Extended Annual Review Report




Project Number: 41914-014
Equity Number: 7274
Loan Number: 2418
September 2016




Loan and Equity Investment
Housing Development Finance Corporation Plc.
(Maldives)




This is an abbreviated version of the document which excludes commercially sensitive and confidential
business information that is subject to exceptions to disclosure set forth in ADB's Public Communications
Policy 2011
                                CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                            Currency Unit – rufiyaa (Rf)

                                     At Appraisal                At Project Review
                                   1 February 2008                   1 July 2016
            Rf1.00      =             $0.07813                        $0.06489
             $1.00      =               Rf12.80                        Rf15.40

                                       ABBREVIATIONS
         ADB           –      Asian Development Bank
         BML           –      Bank of Maldives
         CAGR          –      compound annual growth rate
         DMF           –      design and monitoring framework
         ESMS          –      environmental and social management system
         GDP           –      gross domestic product
         HDFC          –      Housing Development Finance Corporation
         HDFC-I        –      HDFC Investments Limited of India
         IFC           –      International Finance Corporation
         IFI           –      international financial institution
         IPO           –      initial public offering
         LIBOR         –      London interbank offered rate
         NPL           –      nonperforming loan
         PFI           –      participating financial institution
         PSOD          –      Private Sector Operations Department
         TA            –      technical assistance
         TEAP          –      Tsunami Emergency Assistance Project
         XARR          –      extended annual review report


                                              NOTE
                            In this report, “$” refers to US dollars.



 Vice-President              D. Gupta, Private Sector and Cofinancing Operations
 Director General            M. Barrow, Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD)
 Director                    C. Roberts, Private Sector Portfolio Management Division, PSOD

 Team leader                  I. Chua, Senior Investment Officer, PSOD
 Team members                A. Cheema, Investment Specialist, PSOD
                             M. Gunawardhena, Investment Specialist, PSOD
                             J. Gomez, Safeguards Officer, PSOD
                             V. Ramasubramanian, Safeguards Specialist, PSOD

In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the
Asian Development Bank does not intend to make any judgment as to the legal or other status
of any territory or area.
                                        CONTENTS

                                                                                     Page

BASIC DATA                                                                              i

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                       ii
I.     THE PROJECT                                                                      1
       A.   Project Background                                                          1
       B.   Key Project Features                                                        2
       C.   Progress Highlights                                                         2
II.    EVALUATION                                                                       3
       A.   Project Rationale and Objectives                                            3
       B.   Development Results                                                         4
       C.   ADB’s Additionality                                                         8
       D.   ADB Investment Profitability                                                8
       E.   ADB Work Quality                                                            9
       F.   Overall Assessment                                                         10
III.   ISSUES, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDED FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                              11
       A.   Issues and Lessons                                                         11
       B.   Recommended Follow-Up Actions                                              11


APPENDICES

1.     Maldives Housing Market Overview                                                13
2.     Design and Monitoring Framework                                                 14
3.     Estimation of Return on Invested Capital                                        16
4.     Business Performance                                                            17
5.     Financial Statements                                                            21
6.     Results and Ratings for Project Contributions to Private Sector Development
       and ADB Strategic Development Objectives – Financial Intermediaries             22
                                              BASIC DATA

                               Loan and Equity Investment
                       Housing Development Finance Corporation
                (Loan No. 2418 and Equity Investment No. 7274 – Maldives)
                                                  As per ADB Loan
                                                                            Actual
                                                     Documents
                                                                          ($ million)
Key Project Data                                      ($ million)
Total Project Cost:                                     12.00                9.75
Total Investment:
   Loan:
      Committed                                          7.50                7.50
      Disbursed                                                              7.50
      Outstanding                                                            NIL
   Equity:
      Committed                                          4.50                4.50
      Disbursed                                                              2.25

Key Dates                                                                                   Actual
Concept Clearance Approval                                                               17 April 2007
Board Approval                                                                           08 April 2008
First Disbursement (Equity)                                                            09 February 2009
First Disbursement (Loan)                                                              10 February 2009
Loan Agreement                                                                           23 July 2008
Shareholders Agreement                                                                   23 July 2008
Loan Effectiveness                                                                       23 July 2008

Financial and Economic Internal Rates of
Return (%)                                                        Appraisal                    XARR
Financial Internal Rate of Return (project financial              21.2% ($)                  19.2% ($)
  rate of return on equity)                                                                  22.7% (Rf)
Economic Return on Invested Capital (EROIC)                           …                      13.8%

                                                                 Number of               No. of Person-
Project Administration and Monitoring                             Missions                    Days
Due Diligence Mission                                                3                         11
Project Administration                                               1                          2
XARR Mission                                                         1                          3
… = data not available, ADB = Asian Development Bank, XARR = extended annual review report
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In February 2008, the Board of Directors of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved a
$4.5 million equity investment and a $7.5 million senior secured loan to the Housing
Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) in the Maldives.

The Housing Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) was established in 2004 as a wholly
owned government institution to provide long-term housing finance in the country. The
government decided to privatize the company due to strong demand for housing finance and the
inability of the government to source long-term funding for HDFC. Three international investors
participated in HDFC’s privatization in 2009, leaving the government with 49% of HDFC’s capital.
ADB and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) own 18% each, and India’s HDFC
Investments Limited (unrelated to HDFC in the Maldives) owns 15%. ADB and IFC have each
provided a loan of $7.5 million.

The government’s employment of a public–private partnership model in the privatization of
HDFC transferred the controlling interests in government and majority shares to international
shareholders. At the time of this extended annual review, HDFC remained the only specialized
housing finance company in the country and held 50.9% of the housing finance market share.

HDFC is a household name in the country’s housing finance sector and helps deliver solutions
for the growing housing needs of the population. It made a significant contribution to the housing
market in helping the government create a legal framework that allowed freehold title to a single
unit of housing. In this way it became possible that a standalone house or an apartment could
be purchased through a mortgage facility. This was a paradigm shift in a market where houses
were traditionally built on shared land allocated for the family many generations earlier.

The transaction’s development results are rated satisfactory overall. The effect of the ADB loan
and equity investment on private sector development and ADB strategic objectives is rated
excellent. The privatization helped transform HDFC into a commercially viable, private sector-
led company that could compete, grow, and develop effective ways to meet the mortgage
financing needs of the people of the Maldives. The project contributed measurably to (i) meeting
an urgent need for housing in the Maldives (ii) increasing the availability of mortgage lending
and strengthening the financial sector, and (iii) generating jobs and additional revenue.

The economic performance of the project is rated satisfactory. HDFC’s inclusive business model
helped cultivate the products and services of small and medium-sized enterprises in the value
chain as suppliers of construction materials and services. HDFC also helped deepen the
financial sector through pioneering the issuance of domestic corporate bonds that were
subscribed to by institutional and retail investors. Economic return on invested capital of the
project was calculated at 1.3 times the weighted average cost of capital.

Environmental, social, health, and safety performance is rated satisfactory. HDFC established
policies for an environmental management system in accordance with ADB’s guiding principles.
No involuntary resettlement occurred and no impacts on indigenous peoples were observed as
a result of ADB’s investment in HDFC.

Business success is rated satisfactory. During its 7 years of operation since privatization, HDFC
has grown to become the dominant player in the housing finance market. Its active loan portfolio
has reached Rf1 billion, but its nonperforming loan ratio was a sound 2% as of the end of 2015.
With the introduction of Islamic banking products, repricing of interest rates, and extension of
housing loan tenors to 20 years, HDFC is poised to continue its success through 2016 and
beyond. The return on invested capital for the project was calculated at 1.1 times the weighted
average cost of capital.

ADB’s additionality is rated satisfactory. ADB’s investment came at a time when the government
needed long-term funding to sustain the operations of HDFC. ADB could have provided only a
long-term loan, which would have satisfied HDFC’s immediate debt funding needs. However, a
long-term loan coupled with an equity investment that helped in the privatization of HDFC
proved to be a more sustainable solution and had a discernible impact on HDFC’s development.
The infusion of additional equity and its expanded capitalization enabled HDFC to increase
leverage during 2011–2016. It has not needed additional equity during this period. ADB’s
investment has encouraged other international financial institutions and commercial banks to
fund HDFC’s debt funding requirements since 2011.

ADB investment profitability is rated satisfactory. The financial internal rate of return for ADB’s
equity investment is calculated at 22.7%, equivalent to 1.3 times the cost of equity.

ADB work quality is rated satisfactory. This is based on ADB’s (i) screening, appraisal, and
structuring of the project; and (ii) its monitoring and supervision. In 2005, ADB contributed $600
million to the Asian Tsunami Fund, which provided a grant of $20 million and a loan of $1.8
million to finance tsunami relief in the Maldives. Although the housing sector was not a priority
under this assistance, ADB believed that an investment in housing finance would complement
the assistance. For this reason, ADB structured and proposed a loan and equity investment in
HDFC to improve housing and atoll development and strengthen the country’s financial sector
as well. The combination of the loan and equity structure proposed by ADB not only allowed
HDFC to expand its lending activities but also helped it narrow its maturity gap and lower its
debt–equity ratio from a high of 7:1 in 2007. The various aspects of loan administration were
performed carefully by successfully balancing the management of risk and client service
requirements.

This extended annual review rates ADB’s investment in HDFC successful overall.

HDFC has grown and made good progress despite challenging episodes of economic and
political instability in the country. Its future and prospects for continued growth look very
promising. It is thus important for HDFC’s board to find an immediate replacement of the
outgoing CEO due to retire in September 2016.

ADB has been a shareholder in HDFC for 7 years, and its investment in HDFC has met its
development objectives. As an exit strategy, it would be in ADB’s interest to participate in
HDFC’s initial public offering (IPO). However, the Maldives stock exchange lacks depth,
efficiency, and liquidity, rendering an IPO unattractive to external investors. HDFC has deferred
its IPO plans due to political uncertainty, and it is uncertain when it will list its shares. ADB is
currently exploring possible investment exit alternatives to participating in an IPO, such as sale
of its equity to a strategic investor whose interests are aligned with those of HDFC.
                                        I.       THE PROJECT

A.      Project Background

1.     In February 2008, the Board of Directors of the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
approved a $4.5 million equity investment and a $7.5 million senior secured loan to the Housing
Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) in the Maldives.1 A tsunami in 2004 had damaged
the country’s resort islands, stunted economic growth, and greatly affected the housing sector.
By 2007, the increased demand for housing finance that had followed the disaster had
exhausted the initial equity funding provided by the government when it established HDFC as a
state-owned corporation in 2004.

2.      To raise commercial loans and long-term funding internationally, HDFC needed to be
privatized. ADB, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the HDFC Investments
Limited of India (HDFC-I) participated in the privatization in 2009.2 The Maldives HDFC has
been 49% owned by the government since privatization. The balance of 51% is shared by IFC
and ADB—with 18% each—and HDFC-I, which has a 15% holding. Along with their equity
investments, ADB and IFC provided loans. IFC granted HDFC technical assistance (TA) as well,
and HDFC-I served as a technical and strategic partner. HDFC remains the only specialized
housing finance institution in the Maldives and offers longer maturities and lower interest rates
in mortgage lending than competing financial institutions.3 It plays a central role in an ambitious
government plan to provide new housing, improve living conditions, and make the country more
resistant to future natural disasters.

3.       One-third of the Maldives’ 350,000 residents live in the capital city, Malé, where
population density has put extreme stress on the social and physical infrastructure. The low-
lying island country also faces particular threats from rising sea levels and rapid climate change.
The government started to reclaim land in 1997 in an attempt to provide a sustainable solution
to the constraints imposed by its low-lying, archipelagic topography and limited land area. In
2001, it established the Housing Development Corporation as a state-owned enterprise to
undertake land reclamation to create a new, high-elevation island—Hulhumalé, to be located
within the Hulhulé-Farukolhufushi Lagoon.

4.      The government started the first phase of the land reclamation to create Hulhumalé in
1997, completing it in 2003. By the end of that year, phase 1 of the Hulhumalé development had
a population of 35,000, a little more than half of the phase 1 target of 60,000. The second phase
of reclamation began in 2015. The 240-hectare phase 2 development is aiming for a population
of 100,000. Both phases combined would house almost half the population of Maldives. To
avoid large vacancies, the government must attract large numbers of tenants from Malé to the
new island. HDFC has a critical role to play in meeting this challenge. It must help fill the
growing financing requirements for meeting the housing needs of the country’s population, this
relocation effort, and the rapid housing development on Hulhumalé.




1
  ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Equity
  Investment — Housing Development Finance Corporation. Manila.
2
  Housing Development Finance Corporation India is not related to HDFC Maldives.
3
  Housing Development Finance Corporation management.
2


B.      Key Project Features


5.      ADB’s financing consisted of both a senior secured loan and an equity investment The
$7.5 million loan is secured by receivables from mortgage loans. It has a maturity of 7 years,
including a 24-month grace period, and carries a floating interest priced at a credit spread over
the 6-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR). The loan was disbursed in two tranches: $4
million on 11 February 2009, and the balance on 11 August 2010. HDFC fully repaid its loan to
ADB on 11 February 2016.

6.      ADB initially approved an equity investment of up to $4.5 million, but only US$2.25
million was disbursed (in February 2009), equivalent to an 18% shareholding. The other half
was cancelled in July 2013 because the shareholders did not see the need for additional capital.
At the time, capital adequacy was already excessive at 76%, and the debt to equity ratio was
low at 1.5:1.0.4 ADB ownership of 18% gives it the right to appoint one nominee director.

7.      EDA Rural Systems was appointed under the IFC’s TA grant to HDFC to develop a
responsible financial inclusion strategy for HDFC so that HDFC could manage its operations
effectively on a larger scale. The TA involved an assessment of five areas of HDFC’s
operations: (i) policies and guidelines, (ii) systems and procedures, (iii) sales and marketing, (iv)
the operating and support department, and (v) staff training. HDFC provided the in-house
training, and off-site training was conducted at HDFC-I’s training center in Mumbai. The TA
project was completed in December 2011.

C.      Progress Highlights

8.      The privatization of HDFC was one of the first public–private partnerships entered into
by the government. HDFC has since grown and made good progress despite challenging
episodes of economic and political instability in the country. As of 2015, HDFC held 50.9% of
the market share for housing finance. Bank of Maldives (BML) held 31.8%, followed by Maldives
Islamic Bank at 12.8%, with the remaining 4.5% shared between five other commercial banks.5

9.      After privatization in 2009, HDFC has been able to attract debt funding from four
international financial institutions (IFIs) and international commercial banks. These investors
have included FMO of the Netherlands (2011), Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation
(2012), DEG of Germany (2014), and the Bank of Ceylon (2016).

10.     In 2012, HDFC launched HDFC Amna, a product offering sharia-compliant Islamic home
financing to its customers. This gave potential borrowers a wider variety of housing finance
choices, both Islamic and conventional, and enabled HDFC to diversify its portfolio in a cost-
effective manner. HDFC’s long-term plan is to spin off HDFC Amna as a separate company
offering Islamic financing facilities.

11.     In January 2013, HDFC became the first company in the Maldives to issue a local bond
listed on the Maldives stock market.6 The bond had a tenor of 5 years and a total subscription of
Rf51.9 million. In January 2014, HDFC issued the country’s first ever Islamic bond. The Rf22.5

4
  Calculated as the ratio of total liabilities to total equity.
5
  Appendix 1 provides an overview of the housing market in the Maldives.
6
  Information obtained during due diligence mission and; Housing Development Finance Corporation. 2013. 2013
  Annual Report. Male.
                                                                                                          3


million Islamic bond (Sukuk) issue was subscribed by 468 investors, is listed on the stock
exchange, and has a tenor of 10 years.7 Both bonds have been rated AA by International Care
Ratings of India. The issuance of long-term bonds in local currency is an important step in
creating more funding for sustainable housing finance in the Maldives. However, market depth
remains low.8

12.    HDFC paid its first cash dividend in 2011 and has continued to pay annual dividends
since then. In 2014, HDFC paid an additional 10% cash dividend on top of the usual 15%
annual dividend to mark its 10th anniversary. As of July 2016, ADB had received Rf17.7 million
in cash dividends.

13.     In 2014, HDFC started an enterprise resource planning project that is still under way and
under which HDFC will move onto an Oracle platform for finance, planning and lending. The
project will allow HDFC to prepare its staff and technology infrastructure to meet the growing
needs of the business.

                                         II.     EVALUATION

A.      Project Rationale and Objectives

14.     HDFC was established by the government to help provide decent homes to all the
country’s people, but a lack of available long-term finance was preventing the company from
continuing to pursue this goal. Before privatization, HDFC’s main sources of funding came from
bonds issued to local companies and from the Provident Fund held at the Ministry of Finance
and Treasury. The loans from ADB and IFC and the privatization of HDFC brought stability to
the company, provided comfort and confidence to other subsequent stakeholders, facilitated
access to international funding, and strengthened governance practices. The intervention from
the international shareholders thereby provided the impetus for HDFC’s sustainable growth and
development.

15.    HDFC’s transformation into a public–private partnership in 2009 opened up sources of
sustainable funding to finance its business expansion. HDFC has provided mortgage finance
not only for people in the country’s capital but also for residents of far-flung atolls under the
country’s island outreach program.

16.     Experienced nominee board directors from the international community were made
available to HDFC by the international shareholders. These directors helped transform the
company into a commercially viable, private-sector led company that competes with commercial
banks and develops effective ways to help meet the mortgage financing needs of the country’s
people.

17.     The equity investments were accompanied by technical support. The IFC’s TA grant
helped strengthen HDFC’s policies, procedures and internal controls; train HDFC staff in best
practices; and prepare HDFC for expansion. IFC engaged EDA Rural Systems to identify
weaknesses and provide the necessary recommendations to strengthen HDFC’s financial
management and operating processes, including the process for environmental assessments.

7
  Information obtained during due diligence mission and: Housing Development Finance Corporation. 2014. 2014
  Annual Report. Male.
8
  Interview with Housing Development Finance Corporation management, 26–28 April 2016; Housing Development
  Finance Corporation. 2015. 2015 Annual Report. Male. pp. 27, 46.
4


HDFC-I served as the strategic partner for HDFC and provided off-site training of HDFC staff at
its training center in India.

B.        Development Results

18.       The development impact is rated satisfactory.

          1.      Contribution to Private Sector Development and ADB Strategic Objectives

19.    The effect of the ADB loan and equity investment on private sector development and
ADB strategic objectives is rated excellent. The project contributed measurably to (i) meeting
the urgent need for housing, (ii) increasing the availability of mortgage lending, and (iii)
generating jobs and additional revenue. Support by ADB, along with other stakeholders, helped
HDFC meet the key output and outcome targets specified in the project design and monitoring
framework (DMF), which is shown in Appendix 2.

20.     Meeting urgent need for housing in the Maldives. The average number of person per
household in the Maldives in 2007 was 12. This was estimated to be equivalent to a backlog of
10,000 housing units. By 2012, this average had improved to only 8 people, which meant that
about 2 families were sharing each accommodation. The government had targeted a rate of 4
members per household by 2015, requiring an estimated 12,000–15,000 additional housing
units. To decongest the capital, Malé, and to provide the country’s people with better living
conditions under which each family can own an apartment, the government embarked upon the
Hulhumalé reclamation project (paras. 3, 4). Since 2009, HDFC has played an integral role in
helping bridge the housing deficit by providing 1,065 new loans to individuals and families in the
Maldives (Table 1).

                      Table 1: New Housing Loan Origination, 2009–2015
        Indicator                2009      2010      2011   2012    2013       2014   2015   Total
        New housing loan
        origination (loan count)    68      101       325    176     126        126    143   1,065
        Source: Housing Development Finance Corporation management.

21.     One of the major contributions of HDFC to the housing market was to help the
government establish a legal structure for title registration and sale of apartments in Hulhumalé
to promote homeownership. Previously, the government had provided people with provisions or
rights to the use of land and this right was passed on to succeeding generations through
inheritance of land-usage rights. Now, a citizen of the Maldives can have a freehold title to a
single unit of housing, and can use the asset as collateral to secure loans for businesses or for
a second home. This arrangement has encouraged major local and international construction
companies to enter the housing development industry. 9

22.     Increasing availability of mortgage lending and strengthening of the financial
sector. HDFC provided housing finance lending to low-income people, who comprise more than
40% of the population. It helped low-income applicants qualify for home loans by allowing them
to pool the extended family’s income rather than determining eligibility based on one individual’s
income alone. This family-based structure allows a single housing loan to be shared by the
related family members who have legal rights to inherit shared ownership of the property. This



9
    Housing Development Finance Corporation. 2014. 2014 Annual Report. Male. p 65.
                                                                                                    5


usually involves four or more active co-borrowers whose incomes provide the capacity to make
the repayments on a single housing loan.10

23.    Another HDFC product makes home loans more affordable by allowing the borrower to
pay only half of the 20% required equity down payment at the time of application and to pay the
10% balance while the housing is under construction. About 5% of applications received by
HDFC sought these terms. Along with HDFC’s outreach program to provide mortgages to
residents of the country’s outer atolls, this product has helped many low-income families obtain
housing loans.11
24.    HDFC launched the outreach program in 2010 on 12 islands with the critical mass
needed to sustain a viable mortgage portfolio. It provided mortgage loans to 295 families from
the outer atolls in 2015, lifting this program’s share of HDFC’s overall loan portfolio to 10%.
HDFC also has a social housing program that it operates off the balance sheet and that is
guaranteed by the government. During 2004-2015, 473 families outside of Malé region received
housing loans under this program.

25.      In 2015, HDFC increased the maximum tenor of its housing loans from 15 to 20 years,
thereby making mortgages and monthly installments more affordable. In addition, it operates a
flexible installment plan that can reduce monthly repayments to the levels that would be
provided under loans with a 25-year term in return for a final lump sum payment after 20 years.
HDFC is the only institution in the Maldives that provides fixed-term 20-year loans. The others,
including BML, offer a maximum tenor of only 15 years. HDFC also offers lower mortgage rates
than competitor commercial banks, with repayments directly deducted from a borrower’s salary.
In April 2015, HDFC rewarded its existing customers for their loyalty with a rate cut of 0.25%.

26.    HDFC has also introduced a credit protection mechanism by arranging for mortgage
insurance that strengthens the eligibility of potential borrowers. The insurance, arranged through
a partnership between HDFC and the state-owned Allied Insurance, covers properties under
HDFC mortgages during and after construction.

27.      HDFC has increased the availability of housing loans to both middle-income and low-
income home buyers. More importantly, HDFC lowered the average cost of borrowing by 50bps
for all new housing applications that are approved starting 1 April 2015 to 11% (under salary
benefit scheme )fixed for the term of the loan, thus increasing affordability.

28.     Generating jobs and additional revenue. One HDFC product provides enterprising
borrowers with loans to help them use one-third of the space in their dwellings to generate
additional monthly family income through rentals to commercial businesses or to operate trading
or other home businesses and cottage industries.12 This has helped develop new small and
medium-sizes enterprises in the country.

29.    The increase in housing construction activities brought about by the expansion of the
housing credit available in Malé, Hulhumalé, and outer atolls has had a positive multiplier effect
on the economy by creating new jobs and helping construction companies and materials and
services suppliers expand.


10
   Interview with Housing Development Finance Corporation management, 26–28 April 2016.
11
   Interview with Housing Development Finance Corporation management, 26-28 April 2016.
12
   Housing Development Finance Corporation PLC. 2011. 2011 Annual Report. Male. Page 12. - The product
   accounted for 48.3% of HDFC’s loan portfolio in 2013 and 49.9% in 2014.
6


           2.      Economic Performance

30.     The economic performance of the project is rated satisfactory. The government’s
housing and commercial property development in Hulhumalé is a positive for the economy,
since it is creating more jobs. It is also providing an effective antidote to the risks of rising sea
levels due to climate change. HDFC’s inclusive business model includes products and services
that involve cottage industries in the value chain, e.g., suppliers of carpentry work and building
materials such as compressed cement blocks.13 The growth of construction in Hulhumalé and in
other parts of the Maldives that has occurred due to the greater availability of housing funding
has benefited construction service companies and material providers and contributed to the
country’s gross domestic product.

31.    HDFC made a significant contribution to the housing development market in helping
create a legal framework that allowed freehold title to a single unit of housing. In this way, it
became possible that a standalone house or an apartment could be purchased through a
mortgage facility. This was a paradigm shift in a market where houses traditionally were built on
shared land allocated for the family many generations earlier.14

32.    HDFC’s bond issues were subscribed to not only by the government and corporate
investors, but also by the individual retail investors (para. 11). This has helped financial sector
development, broadened involvement in the financial system, and mobilized local funding
sources.

33.    The reevaluated economic return on invested capital is 13.8%, 1.3 times the 11%
weighted average cost of capital (Appendix 3), thus resulting in a satisfactory rating for
economic performance.

           3.      Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety Performance

34.    The project is rated satisfactory for its performance on ADB environmental, social,
health, and safety policies and objectives and adherence to the standards applicable at
approval. ADB’s loan and equity investment in HDFC was classified as category FI for the
environment. It is category FI, treated as C, according to ADB’s Policy on Indigenous Peoples
(1998) and under ADB’s Environment Policy (2002). No involuntary resettlement occurred or
impacts on indigenous peoples were observed as a result of the loan and equity investment.

35.     As required under ADB’s Environment Policy and covered by a loan agreement
covenant, HDFC established and complied with an environmental management system (EMS)
that set out screening and assessment procedures and built capacity to implement them in line
with the guiding principles agreed with ADB.

36.     Under its EMS, HDFC has implemented a rapid environmental and social assessment
checklist to help in its decision-making. HDFC complies with international environmental impact
guidelines when it provides housing finance. Review of HDFC’s national approvals and site
visits by ADB staff confirmed that the subprojects financed by HDFC have complied with
national regulations and the requirements of ADB’s Environment Policy.



13
     Housing Development Finance Corporation PLC. 2012. 2012 Annual Report. Male.
14
     Housing Development Finance Corporation PLC. 2011. 2011 Annual Report. Male. Page 12.
                                                                                              7


37.      HDFC has developed a compliance and evaluation checklist that is used by its EMS
officers when they review application documents and evaluate whether all the approvals needed
from government and regulatory agencies such as the Ministry of Housing and Infrastructure
and the Environmental Protection Agency have been obtained for proposed projects. This
includes a review and evaluation of permits and clearances for land use and zoning, building,
demolition, dewatering, and sanitation. HDFC ensures strict adherence to planning and building
codes through technical inspections at every step of the construction process. HDFC conducts
site visits at each major stage of house construction. Corrective actions are recommended and
monitored whenever gaps are identified. Loan drawdown is structured based on construction
milestones. HDFC does not fund any housing development project that has not been cleared
either by the two city councils or the 11 provincial councils involved. The corporation’s senior
management is made aware of the findings of technical inspections. ADB monitored and
supervised HDFC’s environment safeguards implementation through the annual environmental
and social performance monitoring reports submitted by HDFC. HDFC has received no
environmental grievances related to its operations during the course of ADB’s investment.

38.    The TA provided by IFC included help to implement social safeguards. The TA
consultant, EDA Rural Systems, formulated an integrated social performance management
approach and trained HDFC staff to implement it in its services. The approach included
requirements for respectful collection practices and high ethical standards in the treatment of
customers, as well as a comprehensive complaints handling process. The process enables
HDFC to make use of client feedback to serve customers better and design and deliver its
products more effectively.

39.    HDFC was unable to send an officer to ADB-sponsored environmental and social
safeguard training, although this was required during project approval and included in the loan
agreement as a staffing and capacity building step in EMS operationalization. However, HDFC
management supported implementation of the EMS policy, formed an environment
management committee, and hired an EMS officer with sufficient experience to properly
oversee and implement HDFC’s EMS. HDFC’s execution of the EMS has been satisfactory and
has required only minimal ADB supervision.

       4.     Business Success

40.     After its capital restructuring in 2009, HDFC’s assets grew at a compound annual growth
rate (CAGR) of 22.3% to Rf1.2 billion in 2015 from Rf300 million in 2008. HDFC’s overall
profitability, capitalization, and prospects for sustainability and growth have been based on
strategies that aim to capitalize on the company’s strengths and market opportunities while
managing risks and its available resources.

41.     HDFC’s loan book expanded rapidly following the establishment of a legal structure for
title registration on the new island of Hulhumalé in March 2010. To process the housing
application backlog, aggressive lending put pressure on HDFC’s liquidity. The funds available
were fully lent out, which breached liquidity covenants in 2012. HDFC immediately cured this
breach by tapping additional international lenders (para. 9) and issuing corporate and Islamic
bonds (para. 11). This was a signal of investor confidence. Throughout the growth period,
HDFC’s capacity to absorb losses was significantly above the regulatory limit.

42.      Appendices 4 and 5 contain a more detailed analysis of HDFC’s financial performance
during 2008–2015 based on its capital adequacy, asset quality, management, earnings, and
liquidity. The financial highlights for the period include the following:
8


       (i)   The CAGR of gross loans was 27.7%. Nonperforming loans were at a very low
       average level of 1.7%, compared with 20.0% for the country’s overall banking industry.

       (ii)    The CAGR of total capital was 26.9% due to strong internal capital generation on
       top of the capital infusion by the IFIs (para. 9).

       (iii)  Net income showed a CAGR of 25.2%, which resulted in the declaration of
       Rf98.8 million in dividends during 2011–2015.

43.     The project yielded a real return on invested capital of 11.8% (Appendix 3). This
exceeded the weighted average cost of capital of 11% and thus the project is rated satisfactory
for business success. Moreover, HDFC’s equity generated a return of 19.2% in US dollar terms
for investors (para. 46), further reinforcing the rating for business success.

C.     ADB’s Additionality

44.     ADB’s additionality is rated satisfactory. ADB’s investment was made at a time when the
government needed long-term funding to sustain the operations of HDFC. HDFC could not
obtain this financing due to lack of long-term domestic funding and its inability to borrow
internationally without sovereign guarantees. ADB could have provided only a long-term loan,
which would have satisfied HDFC’s immediate debt funding needs. However, a long-term loan
coupled with an equity investment that helped in the privatization of HDFC proved to be a more
sustainable solution and had a discernible impact on HDFC’s development. The equity infusion
increased HDFC’s capitalization to the point that HDFC was able to raise leverage during 2011–
2016 without the need for additional equity. Its debt–equity ratio remains very low at 1.7:1.0
(footnote 4), allowing HDFC to raise more debt to expand its loan portfolio in the near and
medium terms without the need for existing shareholders to provide more capital.

45.    ADB’s equity investment alongside those of IFC and HDFC-I diluted the government’s
share to 49%. The loans and the additional capitalization had a catalytic effect that enabled
HDFC to increase leverage and raise commercial loans on its own without the need for
government support or guarantees. To keep pace with its growing loan book and liquidity needs,
HDFC was able to attract debt funding from four other IFIs aside from ADB and IFC (para. 9).
HDFC was also able to obtain a loan from the Bank of Maldives in 2013, and it successfully
pioneered local-currency corporate bond issuance in the Maldives (para. 11).

D.     ADB Investment Profitability

46.    ADB investment profitability is rated satisfactory. ADB’s loan to HDFC was benchmarked
against IFC’s loan to HDFC disbursed in the same year. ADB’s loan carried broadly similar
terms and seniority as IFC’s. The IFC and ADB loans were both secured by receivables from
mortgage loans. The IFC loan was fully repaid in January 2016, and ADB’s was fully repaid in
February 2016.

47.   ADB’s equity investment of $2.25 million generated a financial internal rate of return of
22.7% in local currency terms and 19.2% in US dollar terms (Table 2). The terminal value is
based on the assumption that equity will grow at 10% per annum in 2016 as projected by HDFC
                                                                                                                  9


and a price–book ratio multiple of 1.0.15 Based on the estimated cost of equity in local currency
terms of 18.06%,16 the financial internal rate of return yielded a multiple of 1.3.

                      Table 2: ADB Equity Cash Flow and Return Calculation
                                                            Amount (million)
 Item                          FIRR       2009  2010 2011     2012      2013     2014    2015     2016
 Cash flows (USD)             19.2%       (2.3)    -   0.1      0.2       0.2      0.2     0.5      5.9
 Cash flows (Rf)              22.7% (28.8)         -   2.0      2.9       2.9      2.9     7.2     90.1
FIRR = financial internal rate of return.
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; Asian Development
Bank estimates.

E.      ADB Work Quality

48.     ADB’s work quality is rated satisfactory based on (i) its screening, appraisal, and
structuring of the project; and (ii) its monitoring and supervision.

        1.       Screening, Appraisal, and Structuring of the Project

49.     Prior to this project, ADB’s Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) had very
limited experience in the Maldives and was looking for opportunities to support development of
the country’s financial sector. After a tsunami struck the country in 2004, ADB contributed $600
million to establish the Asian Tsunami Fund to respond to the needs of affected developing
member countries. The Asian Tsunami Fund provided a grant of $20 million and a loan of $1.8
million to finance the ADB’s Tsunami Emergency Assistance Project (TEAP) in the Maldives in
2005. 17 The TEAP aimed to help achieve sustainable economic growth by minimizing the
devastating impact of the tsunami in the transport, power, sanitation, agriculture, and fisheries
sectors.

50.     Although the housing sector was not a priority under the TEAP, PSOD believed that an
investment in housing finance would complement the TEAP’s efforts and fit its objective of
providing post-tsunami support for infrastructure sectors. For this reason, PSOD structured and
proposed a loan and equity investment in HDFC to improve housing and atoll development and
strengthen the country’s financial sector as well.

51.     Both aspects of ADB interventions enabled HDFC to expand its lending activities. The
loan helped narrow the maturity gap, while the equity investment helped lower HDFC’s debt–
equity ratio from a high of 7:1 in 2007. Equity investors from ADB, IFC and HDFC-I provided
HDFC with a mix of nominee directors who had the skills and expertise to share international
best practices and provide the proper guidance that would ensure the success of HDFC’s
operation as it expanded.

52.     ADB’s work quality is rated excellent.




15
   In 2015, ADB and the International Finance Corporation received an expression of interest to buy-out their stakes
   in Housing Development Finance Corporation at an indicative rate of a 1.0 price–book multiple.
16
   ADB. 2014. Internal memorandum on cost of equity—Office of Risk Management. Manila.
17
   ADB. 2005. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Grant and Loan
   to the Republic of the Maldives for the Tsunami Emergency Assistance Project. Manila
10


           2.       Monitoring and Supervision

53.     ADB’s monitoring and supervision for HDFC is rated satisfactory. ADB monitored
compliance with the reporting and financial covenants in the facility agreement. It conducted
fact–finding missions and prepared periodic monitoring reports. PSOD staff undertook a review
mission in October 2013 that provided the project team with a realistic overview of housing
demand and supply in the Maldives. The mission allowed PSOD to better understand HDFC’s
operations and governance practices and better appreciate HDFC’s business model. It helped
ADB improve (and increase) the company’s equity valuation, which had been estimated at
below investment cost prior to the mission. The mission helped open and maintain
communication lines that improved ADB’s collaboration with HDFC.

54.    The project administration team assisted HDFC when it required consents, waivers, and
amendments of certain provisions in the facility agreements. PSOD and HDFC staff worked
together in assessing the issues involved in these requests, taking into account the potential
credit risk impact vis-à-vis ADB’s support for continuing business development and
sustainability.

55.     As an equity shareholder in HDFC, ADB appointed an external consultant to HDFC’s
board. An ADB employee was appointed as the alternate nominee director. The board of
directors of HDFC meets at least every 3 months, and the director provides updates to the
PSOD project officer whenever needed.

56.       HDFC was given annual invitations to attend the ADB-sponsored financial asset and
liability and risk management forum from its inception in 2008 until it ended in 2014.18 The forum
was provided as TA to ADB’s nonsovereign financial institution clients, to help them adopt
international banking and financial institution standards and best practices for critical operations.

F.         Overall Assessment

57.        Overall, the project is rated successful (Table 3).




18
     Housing Development Finance Corporation attended all the forums except the one in 2009.
                                                                                                                  11


      Table 3: Evaluation of Loan and Equity Investment to Housing Development Finance
                                         Corporation
                                                                          Less than
 Item                                                 Unsatisfactory     Satisfactory      Satisfactory   Excellent
 Development Results                                                                             √
  (i)   Contribution to private sector
        development and ADB strategic                                                                         √
        development objectives
  (ii) Economic performance                                                                     √
  (iii) Environmental, social, health, and safety                                               √
        performance
  (iv) Business success                                                                         √
 ADB Additionality                                                                              √
 ADB Investment Profitability                                                                   √
 ADB Work Quality                                                                               √
 (i)    Screening, appraisal, and structuring                                                                 √
 (ii)   Monitoring and supervision                                                              √
                                                                           Partly                           Highly
                                                      Unsuccessful       Successful        Successful     Successful
 Overall Rating                                                                                 √
 ADB = Asian Development Bank.
 Source: ADB.

             III.     ISSUES, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDED FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.         Issues and Lessons

58.     The demand for housing in the Maldives is expected to continue to exceed supply as the
population grows and as long as the quality and overcrowding of living accommodations still
need to be improved. This makes it critical that HDFC succeeds in sustaining its business of
providing the country’s residents with the funding they need to buy and own their own homes.
IFC’s TA played a critical role in preparing HDFC and its staff to meet the service level required
to operate efficiently during its expansion stage.

59.    The project illustrated the importance of hiring experienced and effective managers to
steer a company toward success. Despite a limited customer base and lack of market depth in
the Maldives, HDFC was able to expand its business, remain profitable, and provide valuable
services to the community due to strong managers.

B.         Recommended Follow-Up Actions

60.      ADB has been a shareholder in HDFC for 7 years, and its investment in HDFC has met
its development objectives. As an exit strategy, it would be in ADB’s interest to participate in
HDFC’s initial public offering (IPO). However, the Maldives stock exchange lacks depth,
efficiency, and liquidity, rendering an IPO unattractive to external investors. HDFC has deferred
its IPO plans due to the political uncertainty, and it is uncertain when it will list its shares. ADB is
currently exploring possible investment exit alternatives to participating in an IPO, such as sale
of its equity to a strategic investor whose interests are aligned with those of HDFC.

61.     Because the retirement of the current Managing Director is approaching, shareholders
and HDFC’s board of directors should find an immediate replacement who is at least as
qualified.19 A succession plan should be developed to allow continuity in the execution of the
19
     The retirement of Anildilruk Priyanka Baddevithana is scheduled for September 2016.
12


business plan and strategy. Such a plan will also keep current and potential management and
staff motivated to work long term for the company.
                                                                                                Appendix 1        13


                                MALDIVES HOUSING MARKET OVERVIEW

1.      The Maldives is home to 350,000 people living on 189 islands dispersed over 90,000
square kilometers. Based on the government’s 2004 census, 40% of the country’s 68,249
households are in and around Malé. The remaining 60% are dispersed in the 187 administrative
islands. Constraints on buildable land have made Malé one of the most densely populated
capital cities in the world. Households in the Malé area have an average of about eight
members, compared with six in households in the country’s outer atolls. Reaching a desirable
persons-per-unit average of four in Malé would require an estimated 12,000–15,000 new
housing units. The Maldives’ government is working to address this housing backlog through
strategies involving the Housing Development Corporation.

2.       The Housing Development Corporation is a state-owned enterprise established to
facilitate national housing construction. It spearheaded the reclamation and development of
Hulhumalé, a new, high-elevation island located within the Hulhulé-Farukolhufushi Lagoon.
Phase 1 of the Hulhumalé reclamation, consisting of 188 hectares, began in 1997 and was
completed in 2003. As of end 2015, there were an estimated 35,000 people living in phase 1,
more than half of the 60,000 target for 2020. The second phase of the reclamation of Hulhumalé,
consisting of 240 hectares, started in 2015. Phase 2 will be a mixed use development which will
include commercial, residential and light industrial properties and targets a population of
100,000. A bridge is currently being constructed to connect Malé to Hulhumalé.

3.      Due to the high demand for housing, Global Projects Development Company of the
United Kingdom began reclamation work on a coral reef close to Malé in 2010, aiming to
establish a new city. However, the government changed the zoning for the property in 2015
from residential to industrial and handed the project over to a newly established government
entity, Gulhi Falhu Investment Company.

4.     Housing has been the government’s top priority. As a result, it established Housing
Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) in 2004 to provide housing finance to match the
expansion of housing infrastructure in Malé and Hulhumalé. HDFC remains the only specialized
housing finance institution in the country. As of 2015, HDFC held 50.9% of the market share for
housing finance. Bank of Maldives (BML) held 31.8%, followed by Maldives Islamic Bank at
12.8%, with the remaining 4.5% shared between five other commercial banks. However, BML
changed its marketing strategy in 2013 by making housing finance its top line product. BML has
been in the housing mortgage market since its inception in 1982 and has expanded its housing
mortgage loans. In 2015, these loans represented about 10% of its total loan portfolio. HDFC’s
other competitors are the Maldives Islamic Bank, State Bank of India, and Bank of Ceylon.

5.     HDFC’s listed debt instruments consist of a Rf52 million conventional bond (2013) and a
Rf22.5 million Sukuk (2014) listed on the Maldives stock exchange.1 Although the country has a
low national savings rate, the retail public subscribed 15% of the Islamic bond issue. The
balance went to the state-run national pension fund and two local insurance companies.




1
    The Maldives Stock exchange has very limited secondary market trading activities and only six listed companies.
14        Appendix 2


                              DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK

Design Summary                    Performance            Assumptions and Risks             Assessment
                                Targets/Indicators
Impact

Residents of Malé and        Increased formal            Increased access to         Housing loans granted
Hulhumalé have greater       housing for families in     mortgage finance from       during 2008–2015
access to housing in the     Malé and Hulhumalé          banks leading to more       totaled Rf1.4 billion and
Maldives                                                 individuals receiving       went to 2,873
                             Mortgage finance as         mortgage loans and          borrowers. More than
Unlock “dead capital” or     percentage of gross         stimulating the supply of   half of the loans were
capital that cannot be       domestic product            housing in the economy      used to construct
accessed through the         increased                                               multistory residential
creation of a formal                                     Stable or increased         buildings, which
mortgage financing                                       economic development        accommodate more
market                                                   in the Maldives             families than single-
                                                                                     story houses.

                                                                                     Housing supply has
                                                                                     increased with the
                                                                                     completion of
                                                                                     Hulhumalé phase 1.
                                                                                     There are now 35,000
                                                                                     people living in phase 1
                                                                                     units. Phase 2 is
                                                                                     ongoing and expected
                                                                                     to house 100,000
                                                                                     people.

                                                                                     Banking credit given to
                                                                                     the construction sector
                                                                                     (proxy for mortgage
                                                                                     finance) as a
                                                                                     percentage of GDP
                                                                                     grew from 3.0% in 2013
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                     to 4.6% in 2015.

Outcome

HDFC provides                HDFC’s number of            Demand for mortgage         The number of
increased access to          mortgage loan               loans from individuals      mortgage loan
long-term mortgage           borrowers increased         continues                   borrowers grew at a
loans to individuals in      (20% in next 24 months)                                 CAGR of 22% from 733
the Maldives                                             Local currency loans        in 2008 to 2,873 in
                                                                                             1
                             HDFC’s credit quality is    are demanded.               2015. A surge in
                             high; NPLs make up                                      demand occurred in
                             less than 4% of its total   The supply of property      2011 after the
                             portfolio                   is adequate.                establishment of legal
                                                                                     titling framework in
                             HDFC’s capital              HDFC does not breach        Hulhumalé reclamation.
                             adequacy ratio remains      domestic prudential
                             above prudential norms      norms.                      All loans are disbursed

1
    Source: Housing Development Finance Corporation. One loan may have multiple borrowers of record (para. 21,
    main body).
                                                                                       Appendix 2        15


                                                                                 in local currency.
                                                      No adverse economic        Borrowings are
                                                      developments occur in      comprised of 45.4%
                                                      the Maldives               foreign currency and
                                                                                 54.6% local currency.
                                                      No adverse regulatory      All foreign currency
                                                      changes affect the         borrowings are hedged.
                                                      financial sector.
                                                                                 Gross NPLs over the
                                                      No adverse regulatory      2008–2015 period were
                                                      changes affect the legal   1.7% of gross loans (on
                                                      and regulatory             average). At 2.2%, the
                                                      framework governing        highest NPL ratio was in
                                                      the property subsector.    2015.

                                                                                 CAR remained well
                                                                                 above the regulatory
                                                                                 limit of 10%. CAR
                                                                                 started at 153.4% in
                                                                                 2008 and gradually
                                                                                 declined to 79.7% in
                                                                                 2015 as the portfolio
                                                                                 expanded.
Output

ADB provides a long-       As of May 2008, HDFC       Prevailing market          The loan was fully
term US dollar loan to     has $7.5 million in the    conditions are stable.     repaid in February
HDFC.                      form of a loan from                                   2016.
                           ADB.                       All regulatory approvals
ADB invests $2.25                                     are in place for ADB.      ADB made a $2.25
million in HDFC (up to     As of May 2008, ADB                                   million equity
$4.5 million)              has purchased shares                                  investment in HDFC in
                           from HDFC equivalent                                  February 2009,
                           to $2.25 million.                                     equivalent to 18%
                                                                                 ownership.
                           Mortgage loan requests
                           received by HDFC                                      The number of
                           increase by 20% per                                   mortgage loan
                           annum from current                                    borrowers grew at a
                           levels.                                               CAGR of 22% from 733
                                                                                 in 2008 to 2,873 in
                                                                                 2015.
1
 Maldives Monetary Authority. Annual Report 2015. 2015. Male.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CAGR = compound annual growth rate, CAR = capital adequacy ratio, HDFC =
Housing Development Finance Corporation, NPL = nonperforming loan.
16        Appendix 3


                          ESTIMATION OF RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL

                            Table A3.1: Weighted Average Cost of Capital
                                                       2015           Capital         Cost of
Item                                             (Rf million)         Weight           capital              WACC
Debt (excluding ST Wakala)                               533             54%            4.93%                2.7%
Shareholders’ equity                                     455             46%           18.06%                8.3%
Total                                                    988                                                11.0%
WACC = Weighted average cost of capital.
Note: A loan from Bank of Ceylon in 2016, with a tenor of 6 years and a 1-year grace is priced at the 6-month
Treasury rate (Maldives) plus 2.3% with a floor of 5.5% and ceiling of 9.5%. Given the current 6-month Treasury rate
of 3.5% as of 30 June 2016, the cost of borrowing is calculated at 5.8%. The final cost of debt is net of 15% corporate
income tax.
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; ADB. 2014. Internal
memorandum on cost of equity—Office of Risk Management. Manila.

                                 Table A3.2: Project Business Success
                                                                 Amount (Rf million)
Item                                     2009      2010       2011   2012      2013       2014      2015     2016
Equity    investment,    net  of          (81)
advances for share capital
Borrowings (excluding ST Wakala)          (46)      (46)      (118)      (31)    (139)    (100)        3
Net cost & benefits                         18        24         41        49       51       55       61
                                                                                                                 1
Terminal value                                                                                               501
Net Cash Flow                            (108)      (22)       (76)       18      (88)     (46)       63      501

ROIC                                  12.1%

Inflation rate                           4.5%      6.1%      11.3%     10.9%     2.3%     2.1%      1.0%     1.2%
Discount factor                           1.00      1.06       1.24      1.36     1.10     1.11      1.06     1.09
Inflation-Adjusted Net Cash Flow         (108)      (21)       (62)        13     (80)     (41)        60     461

ROIC Adjusted for Inflation        11.8% (greater than 11% WACC, Satisfactory)
ROIC = Return on invested capital.
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; Asian Development
Bank estimates.

                       Table A3.3: Contribution to Economic Development
                                                                  Amount (Rf million)
Indicator                                 2009       2010      2011   2012      2013        2014     2015     2016
Net cash flow                             (108)       (22)      (76)     18      (88)        (46)      63      501
Add: Taxes paid                               -          -         3      9         9          10      11        -
Economic net cash flow (nominal)          (108)       (22)      (73)     27      (79)        (36)      74      501

EROIC (nominal)                        14.3%

Inflation rate discount factor             1.00      1.06       1.24      1.36     1.10     1.11      1.06     1.09
Economic net cash flow (real)             (108)      (21)       (59)        20     (72)     (32)        70     461

EROIC (real)                        13.8% (greater than 11% WACC by 1.3x, Satisfactory)
EROIC = Economic return on invested capital.
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; Asian Development
Bank estimates.



1
    In 2015, ADB and the International Finance Corporation received an expression of interest to buy their stakes in
    Housing Development Finance Corporation at an indicative rate of a 1.0 price–book multiple. The terminal value is
    based on an assumption by the Housing Development Finance Company’s management that shareholders’ equity
    will grow at a rate of 10% in 2016.
                                                                                                   Appendix 4     17


                                               BUSINESS PERFORMANCE

A.         Financial Highlights

                                Table A4.1: Financial Highlights, 2008–2015
                                                              Amount (Rf million)                             CAGR
    Indicator                       2008       2009        2010   2011      2012    2013   2014    2015    2008-2015
    Balance sheet
    Gross loans                      156         176        292      578     770    854      954   1,101      32.2%
    Total assets                     302         418        488      665     798    974    1,103   1,237      22.3%
    Total deposits                     6          15         20       29      36     40       40      59      38.8%
    Total liabilities                137         153        199      337     437    578      669     782      28.3%
    Shareholders' equity             165         266        289      328     361    396      435     455      15.6%

 Income statement
 Net interest income          16       25        30         44        63      67     74              77       25.1%
 Total operating income       17       29        34         66        73      76     83              90       26.9%
 Net income                   10       19        24         49        49      51     55              61       29.3%
CAGR = compound annual growth rate.
Source: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015.

B.         Business Analysis

           1.        Capitalization

The capitalization of the Housing Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) is rated excellent.
Capital adequacy indicators in 2008–2015 remained well above the regulatory 12% and the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) loan covenant 10% limits. Because HDFC was a government
institution before being privatized in 2009, the ratio of equity to assets was 54.6% in 2008, a
very conservative and expensive capital structure. Shareholder equity was Rf165 million in 2008
and grew to Rf455 million in 2015, a 280% increase. The debt–equity ratio in 2015 was a low
1.7:1.0. 1 This gives HDFC the capacity to build its borrowings for business growth and
expansion.

1.     The total capital adequacy ratio peaked at 195.5% in 2009 but declined gradually to
79.7% in 2015 as HDFC grew its portfolio. Tier 1 share capital and internally generated capital
make up 87% of total equity. Since HDFC began paying dividends in 2011, ADB has received
Rf17.7 million in dividends. The Maldives still follows the capital requirements under Basel 1 and
has plans to move up to those under Basel 2 or 3 in the future.

                             Table A4.2 Capital Adequacy Indicators, 2008–2015
 Indicator                    2008       2009      2010     2011        2012      2013     2014      2015
 Tier 1 Capital to RWA     153.4%     195.5%     192.2%  102.6%        90.2%     75.3%    77.0%    70.7%
 Total CAR                 153.4%     195.5%     192.2%  102.6%        90.2%     86.7%    87.3%    79.7%
CAR = capital adequacy ratio, RWA= risk-weighted assets.
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; Asian Development
Bank estimates.

           2.        Asset Quality

2.    The quality of HDFC assets is rated excellent. Its portfolio is divided into residential
mortgage loans in Malé (68.7%), Hulhumalé (22.6%), and other atolls (8.7%). HDFC’s strict

1
    Calculated as the ratio of total liabilities to total equity.
18        Appendix 4


credit underwriting policies allow mortgages only to borrowers who have sustainable income
sources from employment, business or rental income.

                       Table A4.3 Portfolio growth by product type, 2008–2015
                                                   Amount (Rf million)
  Loan Type              2008      2009     2010       2011    2012     2013     2014      2015      CAGR
  Conventional housing    151       170       250        542    724      806      908       976      30.6%
  Islamic housing                                                 18       28       35      120      60.7%
  Commercial                 5        6        42         36      28       19       10        4      (2.3%)
  Total                   156       176       292        578    770      854      954     1,101      32.2%
  Annual growth (&)              12.8%     66.2%     97.9%    33.2%    10.9%    11.7%    15.4%
( ) = negative.
Source: Housing Development Finance Corporation reports.

3.     HDFC’s loan portfolio grew by 66.2% in 2010 and 97.9% in 2011 (Table A4.3). This was
after establishment of legal property titles in Hulhumalé in March 2010. HDFC’s attempt to
service the housing application backlog in 2011 caused its liquidity ratio to drop to 2% in 2012. It
increased to 19% in 2013 after HDFC found additional funding.2

4.      Gross loans increased by a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 32.2% in 2008–
2015, but HDFC managed to keep its ratio of nonperforming loans to gross loans at an average
of 1.7% through a prudent underwriting policy. This is within the 2% forecast in the base case
scenario at project inception. It is within the ADB loan covenant ratio limit and much lower than
the Maldives banking industry’s average of 20% as of 2015. Starting in 2013, HDFC revised its
provisioning policy in accordance with its external auditor’s advice to free up funding for lending
growth. As a result, provisions for loan loss reserves in 2015 declined to 58.3%, significantly
down from a peak of 202.6% in 2010. The loan portfolio remains highly collateralized with
buildings and land provided by borrowers as security and a maximum loan–value ratio of 80%.

                            Table A4.4 Asset quality indicators, 2008–2015
    Indicator                  2008       2009       2010       2011   2012     2013     2014       2015
    Gross NPLs as a % of       2.0%       1.8%       1.3%       1.4%   1.4%     2.0%     1.7%       2.2%
    gross loans

 Total LLR as a % of       56.1%       163.2%    202.6%     127.0%      103.7%       66.6%  75.1%  58.3%
 NPLs
NPL = nonperforming loan, LLR = loan loss reserves.
Note: Gross NPLs were computed based on the definition provided in the facility agreements.
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; Asian Development
Bank estimates.

5.     In 2012, HDFC introduced Islamic finance products through HDFC Amna, a sharia-
compliant financing facility under HDFC’s existing license. HDFC’s Islamic lending grew
tremendously during 2015 and increased its share in the overall portfolio to 10.9% from 3.7% in
2014.

          3.       Management

6.     HDFC’s management is rated satisfactory. The Managing Director, Dr. Anil Dilruk
Priyanka Baddevithana, has 35 years of mortgage industry experience. Prior to his position at
HDFC, he was deputy director for 6 years at HDFC Bank of Sri Lanka (unrelated to HDFC in the
Maldives). In 2014, after having served two appointments of 3 years each as the managing

2
    Refers to Liquid Assets to Deposits and Money Market Funding.
                                                                                       Appendix 4       19


director of HDFC, his tenure was extended until September 2016. HDFC is also supported by a
strong board with two representatives from the Government of Maldives and one representative
for each of the institutional shareholders—International Finance Corporation, HDFC India, and
ADB. HDFC India, backed by more than 30 years of mortgage industry experience, is the
company’s technical partner.

        4.       Earnings

7.      Profitability is rated excellent. HDFC’s profitability has continued on an upward trend,
with a reported net income of Rf60.5 million in 2015, up from Rf10.5 million in 2008. Profitability
grew at a CAGR of 29.3% during 2008–2015.

8.     HDFC’s net interest margin (NIM), although narrowed as a result of rate cuts, is still
adequate to cover operating expenses. The NIM peaked at 8.7% in 2012 after aggressive loan
expansion before gradually declining to 6.8% in 2015. The decline was in line with an HDFC
decision to reward its loyal customers with a 0.25%–0.50% rate cut on existing loans and new
loans.

9.     Despite the narrower NIM, return on equity was 13.6% in 2015, and return on assets
was 5.2% (Table A4.5). That is because the cost–income ratio improved from 21.6% in 2014 to
18.8% in 2015.

                  Table A4.5: Profitability and Efficiency Indicators, 2008–2015
 Indicator                   2008      2009      2010      2011       2012      2013     2014      2015
 Net interest margin         6.0%      7.2%      6.8%      7.7%       8.7%      7.7%     7.3%      6.8%
 Non-interest income as      6.4%     13.0%     10.6%     33.9%      13.9%     12.4%    11.0%     15.0%
 a % of operating
 income
 Provisions as a % of      13.8%      14.9%      9.9%      4.2%       3.4%      0.4%     0.8%       2.5%
 pre-provision income
 Pre-provision income        2.3%      6.2%      5.8%      9.5%       8.2%      6.8%     6.3%       6.3%
 as a % of average total
 assets
 Cost–income ratio         27.1%      23.4%     23.2%     16.6%      17.5%     20.9%    21.6%     18.8%


  Return on assets        4.0%        5.3%       5.2%       8.6%        6.7%      5.8%     5.3%      5.2%
  Return on equity       10.9%        8.9%       8.5%      16.0%       14.2%     13.5%    13.2%    13.6%
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; Asian Development
Bank estimates.
.
        5.       Liquidity

10.      HDFC’s liquidity is rated satisfactory. Liquidity tightened due to the aggressive
expansion of the loan book starting in 2010 as HDFC tried to process the loan application
backlog following the resolution of titling issue in Hulhumalé. This depleted its cash position and
its liquid asset–short-term liabilities ratio declined to 4.52% in 2012 (Table A1.6). However,
HDFC was immediately able to raise funding from international financial institutions to fill the
gap. In the first quarter of 2013, HDFC issued the country’s first listed bond. In 2014, HDFC
launched the country’s first Sukuk to diversify its funding mix further. In addition, management
undertook to maintain Rf20 million in local treasury bills at all times for liquidity.
20        Appendix 4


                              Table A4.6: Liquidity Indicators, 2008–2015
 Indicator                 2008       2009       2010       2011        2012      2013     2014      2015
 Liquid      assets  to  228.5%     207.1%     101.6%      18.3%        2.0%     19.0%    20.7%    18.8%
 deposits and money
 market funding
 Liquid assets to short  228.5%    1671.4%     399.2%      65.7%        4.5%     53.7%    44.4%    76.3%
 term liabilities
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; Asian Development
Bank estimates.

                                Table A4.7 Funding Sources, 2008–2015
                                                 Amount (Rf million)                                CAGR
 Indicator                2008      2009      2010     2011      2012    2013     2014    2015 2008-2015
 Deposits                     6       15        20        29        36      40      40      59       38.8%
 Borrowings                  57      103       148      266       317     467      567     609       40.3%
 Others                      74       35        31        42        84      71      62     113        6.3%
 Total funding              137      153       199      337       437     578      669     782       28.3%
Sources: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015; Asian Development
Bank estimates.

11.     HDFC was not heavily affected by a sharp devaluation of the local currency (20%
against the US dollar) that followed the Maldives’ move from a pegged foreign currency
exchange rate regime to a managed peg system in April 2011.3 HDFC has effectively hedged its
US dollar loans from ADB, the International Finance Corporation and all the other foreign
currency lenders through cross-currency swaps with the State Trading Organization for the
entire tenor of the loans. HDFC also used similar hedging strategy against hard currency loans
from the other financial institutions.




3
    The exchange rate system was changed by the Maldives Monetary Authority to support fiscal reform efforts and
    help ease the pressure on the country’s currency.
                                                                                           Appendix 5     21


                                       FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

                        Table A5.1: Statement of Financial Position, 2008–2015
                                                   Amount (Rf million)                                CAGR
 Indicator                    2008    2009      2010   2011      2012     2013     2014     2015   2008-2015
 Net customer loans            155     171       285     568       759     842      941    1,087      32.1%
 Other earning assets          145     238       197      86        30      93      141      103      (4.8%)
 Fixed assets, net               2       2         2       2         2       2        2        1      (4.2%)
 Other non-earning               1       8         5       8         7      37       19       47      73.1%
 assets
 Total assets                  303     418       488      665      798     974    1,103    1,237      22.3%

 Total deposits and              6      15        20        29      36       40      40      59       38.8%
 money market funding
 Other liabilities              74      35        54       95      207     211      306     219       16.7%
 Long-term borrowings           57     103       125      213      195     328      324     504       36.5%
 Total liabilities             137     153       199      337      437     578      669     782       28.2%

  Common stock                  1      159       159       159      159      159    159     159      106.4%
  Advances for share         129        51        51        51        51      51     51      51      (12.3%)
  capital
  Retained earnings           16        35        59        98      132      168    207     228       46.1%
  Reserves                    20        20        19        18        17      17     17      17       (2.5%)
  Total equity               166       266       289       328      361      396    435     455       15.5%
( ) = negative, CAGR = compound annual growth rate.
Source: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015.


                              Table A5.2: Income Statement, 2008–2015
                                                    Amount (Rf million)                               CAGR
  Indicator                 2008     2009       2010      2011     2012    2013    2014    2015    2008-2015
  Interest income             20        30        36         53       81      99    114     114       28.3%
  Interest expense            (4)       (5)       (6)      (10)     (18)    (33)    (40)    (37)      37.6%
  Net interest income         16        25        30         44       63      67      74      77      25.1%
  Net fee and                   -         2         3         7         9       8      8       7           -
  commission income
  Other operating               1         1         0         7         1       1      1      7       31.6%
  income
  Total operating             17        29        34         58       73      76      83     90       26.9%
  income
  Less: operating             (5)       (7)       (8)      (11)     (13)    (16)    (18)    (17)      19.1%
  expense
  Pre-provision income        12        22        26         47       60      60      65      73      29.5%
  Loss provisions             (2)       (3)       (3)       (2)       (2)     (0)    (1)     (2)      (1.0%)
  Pretax income               10        18        24         45       58      60      65      71      32.4%
  Taxes                         -         -          -      (3)       (9)     (9)   (10)    (11)           -
  Net income                  10        18        24         41       49      51      55      61      29.3%
( ) = negative, CAGR = compound annual growth rate.
Source: Housing Development Finance Corporation audited financial statements, 2008–2015.
   22        Appendix 6



      RESULTS AND RATINGS FOR PROJECT CONTRIBUTIONS TO PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT AND ADB STRATEGIC
                             DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES—FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES
                                            (for Housing Finance)

Results Area                                    Actual achievements                   Rating               Justification                  Potential future            Risk
                                                                                                                                           achievements
1. Financial institution and
Sub borrower PSD effects
1.1 Improved skills:                  Despite an aggressive lending in 2010–        Excellent      HDFC established operational     HDFC is faced with a high        Low
(i) Improved mortgage lending         2012, HDFC’s NPL remained low at 2.2%                        guidelines such as a loan        average employee turnover
skills in the participant financial   as of the end of 2015 due to HDFC’s                          evaluation and credit manual,    rate of 28% per annum. The
institution(s).                       prudent underwriting skills. The TA                          project assessment               highly skilled employees of
(ii) Contribution via the             provided by IFC and HDFC-I enhanced                          guidelines, disbursement         HDFC can easily move to
participating financial               staff knowledge and skills in underwriting                   procedures, a recovery           private or public sector
institution(s) to improved sub        and credit analysis. Under the                               manual, and an HR manual.        companies that can offer
borrower skills in operation of       management of the current CEO, HDFC                          HDFC is currently upgrading      higher compensation. HDFC
their businesses, e.g., via           formalized internal processes and control                    its IT system on to an Oracle    thus loses its employees after
appropriate loan conditions,          by improving systems and procedures and                      platform to improve              they are trained. HDFC
advisory services by the              initiated the upgrading of MIS.                              operational efficiency. Staff    should look for other ways to
bank(s).                                                                                           were sent off-shore for          motivate and retain its
                                                                                                   training whenever necessary.     employees.

1.2 Improved standards:               The corporate governance policy of HDFC       Satisfactory   HDFC adopted an                  Continued careful                Low
Improved standards and                is patterned according to the Capital                        environmental and social         implementation of ESMS by
practices with regard to              Market Development Authority corporate                       screening and assessment         HDFC will further enhance
corporate governance and              governance code. HDFC’s corporate                            system to identify impacts and   compliance with environment
transparency, stakeholder             governance policy is focused on integrity,                   issues to aid its decision       and social risk management
relations, or ESHS in                 transparency, and equality.                                  making. Loan drawdowns are       standards.
participating financial                                                                            structured based on
institutions or sub-borrowers.        HDFC set up a shariah amna department                        construction milestones, a
                                      to ensure proper shariah governance                          system under which the
                                      mechanism is applied. A shariah                              release of funds depends on
                                      committee was established to advise the                      clearance by local officials.
                                      Board of Directors on shariah-related
                                      matters.

                                      HDFC’s ESMS is compliant with ADB’s
                                      ESMS requirement.
1.3 Innovation: Innovative            HDFC offered several new products in the      Excellent      HDFC’s market dominance          The bank can utilize             Medium
ways of offering effective            Maldives, such as loan-linked savings,                       and growing familiarity with     advancements in information
banking services for the              long-tenor loans, extended family income                     the mortgage finance             technology to enhance
mortgage finance market               pooling for loan application, a product for                  market’s needs and enhanced      products and services,
                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 6        23


Results Area                               Actual achievements                  Rating                Justification                     Potential future             Risk
                                                                                                                                         achievements
(including new products,         entrepreneur borrowers, and Islamic                         capacity enabled them to           particularly in terms of the
services, and technologies)      finance. In addition, HDFC introduced a                     expand mortgage lending.           collection of monthly
                                 credit protection mechanism by making                       Some of HDFC’s innovative          payments in the outer atolls.
                                 mortgage insurance available, SMS                           products are being replicated
                                 payment reminders, and a customer                           by the Bank of Maldives.
                                 loyalty rewards program.
1.4 Catalytic element:           HDFC continuously worked to diversify        Excellent      The presence of ADB (as a          As financial strength and           Low
Mobilizing or inducing more      funding sources. It made a pioneering                       shareholder and a lender) and      country risk factors stabilize
local or foreign market          contribution to the development of capital                  of the other IFIs as lenders       and improve, HDFC may gain
financing or foreign direct      markets in the Maldives by listing both a                   indirectly assisted HDFC in        more opportunities to
investment for the supported     conventional and an Islamic bond on the                     mobilizing additional funding      diversify funding sources,
financial institution or sub-    Maldives stock exchange.                                    both in local and hard             including offering shares in
borrowers.                                                                                   currency. The bond issuance        the stock market.
                                 In addition to the loans obtained from                      showed that HDFC can
                                 ADB and IFC, 3 other IFIs have provided                     source funding on its own,
                                 new funding to HDFC to support its loan                     i.e., without the need for any
                                 expansion.                                                  government guarantee or
                                                                                             support.
1.5. Improved business           Mortgage lending expanded particularly in    Excellent      Following the privatization,       With improved capacity and          Low
performance. Expanded            the Greater Malé area following the                         HDFC was steadily able to          diversified funding sources,
mortgage lending with good       development and completion of                               gain 50.9% of the market           HDFC should invest in
portfolio and sub-borrower       Hulhumalé phase 1. HDFC’s loan portfolio                    share in housing finance by        infrastructure that will allow it
performance. Expansion of        grew from Rf156 million in 2008 to                          2015. Prior to privatization,      to expand operations
market share.                    Rf1,101 million in 2015, equivalent to a                    the market was dominated by        efficiently.
                                 CAGR of 32.2%.                                              BML.
2. PSD effects beyond
financial intermediaries and
sub-borrowers
2.1 Private sector expansion     The ADB loan and equity investment           Satisfactory   The project contributed to         Housing borrower access to          Low
and institutional impact:        provided HDFC with long-term funding it                     increased competition in the       formal credit and banking
2.1.1 Contribution to an         needed to sustain its business and the                      mortgage lending market,           services in the economy is
increased private sector share   expansion of its mortgage loan portfolio.                   thus giving the mortgage           expected to increase further
and role in the economy.         HDFC’s access to long-term funding                          borrowers more options and         in the future with additional
2.1.2 Contribution to expanded   sources domestically and internationally                    improved access to credit.         funding, new products and
mortgage lending in the          allowed it to offer the longest mortgage                    This will likely have a positive   services, and enhanced
financial system.                finance in the market spanning up to 20                     long-term impact on private        underwriting and risk
2.1.3 Improved access to         years. HDFC also has the lowest                             sector investment, growth,         management capacity of
formal credit and banking        mortgage rate in the market at 11% per                      and employment in the              banks.
services in the economy.         annum, making mortgage funding more                         Maldives.
                                 affordable for borrowers.
2.2 Competition: Enhanced        HDFC’s success appears to have given         Satisfactory   New products and services          Competition between local           Low
competition among local banks    an impetus for other commercial banks to                    introduced in the mortgage         banks is expected to grow
   24       Appendix 6


Results Area                               Actual achievements                  Rating               Justification                   Potential future            Risk
                                                                                                                                      achievements
or other types of financial       launch aggressive home loan marketing                      market by local banks           further given increased
institutions (including new       and advertising campaigns in the housing                   benefited mortgage borrowers    awareness by banks of the
product and service offerings,    mortgage market, particularly since the                    by giving them wider options    high demand for mortgages.
local-currency products) and/or   beginning of 2013.                                         and more competitive terms.     Cost efficiencies in product
contribution to increased                                                                                                    offerings may be achieved by
competition in key sub-                                                                                                      banks in the future, which
borrower markets.                                                                                                            may have a favourable
                                                                                                                             impact on pricing and income
                                                                                                                             margins.
2.3 Demonstration effects:        HDFC market practices and product           Satisfactory   BML has replicated most of      Given the high demand for          Low
Replication of new ways of        offerings are being replicated by other                    the products and services of    housing in the Maldives, it will
offering effective banking        players. BML, which had previously                         HDFC, including HDFC            be beneficial for HDFC to
services to the mortgage          reduced its exposure to housing loans,                     concessional rate cuts to       send staff to attend seminars
finance segment by other          increased its marketing to promote                         borrowers.                      or training outside of the
banks or institutions.            housing finance products in 2013 due to                                                    region to learn about new
                                  the booming housing market.                                                                products and services that
                                                                                                                             can be adopted by HDFC.
2.4 Linkages: Contribution to     The Maldives has the lowest saving index    Satisfactory   HDFC’s expanded branch          HDFC can strengthen market         Low
local savings and deposit         in the world, yet 15% of the HDFC’s                        network and use of internet     offerings to capture other
mobilization via networks of      Islamic bond issue amount was                              and mobile banking have         cash management, savings,
participant bank(s);              subscribed by retail buyers, indicating                    helped enhance its outreach     and investment requirements
contribution to notable           public confidence in investing savings in                  to and accessibility from the   of mortgage borrowers.
upstream or downstream link       HDFC.                                                      outer atolls.
effects to sub-borrowers’
businesses in their industries    HDFC’s program to allow borrowers to
or the economy.                   pay half of the 20% required equity down
                                  payment at application and the 10%
                                  balance during the housing construction
                                  phase is a good way to help borrowers
                                  learn how to save. About 5% of
                                  applications received by HDFC fall into
                                  this category. This product attracts
                                  borrowers to HDFC from low-income
                                  families and those residing in outer
                                  islands.
2.5 Catalytic element:            Upon completion of their housing units,     Satisfactory   ADB lending to HDFC and its     Additional funding from local      Low
Contribution to mobilization of   mortgage borrowers can use these assets                    encouragement of HDFC’s         and foreign institutions
other local or international      as collateral to secure loans for                          expansion of mortgage           continues to come in to
financing for financial           businesses or for a second home.                           lending demonstrates ADB’s      support the growth and
institutions for mortgage                                                                    commitment to this market       development of housing and
borrowers, and by positive                                                                   and belief in its viability.    the housing market, as well
demonstration to market                                                                                                      as of the local banking sector.
                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 6      25


Results Area                                Actual achievements                    Rating                Justification                    Potential future           Risk
                                                                                                                                           achievements
providers of debt and risk
capital to borrowers.
2.6 Affected laws,                HDFC contributed to the establishment of       Satisfactory   Prior to this law, citizens were   Extending this law or creating   Low
frameworks, regulation:           a legal structure for title registration and                  granted rights only to use         a similar law for Malé could
Contribution to (i) improved      sale of apartments in Hulhumalé.                              government land for housing.       stimulate the mortgage
laws, regulation, and                                                                           After the law was passed,          market further, since current
inspection affecting mortgage     HDFC is also a constant contributor of                        citizens in Hulhumalé can          homeowners could be
financing; or (ii) a more         knowledge and a promoter of constructive                      have a freehold title to a         incentivised to undertake
enabling environment for          public dialogue at events organized by the                    single unit of housing.            home improvement projects if
mortgage financing via lobby      Maldives Monteray Authority, the Housing                                                         title to the land passed to
activity, policy dialogue, or     Ministry, Islamic Affairs Ministry, the                                                          them.
otherwise.                        Ministry of Finance and Treasury, and the
                                  Capital Market Development Authority.
3. Contributions to other
ADB strategic objectives
3.1 Inclusion: Increased          HDFC’s inclusive business model                Excellent      Support for mortgage market        Future IFI funding for           Low
availability or reduced cost of   developed a range of products and                             development through the ADB        onlending to qualified
financial services for the poor   services that involve local cottage                           project will benefit low-income    subborrowers as well as
and other disadvantaged           industries in the value chain as suppliers                    families and borrowers in          government financing
groups. Indirect inclusion        of carpentry work and such building                           other atolls, who were             initiatives targeted at other
benefits generated by             materials such as compressed cement                           specifically targeted by the       atolls and disadvantaged
subprojects/borrowers through     blocks. This reduces the cost of                              project.                           sectors will drive further
forward/backward linkages to      construction by avoiding the need to                                                             financial inclusion.
poor, female, or rural            import materials and labor.
entrepreneurs; the provision of
services or products for the      Through the outreach program to extend
poor, women, and rural            home loans to outer islands, mortgage
populations; and employment       financing became accessible to people
of such groups.                   living in outer atolls.

                                  The Maldives benefited from a reduction
                                  in the average population density from
                                  about 12 people per household in 2007 to
                                  8 people per household in 2012.
3.2 Job creation: Creation of     Growth in operations was supported by          Excellent      Funding support to HDFC            Additional funding from IFIs     Low
additional sustainable jobs or    additional staff hired by HDFC to support                     helped create jobs at different    and improvement in market
self-employment. Distinguish      its expanded operation and branches to                        levels.                            conditions can provide new
between jobs created within       be opened in the outer atolls.                                                                   and greater demand for loans
supported FI, sub-borrowers                                                                                                        to fund business activities,
and beyond.                       The boom in construction and home                                                                encouraging job creation.
                                  improvement industries created additional
                                  requirement for construction manpower
    26        Appendix 6


 Results Area                                 Actual achievements                  Rating               Justification                  Potential future             Risk
                                                                                                                                        achievements
                                     and engineers. The benefits extended to
                                     suppliers of construction materials and
                                     services, which contributed to economic
                                     growth.

                                     The introduction of the Million Plus
                                     product enabled entrepreneurial
                                     borrowers to establish small home-based
                                     businesses that have augmented their
                                     regular income and provided jobs for
                                     others.
 3.3. Environmental                  HDFC established an EMS that set out        Satisfactory   The project contributed to      ESMS training programs             Low
 sustainability: Contribution to     screening and assessment procedures as                     increased awareness of          funded by IFIs and
 reductions in GHG emissions         well as built capacity to implement them                   ESMS risks by HDFC and          implementation of ESMS
 other environmental                 following the guiding principles agreed                    therefore by their borrowers.   policies by HDFC as part of
 improvements through relevant       with ADB.                                                                                  funding disbursement can
 lending policies and practices,                                                                                                create greater awareness and
 and, targeting / allocations for                                                                                               skills among banks and sub-
 borrowers with environmentally                                                                                                 borrowers.
 beneficial investments.
 3.4. Regional integration:          Real estate developers from the People’s    Satisfactory   Housing units in Hulhumalé      The Maldives may want to           Low
 Project contributions to            Republic of China came in to fill the gap                  delivered by these foreign      invite other developers from
 regional cooperation and            for local construction companies for the                   developers significantly        neighboring India and Sri
 integration by facilitating trade   development of Hulhumalé. In addition to                   augmented the number            Lanka to increase competition
 or cross-border financial           housing, these firms are also involved in                  previously delivered by local   and meet the current large
 transactions.                       key infrastructure projects such as roads                  construction companies.         deficit in housing units for its
                                     and bridges.                                                                               citizens.
 3.5 Any other project
 development outputs and
 outcomes
 4. Overall Rating                                                            Satisfactory
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BML = Bank of Maldives, CAGR = ESMS = environmental and social management system, HDFC = Housing Development Finance
Corporation, IFC = International Finance Corporation, NPL = nonperforming loan.
