                              2


      shall be substituted by NBU, QQB and such other PCB that is a party
      to a Project Agreement”.

(c)   Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

              Commitment Charge; Credit.        (a) The Borrower
      shall pay a commitment charge on the unwithdrawn amount of
      the Loan at the rate and on the terms specified in the Loan
      Agreement.

              (b)     ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at
      the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall
      remain fixed for the term of the Loan. ADB shall apply the
      credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.

(d)   Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

              Rebate.         (a)    Following any announcement by
      ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
      reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an
      outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is
      applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
      multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread
      applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that
      will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per
      annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on
      which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
      commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed
      Spread that will be applied to new Loans.

              (b)    Following any announcement by ADB that its
      Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
      Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
      ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the
      Borrower. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
      multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
      percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
      on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
      commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
      Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall apply the
      amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the
      Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
      the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
      calculated.

(e)   Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

             Surcharge. (a)       Following any announcement by
      ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
      increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a
      lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge.
                                              3


                      The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by
                      multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will
                      be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to
                      the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum),
                      by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which
                      the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
                      commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed
                      Spread that will be applied to new Loans.

                              (b)    Following any announcement by ADB that its
                      Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
                      Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
                      ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a
                      Surcharge. The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined
                      by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
                      percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
                      on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
                      commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
                      Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall add the
                      amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the
                      Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
                      the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
                      calculated.

               Section 1.02.        Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan
Agreement have the following meanings:

              (a)     “CBU” means the central bank of the Borrower or any successor
thereto;

              (b)    “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to
time);

             (c)   “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan as described in sub-paragraph 2(b) of Schedule 1 to this Loan
Agreement;

               (d)    “ESMS” means an environmental and social management system,
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by a PCB for the purposes of the
Project and cleared by ADB;

              (e)     “Facility” means the multitranche financing facility provided by ADB to
the Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Investment Program;

               (f)    “FAM” means the Facility administration manual dated 29 July 2011
and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with
the respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;
                                              4


                (g)   “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, insurance,
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting
Services;

            (h)     “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement
Handbook (2012, as amended from time to time);

               (i)    “MOF” means the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower or any
successor thereto;

               (j)    “NBU” means the National Bank of Uzbekistan for Foreign Economic
Activity which is established under the laws and regulations of the Borrower and has its
registered address at 101 Amir Temur Street, Tashkent 100084, Republic of Uzbekistan;

             (k)      “NBU Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means the agreement between the
Borrower and NBU;

                (l)   “Part” means each of Part 1 and Part 2 of the Project as further
described in paragraph 2 of Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

               (m)    “PFR” means the periodic financing request submitted or to be
submitted by the Borrower, for the purposes of each loan under the Facility, and for the
purpose of this Loan Agreement means the periodic financing request dated 7 June 2013;

             (n)     “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines
(2013, as amended from time to time);

            (o)       “Project 1” means the first project of the Investment Program (Loan
No. 2775-UZB);

              (p)    “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the
meaning of, the Loan Regulations means the MOE or any successor thereto acceptable to
ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

              (q)     “QQB” means the Open Joint Stock Commercial Bank “Qishloq Qurlish
Bank” which is established under the laws and regulations of the Borrower and has its
registered address at 36 Shahrisabz Street, Tashkent 100060, Republic of Uzbekistan;

             (r)      “QQB Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means the agreement between the
Borrower and QQB;

              (s)    “QQI” means Qishloq Qurlish Invest which is established under the
laws and regulations of the Borrower and has its registered address at 53B Usman Nosir
Street, Tashkent 100100, Republic of Uzbekistan;

                   (t)     “Qualified Subborrower” means an individual which satisfies the
eligibility criteria set out in paragraph 3 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement;

                (u)     “Qualified Subproject” means a specific subproject, which satisfies the
criteria set out in paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement, to be carried out by a
                                               5


Qualified Subborrower;

               (v)   “Rural Housing Scheme” means the Rural Housing Scheme for 2011
to 2015 of the Borrower;

             (w)      “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy
Statement (2009);

               (x)    “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and
submitted by a PCB to ADB on its performance with regard to the ESMS and compliance
with the safeguards covenants described in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement, including
any corrective and preventative actions;

              (y)    “Subloan” means a loan made, or proposed to be made, by a PCB out
of the proceeds of the Loan together with its own funds, in Sum equivalent, to a Qualified
Subborrower for a Qualified Subproject;

            (z)    “Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means each of the Subsidiary Loan
Agreements between the Borrower and the PCBs, including the NBU Subsidiary Loan
Agreement and the QQB Subsidiary Loan Agreement;

               (aa)   “Sum” means the currency of the Borrower; and

               (bb) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, and project related
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding
Consulting Services.



                                         ARTICLE II

                                          The Loan


                Section 2.01.         (a)     ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of two hundred million Dollars ($200,000,000), as such
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

               (b)     The Loan has a principal repayment period of 15 years, and a grace
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

               (c)     The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

               Section 2.02.     The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest
Period equal to the sum of:
                                               6


              (a)     LIBOR; and

              (b)     0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
                      credit of 0.20% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

              Section 2.03.       The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15%
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

              Section 2.04.         Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable
semiannually on 15 April and 15 October in each year.

              Section 2.05.      The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to
this Loan Agreement.

              Section 2.06.       (a)   The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt
management:

                      (i)     a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the
                              principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and
                              outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

                      (ii)    a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any
                              portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
                              outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa;
                              and

                      (iii)   the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any
                              portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
                              outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or
                              Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

              (b)   Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.



                                         ARTICLE III

                               Use of Proceeds of the Loan


              Section 3.01.        (a)    The Borrower shall relend a portion of the
proceeds of the Loan to the PCBs ($14,376,000 to NBU and $77,384,000 to QQB for
financing Subloans in 2013 and $21,360,000 to NBU and $85,440,000 to QQB for financing
Subloans in 2014), in Sum equivalent, under a Subsidiary Loan Agreement with each PCB,
upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB. If there is any change to the current
                                              7


composition of the PCBs, or if there is a need to reallocate the proceeds of the Loan for more
effective Project implementation, the Borrower shall reallocate the Loan proceeds amongst
the PCBs in a manner acceptable to ADB.

              (b)    The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to apply the proceeds of the Loan
described in subsection (a) hereinabove to the financing of expenditures on Part 1 of the
Project in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project
Agreements.

               Section 3.02.         The Borrower shall make the remainder of the proceeds
of the Loan ($1,440,000) available to MOE upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB,
and cause MOE to apply such proceeds to the financing of expenditures on Part 2 of the
Project in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement.

              Section 3.03.        (a)     The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

               (b)    Notwithstanding the generality of subsection (a) hereinabove and
except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan described in Section 3.01(a)
of this Loan Agreement shall be used only for making Subloans to Qualified Subborrowers
for Qualified Subprojects and shall be applied exclusively for the financing of expenditures
under Part 1 of the Project.

               Section 3.04.       Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan
Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has not been
procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the
Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to
ADB.

                Section 3.05.          Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project.

              Section 3.06.         The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 March 2016 or such other date as may from time to time
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.



                                        ARTICLE IV

                                   Particular Covenants


               Section 4.01.         (a)     The Borrower shall cause the Project to be
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound banking, financial,
business, and development practices.
                                                8


              (b)    In the carrying out of the Project, the Borrower shall perform, or cause
to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the
Project Agreements.

                Section 4.02.        The Borrower shall make available, or cause to be
made available, promptly as needed, the funds, facilities, land and services, as required, in
addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project.

             Section 4.03.         In the carrying out of the Project, the Borrower shall
cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, acceptable to ADB, to be
employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.

                 Section 4.04.      The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative
policies and procedures.

               Section 4.05.        The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

                Section 4.06.           (a)    The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for
auditing or the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have
the auditors prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial
statements, use of the Loan proceeds and compliance with the financial covenants of this
Loan Agreement as well as on the use of the procedures for imprest fund and statement of
expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time
reasonably request.

                 (b)    ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 30 days of the date
of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s website.

               (c)    The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall
otherwise agree.

              Section 4.07.         In addition to the reports and information set forth in
Section 7.04 of the Loan Regulations, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished to
ADB, all such reports and information as ADB shall reasonably request concerning: (a) the
                                             9


Qualified Subborrowers, the Qualified Subprojects and the Subloans; and (b) the
administrative, operational and financial condition of the PCBs.

               Section 4.08.         The Borrower shall take all actions, including the
provision of funds and other resources, which shall be necessary on its part to enable the
PCBs to perform their obligations under the Project Agreements, and shall not take or permit
any action which would interfere with the performance of such obligations.

              Section 4.09.       (a)    The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreements in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

              (b)  No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreements shall
be assigned, amended, abrogated or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.



                                        ARTICLE V

                                      Effectiveness


               Section 5.01.        The following are specified as additional conditions to
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan
Regulations:

              (a)    the NBU Subsidiary Loan Agreement, in form and substance
                     satisfactory to ADB, shall have been duly executed and delivered on
                     behalf of the Borrower and NBU, and shall have become fully effective
                     and binding on such parties in accordance with its terms, subject only
                     to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement; and

              (b)    the QQB Subsidiary Loan Agreement, in form and substance
                     satisfactory to ADB, shall have been duly executed and delivered on
                     behalf of the Borrower and QQB, and shall have become fully effective
                     and binding on such parties in accordance with its terms, subject only
                     to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

               Section 5.02.      The following are specified as additional matters, for the
purposes of Section 10.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or
opinions to be furnished to ADB:

              (a)    the NBU Subsidiary Loan Agreement has been duly authorized or
                     ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, and is legally
                     binding upon the Borrower and NBU in accordance with its terms,
                     subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement; and

              (b)    the QQB Subsidiary Loan Agreement has been duly authorized or
                     ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, and is legally
                     binding upon the Borrower and QQB in accordance with its terms,
                     subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.
                                               10


                Section 5.03.          A date 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of
the Loan Regulations.



                                        ARTICLE VI

                                  Delegation of Authority


                Section 6.01.        The Borrower hereby designates each of the PCBs as
its agents for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or
permitted under Sections 3.03 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 6.01, 6.02 and
6.03 of the Loan Regulations for the purposes of Part 1 of the Project.

               Section 6.02.        Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the
PCBs pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 6.01 of this Loan Agreement shall be
fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by the
Borrower.

              Section 6.03.    The authority conferred on the PCBs under Section
6.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the
Borrower and ADB.



                                        ARTICLE VII

                                       Miscellaneous


               Section 8.01.         The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

               Section 8.02.         The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

              For the Borrower

                      Ministry of Finance
                      5 Mustaqillik Square
                      Tashkent 100008
                      Republic of Uzbekistan

                      Facsimile Numbers:

                             (998-71) 244-5643
                             (998-71) 239-1259.
                                            12


                                      SCHEDULE 1

                                Description of the Project


1.              The objective of the Investment Program is to improve housing for targeted
beneficiaries in the rural communities through financing projects aimed to:

              (a)   finance housing loans provided by PCBs to targeted beneficiaries for
                    their purchase of new residential housing under the Rural Housing
                    Scheme;

              (b)   improve capacity of local governments to prepare integrated rural
                    development plans and investment promotion strategies; and

              (c)   improve enabling environment for rural micro and small sized
                    enterprises.

2.            As a part of the Investment Program, the Project shall support:

              (a)    financing of housing loans provided by the PCBs to targeted
                     beneficiaries for their purchases of new residential housing under the
                     Rural Housing Scheme of the Borrower (“Part 1”); and

              (b)    capacity development of local governments, the MOE, the PCBs and
                     related bodies, improvement of enabling environment for rural micro
                     and small sized enterprises, and project management support (“Part
                     2”).

3.            The Project is described more fully in the PFR.

4.            The Project is expected to be completed by 30 September 2015.
                                              13


                                        SCHEDULE 2

                                   Amortization Schedule

     (Housing for Integrated Rural Development Investment Program – Project 2)


1.               The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the
first Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on
each Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total
principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment
Date; by (b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount
to be adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies.


       Payment Due                                          Installment Share
                                                          (Expressed as a %)

        15 October 2016                                        3.333333
        15 April 2017                                          3.333333
        15 October 2017                                        3.333333
        15 April 2018                                          3.333333
        15 October 2018                                        3.333333
        15 April 2019                                          3.333333
        15 October 2019                                        3.333333
        15 April 2020                                          3.333333
        15 October 2020                                        3.333333
        15 April 2021                                          3.333333
        15 October 2021                                        3.333333
        15 April 2022                                          3.333333
        15 October 2022                                        3.333333
        15 April 2023                                          3.333333
        15 October 2023                                        3.333333
        15 April 2024                                          3.333333
        15 October 2024                                        3.333333
        15 April 2025                                          3.333333
        15 October 2025                                        3.333333
        15 April 2026                                          3.333333
        15 October 2026                                        3.333333
        15 April 2027                                          3.333333
        15 October 2027                                        3.333333
        15 April 2028                                          3.333333
        15 October 2028                                        3.333333
        15 April 2029                                          3.333333
        15 October 2029                                        3.333333
        15 April 2030                                          3.333333
                                              14

                                                                                    Schedule 2


        Payment Due                                         Installment Share
                                                           (Expressed as a %)

        15 October 2030                                         3.333333
        15 April 2031                                           3.333343

        Total                                                  100.000000

2.            If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

                (a)     To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule.

              (b)     Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

3.             Withdrawals made within two calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of
withdrawal.

4.             Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5.             If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.
                                             15

                                       SCHEDULE 3

                      Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds


General

1.            The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a
Category or Subcategory of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in
the Table.

Reallocation

3.           Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

                 (a)    if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the
Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

              (b)    if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate
such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Condition for Disbursement for Subprojects

5.            Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for the purpose of any Qualified Subproject until the
Borrower has caused each PCB to: (a) establish an ESMS in a manner satisfactory to ADB;
and (b) appoint a designated staff who is trained in implementing the ESMS.

6.             The Borrower shall cause QQB to provide ADB with (a) the auditors’ opinion
on the use of loan proceeds, compliance with financial covenants and the use of imprest fund
and statement of expenditures procedures in 2012 for Project 1 (as described in Section
3.06(a) of the Project Agreement for Project 1 between ADB and QQB dated 16 February
2012); and (b) an action plan satisfactory to ADB to address any deficiency identified in that
                                             16
                                                                                 Schedule 3


audit of QQB’s 2012 financial statements. In the event that such auditors’ opinion and action
plan are not provided to ADB by 31 December 2013, ADB shall not process any withdrawal
application for the Loan received after 31 December 2013.
                                                       17
                                                                                    Attachment to Schedule 3


                                                    TABLE

                ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
       (Housing for Integrated Rural Development Investment Program – Project 2)
                                                Total Amount Allocated for
                                                                                        Basis for Withdrawal
                                                      ADB Financing
                                                                                           from the Loan
Number                  Item                               ($)
                                                                                              Account
                                                 Category      Subcategory

  1        Financing of Subloans                 198,560,000

           Financing of Subloans                                                  30% of total
  1A
           (made by PCBs in 2013)                                      91,760,000 expenditure claimed

           Financing of Subloans                                                  20% of total
  1B
           (made by PCBs in 2014)**                                   106,800,000 expenditure claimed

           Goods (Equipment and                                                        100% of total
  2                                                                                    expenditure claimed*
           Office Supplies)                            158,000

           Consulting Services
  3        (including Project                                                          100% of total
           Management Support)                      1,282,000                          expenditure claimed*

           Total                                 200,000,000
* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
**Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.
                                             18


                                         SCHEDULE 4

                 Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services


General

1.           The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2.            All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Procurement

3.             (a)    The Borrower and the PCBs shall ensure that procurement of Goods,
Works and other items of expenditures for the Qualified Subprojects is carried out with due
attention to economy and efficiency and in accordance with established private sector or
commercial practices, acceptable to ADB.

                (b)    Notwithstanding the generality of subparagraph (a) hereinabove and
except as ADB may otherwise agree: (i) Works for the Qualified Subprojects shall be
procured on the basis of national competitive bidding (unless the threshold for national
competitive bidding is exceeded, in which case international competitive bidding shall be
used); and (ii) Goods for the Project shall be procured using national competitive bidding
(unless the threshold for national competitive bidding is exceeded, in which case
international competitive bidding shall be used) and shopping.

              (c)   The method of procurement is subject to, among other things, the
detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. The
Borrower may only modify the method of procurement or threshold values with the prior
agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates to the Procurement Plan.

               (d)    The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement
of any procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national
competitive bidding procedures and bidding documents are consistent with the Procurement
Guidelines. Any modifications or clarifications to such procedures agreed between the
Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the FAM. Any subsequent change to the agreed
modifications and clarifications shall become effective only after approval of such change by
the Borrower and ADB.

Consulting Services

4.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree and as set forth in the Procurement
Plan, the Borrower shall apply quality- and cost-based selection for selecting and engaging
Consulting Services.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

5.           (a)     The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that all Goods and
Works procured (including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems,
whether separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do
                                                19
                                                                                       Schedule 4


not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third
party.

               (b)    The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that all contracts for the
procurement of Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if
appropriate, indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to
in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

6.              The Borrower shall cause MOE to ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with
consultants contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities
from the consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or
infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

7.            In the case of a contract of Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s prior
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the
terms and conditions of the contract, including:

               (a)     granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract
                       for a period of 1 month or more, or which is likely to require an
                       extension of the Loan Closing Date; and

               (b)     increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 15% (for the
                       avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous
                       change under such contract).

8.             ADB shall respond to each request for approval under sub-paragraphs 7(a)
and (b) hereinabove within 20 ADB business days (in Manila) of ADB’s receipt of such
request. Such response will indicate that the request is (a) approved; (b) declined;
(c) pending receipt of additional information or documentation; or (d) pending consideration
by ADB’s procurement committee, in each case as determined by ADB.

9.           In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the
Borrower as soon as practicable, but not later than 1 month after the receipt of the required
document.

10.            The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications
or waivers to the contracts (including charge orders) within 1 month following amendment of
the contract.
                                               20


                                         SCHEDULE 5

                          Execution of Project; Financial Matters


Implementation Arrangements

1.            The Borrower, the MOE and the PCBs shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the FAM. Any
subsequent change to the FAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the FAM and this Loan
Agreement and the Project Agreements, the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the
Project Agreements shall prevail.

Sale of Construction Materials Businesses/Companies

2.             The Borrower shall cause QQB to sell the construction materials
businesses/companies (comprising 12 brick companies and 1 door, window and roof factory,
transferred by QQI to QQB) to independent third parties by 30 September 2014.

Qualified Subborrower

3.           The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that each Qualified
Subborrower shall meet and maintain the following eligibility criteria:

              (a)      he/she is a citizen, and resident of a rural area, of the Borrower;

              (b)      he/she agrees to use the Subloan only for the financing of his/her
                       Qualified Subproject and he/she is only entitled to 1 Qualified
                       Subproject for the purposes of this Investment Program;

              (c)      he/she meets the middle-income, or low-income, threshold of the Rural
                       Housing Scheme (to be defined annually as a multiple of the national
                       minimum wage); and

              (d)      he/she agrees to occupy, and not to sell or transfer ownership of, the
                       house purchased under his/her Qualified Subproject for at least 5
                       years from the date he/she receives the legal title to the house.

Qualified Subproject

4.             The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that each Qualified Subproject
meets the following eligibility criteria:

              (a)      the Qualified Subproject is for the purchase by the Qualified
                       Subborrower of a house under the Rural Housing Scheme of the
                       Borrower; and

              (b)      the Qualified Subproject shall adhere to the safeguards requirements
                       set forth in paragraphs 9 to 15 of this Schedule.
                                              21

                                                                                   Schedule 5


Subloan

5.             The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that:

               (a)    each Subloan made by a PCB in 2013 shall: (i) have a term of 15
                      years, including a grace period of 12 months; and (ii) charge interest at
                      the rate of 7% per annum for the first 10 years and equal to the market
                      rate (wherein the CBU refinancing rate will be used as a proxy) for the
                      remaining 5 years;

               (b)    each Subloan made by a PCB in 2014 shall: (i) have a term of 15
                      years, including a grace period of 12 months; and (ii) charge interest at
                      the rate of 7% per annum for the first 5 years and equal to 90% of the
                      market rate (wherein the CBU refinancing rate will be used as a proxy)
                      for the remaining 10 years; and

               (c)    all Subloans shall not exceed $50,000 equivalent.

6.             The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that for each Qualified
Subproject, at least 25% of the subproject costs shall be paid by the Qualified Subborrower.
The remainder of such costs shall be financed by way of a Subloan. (For the avoidance of
doubt, the Subloan shall not finance any costs relating to QQI activities under the Rural
Housing Scheme.) Each such Subloan approved by a PCB, for which a loan agreement is
entered into between the PCB and a Qualified Subborrower, in 2013 shall comprise 70% of
its amount from the PCB’s funds and 30% of the amount from the proceeds of the Loan
relent by the Borrower to the PCB. Each such Subloan approved by a PCB in 2014 shall
comprise 80% of its amount from the PCB’s funds and 20% of the amount from the proceeds
of the Loan relent by the Borrower to the PCB.

7.            In the event that any eligibility criteria for a Qualified Subborrower, Qualified
Subproject or Subloan is not complied with, whether at the time of Subloan approval or
thereafter, ADB reserves the right to exclude such Subloan from the Project.

Financial Covenants

8.            The PCBs shall remain financially            sound    throughout    the   Project
implementation period. Specifically, the PCBs shall:

               (a)    maintain a capital adequacy ratio of not less than 12%. For the
                      purpose of this subparagraph, capital adequacy ratio means the ratio
                      of regulatory capital to risk assets, expressed as a percentage.
                      Regulatory capital means the aggregate of equity share capital,
                      general reserves and subordinate debt. Risk assets mean the
                      aggregate of total assets less risk-free assets (i.e. cash in hand, with
                      CBU and other banks, and holdings of securities issued by the
                      Borrower and by governments of countries of the Organisation for
                      Economic Cooperation and Development) plus off-balance sheet
                      contingencies;
                                            22

                                                                                  Schedule 5


              (b)    maintain a return on average assets ratio of not less than 0.5% for
                     each of the last two completed fiscal years. For the purpose of this
                     subparagraph, return on assets ratio means the division of net profit by
                     the sum of the total assets at the end of the year in issue and the total
                     assets at the end of the previous year, expressed as a percentage;
                     and

              (c)    ensure that its non-performing loans (i.e. debts requiring 100% loan-
                     loss provisioning as defined by CBU) are less than 5% of its total loan
                     portfolio.

Screening, Categorization, and Environmental and Social Assessment and Planning

9.            The Borrower shall, or shall cause the PCBs to, ensure that before any
Qualified Subproject is approved for financing:

              (a)    the ESMS is used to screen the Qualified Subproject from the
                     environmental, ethnic minority/indigenous peoples or involuntary
                     resettlement impacts associated with such Qualified Subproject and
                     ensure that all Qualified Subprojects shall not involve any
                     environmental, ethnic minority/indigenous peoples or involuntary
                     resettlement impact which can be categorized as Category A or B
                     within the meaning of the SPS;

              (b)    the environmental clearance from the Nature Protection Committee of
                     the Borrower for the rural housing site for the Qualified Subproject has
                     been obtained; and

              (c)    the rural housing site for the Qualified Subproject has been classified
                     under the local government reserve land for non-agricultural activities
                     since 31 December 2010 for 2013 houses and 31 December 2011 for
                     2014 houses, and there is no claim from any third party on this rural
                     housing site.

Environment

10.            The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that the preparation, design and
construction of each Qualified Subproject comply with all applicable laws and regulations of
the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety and the SPS. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, no environmental impact under the SPS is permitted for the
Qualified Subprojects.     In the event that there is any unanticipated impact during
implementation of a Qualified Subproject, the Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that
they adhere to applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and the SPS. If there is any
discrepancy between the SPS and the Borrower’s laws and regulations, the SPS shall
prevail.
                                               23

                                                                                      Schedule 5


Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

11.             The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that all land used for each
Qualified Subproject comply with paragraph 9(c) of this Schedule, all applicable laws and
regulations of the Borrower and the SPS. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, no
land acquisition or resettlement impact under the SPS is permitted for the Qualified
Subprojects. In the event that there is any unanticipated impact during implementation of a
Qualified Subproject, the Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that they adhere to
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and the SPS. If there is any discrepancy
between the SPS and the Borrower’s laws and regulations, the SPS shall prevail.

Ethnic Minority/Indigenous Peoples

12.           No ethnic minority/indigenous peoples impact under the SPS is permitted for
the Qualified Subprojects. In the event that there is any unanticipated impact during
implementation of a Qualified Subproject, the Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that
they adhere to applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and the SPS. If there is any
discrepancy between the SPS and the Borrower’s laws and regulations, the SPS shall
prevail.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

13.          The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that necessary budgetary and
human resources are made available to fully implement the ESMS.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14.            The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to do the following:

               (a)     submit annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB;

               (b)     if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts
                       arise during Qualified Subproject implementation promptly inform ADB
                       of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of
                       the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

               (c)     report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures
                       and requirements set forth in the ESMS promptly after becoming
                       aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

15.            The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that no proceeds of the Loan
are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided
in Appendix 5 of the SPS and as set forth in the ESMS.
                                              24

                                                                                    Schedule 5


Gender and Development

16.              The Borrower shall ensure that: (a) the gender action plan prepared under the
Investment Program is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) adequate resources
are allocated for the implementation of this plan; and (c) key gender outcome and output
targets in this plan are monitored regularly and achieved.

Labor Standards

17.             The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to include a specific provision in the
bidding documents and civil works contracts to ensure that contractors: (a) comply with core
labor standards, applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and incorporate workplace
occupational safety norms; (b) do not differentiate pay between men and women for work of
equal value; (c) do not employ child labor in the construction and maintenance activities;
(d) eliminate forced or compulsory labor; (e) eliminate employment discrimination; (f) allow
for freedom of association; and (g) to the extent possible, maximize employment of local
people for project construction purposes provided that the requirements for job and efficiency
are adequately met. The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to include in the semiannual
progress reports for the Project the implementation status of such matters.

18.             The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that appropriate bodies,
particularly nongovernment organizations, disseminate information on the risks of sexually
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of civil works contractors
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project,
particularly females.

Counterpart Support

19.            Notwithstanding the generality of Section 4.02 of this Loan Agreement, the
Borrower shall allocate in its national budget for 2013 and 2014 counterpart financing for
approximately 10,000 houses for 2013, and 10,000 houses for 2014, under the Rural
Housing Scheme and related infrastructure and social services. Such counterpart financing
of the Borrower shall be made by the end of 2012 and 2013 respectively. The Borrower shall
ensure that the PCBs make provision for the financing of Subloans in 2013 and 2014.

Sector Development

20.             The Borrower shall cause the PCBs to ensure that the standard contracts to
be used under the Rural Housing Scheme (i.e. the mortgage agreements with the individual
purchasers, the collateral agreements with the individual purchasers, the QQI pre-purchase
agreements with the individual purchasers, the QQI pre-purchase agreements with the
individual purchasers and the QQI contracts with the contractors) comply with the laws and
regulations of the Borrower and are satisfactory to ADB.

Governance and Anticorruption

21.              The Borrower and the PCBs shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy
(1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice
                                            25

                                                                                Schedule 5


relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all
necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

22.            The Borrower and the PCBs shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service
providers as they relate to the Project.

Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism

23.           The Borrower shall ensure that the PCBs:

              (a)    comply with applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower on
                     combating money laundering and financing of terrorism and that Loan
                     proceeds are not used, directly or indirectly, in money laundering or
                     financing of terrorism;

              (b)    formulate and implement internal control procedures, including
                     customer due diligence procedures, to prevent violation of
                     subparagraph (a) hereinabove;

              (c)    promptly inform the Borrower and ADB if there is any violation or
                     potential violation of subparagraph (a) hereinabove. In the event that
                     ADB informs a PCB of its concern that there has been such an alleged
                     violation, the PCB shall: (i) cooperate in good faith with ADB and its
                     representatives so that ADB can determine whether such a violation
                     has occurred; (ii) respond promptly and in reasonable detail to any
                     query from ADB; and (iii) furnish documentary support for such
                     response upon ADB’s request; and

              (d)    provide an update in their periodic reports to ADB on any change in
                     their management or shareholders.

24.             The Borrower shall ensure that the PCBs comply with the requirements of
United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1737, 1747, 1803 and 1929 (and any additional
related resolution of the United Nations Security Council), which are mandatory requirements
for the Borrower, to ensure that the PCBs do not have any direct or indirect dealing with
entities or persons identified in these resolutions.
