Periodic Financing Request Report




Project Number: 45007-009
MFF Number: 0078
June 2020




Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger
Areas Development Investment Program (Tranche 3)




This document is being disclosed to the public in accordance with ADB's Access to Information
Policy.
                                       CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                                           (as of 22 June 2020)
                                     Currency unit    –   togrog (MNT)
                                         MNT1.00      =   $0.00036
                                            $1.00     =   MNT2,814.04


                                               ABBREVIATIONS

                        ADB                –      Asian Development Bank
                        COVID-19           –      coronavirus disease
                        DEIA               –      detailed environmental impact assessment
                        EIB                –      European Investment Bank
                        EIRR               –      economic internal rate of return
                        FFA                –      framework financing agreement
                        km                 –      kilometer
                        LARP               –      land acquisition and resettlement plan
                        MFF                –      multitranche financing facility
                        MUB                –      Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
                        OCR                –      ordinary capital resources
                        PMO                –      program management office
                        SDR                –      special drawing right


                                                    NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to United States dollars.

Vice-President           Ahmed M. Saeed, Operations 2
Director General         James P. Lynch, East Asia Department (EARD)
Director                 Sangay Penjor, Urban and Social Sectors Division (EASS), EARD

Team leaders             Bai Jie, Urban Development Specialist, EASS, EARD
                         Arnaud Heckmann, Principal Urban Development Specialist, EASS, EARDa
Team members             Tuul Badarch, Senior Project Officer (Infrastructure), Mongolia Resident
                         Mission, EARD
                         Maria Victoria Dela Cruz, Project Officer, EASS, EARD
                         Shinsuke Kawazu, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                         Marimar Montemayor, Senior Operations Assistant, EASS, EARD
                         Viswanathan Ramasubramanian, Senior Safeguards Specialist
                         (Resettlement), EASS, EARD
                         Mark Allister Robis, Senior Financial Management Officer, Office of the
                         Director General, EARD
                         Shotaro Sasaki, Senior Environment Specialist, EASS, EARD
                         Gohar Tadevosyan, Senior Social Development Specialist (Safeguards),
                         EASS, EARD
                         Maria Carina Tinio, Economics and Statistics Analyst, Social Sectors and
                         Public Sector Management Division, Pacific Department (PARD)
Peer reviewer            Shinjini Mehta, Infrastructure Specialist, Pacific Liaison and Coordination
                         Office, PARD
a   Outposted to the Mongolia Resident Mission.
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                      CONTENTS

                                                                                   Page

TRANCHE AT A GLANCE
I.     BACKGROUND                                                                        1
II.    ASSESSMENT OF MULTITRANCHE FINANCING FACILITY IMPLEMENTATION                      2
III.   PERIODIC FINANCING REQUEST                                                        4
       A.   Impact and Outcome                                                           4
       B.   Outputs                                                                      4
       C.   Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan                                    5
       D.   Implementation Arrangements                                                  6
       E.   Tranche Readiness                                                            7
IV.    DUE DILIGENCE                                                                      7
       A.    Technical                                                                    7
       B.    Economic and Financial                                                       8
       C.    Governance                                                                   8
       D.    Poverty, Social, and Gender                                                  9
       E.    Safeguards                                                                   9
       F.    Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan                         11
V.     ASSURANCES                                                                        11
VI.    THE PRESIDENT'S DECISION                                                          11

APPENDIXES
1.   Design and Monitoring Framework for Tranche 3
2.   Loan Agreements
3.   Project Agreement
4.   Status of Compliance with Framework Financing Agreement Undertakings and Loan
     Covenants for Tranches 1 and 2
5.   Updated Facility Administration Manual
6.   Economic Analysis for Tranche 3
7.   Financial Analysis for Tranche 3
8.   Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy for Tranche 3
9.   Updated Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
10.  Initial Environmental Examination and Environmental Management Plan for Tranche 3
     (including Environment Management Plan for Contractors)
11.  Updated Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework
12.  Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan for Tranche 3
13.  Social Development and Gender Action Plans for Tranche 3
14.  Updated Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
15.  Climate Change Assessment for Tranche 3
16.  Client Feasibility Studies and Engineering Designs (available on request)

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIXES
17.  Implementation of Remedial Measures to Address Involuntary Resettlement-Related
     Complaints in Tranche 1
18.  Detailed Economic Analysis
                                            I.       BACKGROUND

1.      Ulaanbaatar city is home to more than 1.44 million people. 1 The central city core with
comprehensive utility services is surrounded by vast, substandard, and unserved ger areas of
about 100 square kilometers. 2 Ger areas accommodate about 60% of the city's population (about
840,000 inhabitants) 3 and have spread and expanded through successive waves of migration. 4
These settlements of low- and medium-income households are characterized by loosely aligned
plots, creating irregular unpaved pathways. 5 The majority of households living here have land
tenure. Lack of basic urban infrastructure and services in ger areas has caused severe pollution
that threatens city residents' health. Obsolete household coal stoves for heating, and traffic
congestion caused by unplanned road networks have helped generate some of the highest levels
of air pollution in the world. 6 Households’ exclusive reliance on open pit latrines and a poor solid
waste collection system has led to poor sanitation, along with limited access to water supplied by
water kiosks. There is a lack of basic social and public facilities, such as green spaces, parks,
sports centers, kindergartens, and primary health centers. The upgrading of ger areas is
constrained by inadequate urban infrastructure, lack of urban planning, poor urban services, and
limited public spaces and facilities.

2.      Multitranche financing facility. On 12 December 2013, the Asian Development Bank
(ADB) approved the Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment
Program 7 using a multitranche financing facility (MFF) modality, comprising three tranches, and
with a revised implementation period of 10 years or until 11 December 2023. 8 The total program
cost is $320.00 million, of which $163.70 million will be financed by ADB; $96.00 million by the
Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB); and up to €50.00 million ($60.30 million equivalent at the time
of approval) parallel cofinancing by the European Investment Bank (EIB). This program is the
result of a successful policy dialogue between ADB and the MUB that catalyzed the (i) integration
of ger areas in the Ulaanbaatar city master plan for the first time in December 2013, and
(ii) adoption of a priority service and economic hubs (subcenters) development strategy in ger
areas as a catalyst for more polycentric and inclusive city development. Under this program, a
road map has been developed to establish a network of well-developed city subcenters to provide
jobs, housing, and economic opportunities with reduced soil and air pollution. The program has
introduced a paradigm shift and replicable mechanism to systematically extend modern
infrastructure and key social facilities to ger areas. 9 The program's impact is improved living
conditions in Ulaanbaatar; its outcome is a network of livable, competitive, and inclusive
subcenters in Ulaanbaatar's ger areas. The program has four outputs: (i) roads and urban
services are expanded within the targeted subcenters and connectivity between subcenters is
improved; (ii) economic and public services in subcenters are improved; (iii) service providers
become more efficient; and (iv) institutions and capacity for urban development, program

1 Ulaanbaatar City Statistics Office. http://ubstat.mn/StatTable=11/ (Mongolian version, accessed 16 January 2020).
2 Ger is the Mongolian word for yurt, and a ger area refers to a peri-urban area not connected to basic services.
3 Almost 54% of the population of Ulaanbaatar’s ger areas lives in solid houses and 46% lives in traditional gers.

  Ulaanbaatar City Statistics Office. http://ubstat.mn/ (Mongolian version, accessed 18 January 2020).
4 Since 2010, the estimated average population growth in ger areas was about 25,000 inhabitants per year. This

  represents half of the city's 3.8% annual growth rate.
5 The average household monthly income in ger areas is $380.
6 World Health Organization. 2019. Air Pollution in Mongolia. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 97(2). pp. 79–

  80.
7 ADB. Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program.
8 On 16 April 2020, the President approved the extension of the MFF availability period from 9 years to 10 years (or

  from 31 December 2022 to 11 December 2023) to ensure the timely implementation of tranche 3.
9 For example, this mechanism will be replicated in ADB's forthcoming Aimag and Soum Centers Regional

  Development Investment Program.
2


management, and service delivery are strengthened. The framework financing agreement (FFA)
was signed on 9 December 2013 and ratified by the Parliament of Mongolia on 23 May 2014.

3.       Tranches. Tranche 1 was approved on 17 December 2013, with a revised closing date of
30 June 2021. It supports the city master plan in developing the Selbe and Bayankhoshuu
subcenters. 10 ADB financing for tranche 1 consists of (i) a $27.50 million regular ordinary capital
resources (OCR) loan, (ii) a SDR14.54 million (equivalent to $22.50 million at the time of approval)
concessional OCR loan, and (iii) a $3.70 million grant from the Urban Environmental Infrastructure
Fund under the Urban Financing Partnership Facility. 11 EIB cofinancing for tranche 1 is
$22.01 million, while MUB financing is $33.15 million. Tranche 2 was approved on 31 March 2017,
with a closing date of 28 February 2022. It aims to extend the urban infrastructure and social
facilities upgrading and spatial restructuring to the Dambadarjaa and Denjiin subcenters and to
provide additional investments in the Bayankhoshuu and Selbe subcenters. 12 ADB financing for
tranche 2 consists of (i) a $37.11 million regular OCR loan, and (ii) a SDR21.59 million (equivalent
to $29.24 million at the time of approval) concessional OCR loan. EIB cofinancing for tranche 2
is $19.64 million, while MUB financing is $35.15 million.

4.     ADB received a periodic financing request for the third tranche under the MFF from the
Government of Mongolia on 15 April 2020. The third tranche is included in ADB's country
operations business plan for Mongolia, 2020–2021. 13

    II.      ASSESSMENT OF MULTITRANCHE FINANCING FACILITY IMPLEMENTATION

5.      Progress on road map. The progress on road map is satisfactory. Tranches 1 and 2 have
supported the development of four subcenters in ger areas, by expanding roads and basic urban
services and increasing economic and public services. Water operation efficiency of the
Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority has improved with reduced power
consumption at the pumping stations and reduced energy consumption per cubic meter of water.
The first batch of community development councils and business councils have been established
and functioning with significant representation of women. With improved city planning capacity,
MUB has formulated the local development plans for tranche 1 subcenters, which will be followed
by tranches 2 and 3 and other subcenter development. The program has already acted as a
catalyst for other initiatives by the MUB, ADB, and other development partners, creating strong
partnerships and synergies to achieve the outcome and impact of the overall road map. 14


10 ADB. Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program (Tranche 1).
11 Administered by ADB. The financing partner is the Government of Sweden. The grant supported output 3 to improve

   water and wastewater services operation and energy efficiency of the Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage
   Authority.
12 ADB. Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program (Tranche 2).
13 ADB. 2018. Country Operations Business Plan: Mongolia, 2020–2021. Manila.
14 For example: (i) ADB. Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar Air Quality Improvement Program, a policy-based loan of $130 million

   that supports a switch to alternative fuels for heating in ger areas to reduce air pollution; (ii) the joint Build4Skills
   initiative by ADB, the German Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development, and German
   development cooperation through Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, which is being piloted
   using tranche 1 construction activities to improve technical skills of the local communities; (iii) Pomagalski S.A., a
   French company, is at the final negotiation stage with the MUB and the Treasury of the Government of France to
   build a ropeway public transportation system linking tranche 1 subcenters to Ulaanbaatar city center; (iv) the Asia
   Foundation’s Women Entrepreneurship Program, which will partner with the business incubator operator to build
   capacity of women entrepreneurs; (v) the Second Compact Grant, for $350 million, signed by the Millennium
   Challenge Corporation and the Government of Mongolia to increase the potable water supply capacity by 80%; and
   (vi) construction of a new central wastewater treatment plant with a capacity of 250,000 cubic meters, partly financed
   through a $300 million loan from the Government of the People's Republic of China.
                                                                                                                     3


6.     Improvements in policy framework. Significant achievements in the policy framework
are as follows: (i) there has been an increase in water and wastewater tariffs, (ii) an affordable
housing strategy and the ADB-financed Ulaanbaatar Green Affordable Housing and Resilient
Urban Renewal Sector Project amounting to $80.0 million were approved, 15 and (iii) the subcenter
redevelopment strategy remains a high priority for the MUB. 16

7.      Tranche 1 implementation performance. As of 31 March 2020, the overall
implementation progress was 75.1% against 83.4% of the elapsed implementation period. Of the
overall contract amount, $45.3 million (84.3%) had been awarded, while total disbursement was
at $31.0 million (57.7%). On 14 December 2019, ADB approved the extension of the loan closing
date for tranche 1 until 30 June 2021 to ensure the satisfactory completion of all construction
works and other remaining activities. The $3.7 million grant from the Urban Environmental
Infrastructure Fund was financially closed on 21 November 2019. For outputs 1 and 2, 30 of the
31 contracts have been awarded, of which 13 have been physically completed. The remaining
packages will be physically completed by the first quarter of 2021. Output 3 activities have been
completed which improved the operations efficiency of the Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and
Sewerage Authority. The institutional and capacity strengthening activities under output 4 for
urban development, program management, and service delivery have been substantially
completed. There is no change in tranche 1 outputs and its performance is rated on track.

8.      Tranche 2 implementation performance. As of 31 March 2020, the overall
implementation progress was 10.8% against 61.1% of the elapsed implementation period. Of the
overall contract amount, $14.8 million (22.3%) had been awarded, while total disbursement was
$10.1 million (15.2%). Detailed design for outputs 1 and 2 will be completed and approved by
State Expertise in August 2020. 17 For output 3, community participation and small and medium-
sized enterprises development were supported through consultation meetings, socioeconomic
surveys, and focus group discussions. The project implementation consulting team is working on
the mobilization of primary groups and community development councils. Local development
plans are being prepared, and redevelopment process and community engagement will follow the
same steps and principles as those used in tranche 1. There is no change in tranche 2 outputs
and its performance is rated on track.

9.     Compliance with undertakings and loan covenants. Compliance by the Government
of Mongolia with the loan covenants and FFA undertakings has been satisfactory overall
(Appendix 4). Compliance with FFA Schedule 6, Undertaking 4 is ongoing but should be
expedited. 18 Current subcenter development initiatives and community activities should be
consolidated and developed into an operational framework and submitted to ADB for approval by
31 December 2020. Under tranche 1, two eligible complaints were filed with ADB's Office of the
Special Project Facilitator. The complaints were from affected persons and nongovernment

15 ADB. Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Green Affordable Housing and Resilient Urban Renewal Sector Project.
16 The subcenters development is the main strategy and the principal investment program of the MUB to modernize

   ger areas. It is one of the key components of the “Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban Development Master
   Plan 2020 and Development Directions 2030” approved by the Mongolian Parliament.
17 Tranche 2 detailed design completion for output 1 has been delayed because of lengthy discussion around the district

   heating solutions to be implemented that should take the form of transmission line from the central system or
   decentralized heating facilities. A working group was formed in November 2019, and the final decision was made in
   April 2020.
18 FFA Schedule 6, Undertaking 4: The Government of Mongolia shall cause the MUB to establish and make operational

   an agency and transparent mechanism, acceptable to ADB, that will ensure community-led ger subcenter
   redevelopment; monitor relevant community development councils' conducting adequate community consultation;
   catalyze private sector participation; and ensure equitable land redevelopment, land pooling practices, and fair
   compensation to affected persons.
4


organizations and related to the implementation of the resettlement provisions. The corrective
measures to resolve the complaints were agreed through a joint memorandum of understanding
signed among various parties on 2 July 2018, and the implementation progress is summarized in
Supplementary Appendix 17. The project team is working closely with the MUB in implementing
these corrective measures to achieve the Office of the Special Project Facilitator's formal closure
of the complaints, which is expected by the second quarter of 2020.

10.    Lessons. Lessons from previous tranches have been incorporated in the design of
tranche 3, including enhancing community participation and minimizing project delays because of
the slow land acquisition and resettlement process and detailed design preparation.

11.     Continuity of longer-term engagement. Approved under the previous government and
implemented under the current one, the program has ownership from all political parties, and
continues to be highly relevant for the government, as it is a major instrument to reduce air
pollution and implement the long-term redevelopment of ger areas. The program has also built
strong synergies with other development partners, the MUB, the private sector, and local
communities, and it has gained visibility in the local media, making it resilient to political changes
and interference.

12.     Response to coronavirus disease. The program will significantly contribute to
Mongolia’s response to coronavirus disease (COVID-19) by improving access to clean water,
sanitation, and hygiene in ger areas and reducing the citywide air pollution caused by household
stoves and traffic congestion. In addition, tranche 3 has sought effective coordination with ongoing
health sector projects to contribute to post-pandemic recovery. This includes construction of a
primary health care center to further improve the essential health service delivery, including for
COVID-19, in ger areas.

13.    All outputs under the MFF-financed physical and nonphysical investments will be delivered
by the end of the 10-year MFF availability period to achieve timely completion (footnote 8).

                                   III.      PERIODIC FINANCING REQUEST

A.         Impact and Outcome

14.   Tranche 3 is aligned with the following impact: improved living conditions in Ulaanbaatar. 19
Tranche 3 will have the following outcome: a network of livable, competitive, and inclusive
subcenters in Ulaanbaatar's ger areas. 20

B.         Outputs

15.     Tranche 3 of the MFF will have three outputs to support the redevelopment of two
additional subcenters in the eastern and western ger areas (Sharkhad and Tolgoit). 21

19 State Great Khural (Parliament) of Mongolia. 2013. Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban Development Master

    Plan 2020 and Development Directions 2030. Ulaanbaatar.
20 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
21 Tranche 3 targeted areas have been selected because they are compliant with the FFA selection criteria: (i) central

    characteristics (i.e., agglomeration and densification processes) are already ongoing; (ii) large influence areas;
    (iii) socioeconomic impacts; (iv) high pollution levels; (v) economic potential; (vi) alignment with the city master plan;
    and (vii) potential synergies with tranches 1 and 2 investments. All components of tranche 3 are compliant with the
    selection criteria indicated in Schedule 4 of the FFA. In 2019, the populations of Sharkhad and Tolgoit subcenter
    project areas were 9,046 and 6,979, respectively.
                                                                                                                5


16.      Output 1: Roads and urban services expanded within the targeted subcenters and
connectivity between subcenters improved. This output will involve the construction of
(i) 16.62 kilometers (km) of priority roads with 10 closed-circuit television cameras installed;
(ii) 10.88 km of flood protection channels and two sediment retention ponds; (iii) 40.00 km of
overhead electricity cables and 9.60 km of fiber-optic cables with auxiliary facilities for a
telecommunication network; (iv) 17.26 km of water supply, 6.80 km of sewerage pipeline, and
8.02 km of heating network pipes with seven substations and secondary connections; and (v) one
reservoir in Sharkhad and one pumping station each for water supply in Sharkhad and Tolgoit.

17.     Output 2: Economic and public services in targeted subcenters improved. This
output will involve the construction of (i) two kindergartens in Tolgoit and Sharkhad, (ii) one
primary health care center in Tolgoit, (iii) two community development and service centers in
Tolgoit and Sharkhad, (iv) two training centers in Tolgoit and Sharkhad, (v) one sports complex
in Sharkhad, (vi) five green public spaces in Tolgoit and Sharkhad, and (vii) 50 social housing
units in Sharkhad.

18.     Output 3: Institutional capacity for program management and urban development
strengthened. This output will involve the engagement of consulting services for a people-
centered subcenter redevelopment mechanism and platform to ensure a green, livable, and
efficient subcenter redevelopment process involving people and public and private stakeholders.
This output aims to finalize and institutionalize the activities that have been implemented under
tranches 1 and 2, including community participation, awareness, and empowerment; and small
and medium-sized enterprises development. External monitoring consultants will also be
engaged to ensure compliance with ADB safeguard requirements.

C.      Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan

19.     Tranche 3 is estimated to cost $114.20 million (Table 1). Detailed cost estimates by
financier and by outputs are included in the updated facility administration manual (Appendix 5).

                                   Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates
                                               ($ million)
Item                                                                                                Amounta
A. Base Costb
    1. Roads and urban services expanded
       1.1 Roads and associated infrastructure                                                        50.92
       1.2 Water supply and sewerage, including flood protection                                      15.34
       1.3 Heating services                                                                           10.80
                 Subtotal (A1)                                                                        77.06
    2. Economic and public services in targeted subcenters improved                                   14.05
    3. Institutional capacity for program management and urban development                             3.29
       strengthened
                 Subtotal (A)                                                                         94.40
B. Contingenciesc                                                                                     16.62
C. Financial Charges During Implementationd                                                            3.18
                        Total (A+B+C)                                                                114.20
a Includes value-added taxes and custom duties estimated at $8.22 million for tranche 3. Such amount does not
  represent an excessive share of the project cost. The government will finance these taxes and duties through
  exemption.
b In 2019 prices as of 25 November 2019.
c Physical contingencies computed at 8% for roads and associated infrastructure, including heating; 5.0% for civil

  works and consulting services; and 10.3% for water supply and sewerage, including flood protection. Price
  contingencies computed at average of 1.6% on foreign exchange costs and 6.8% on local currency costs; includes
6


  provision for potential exchange rate fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
d Includes interest and commitment charges. Financial charges during implementation of the Asian Development Bank
  (ADB) loans are computed at (i) 2.0% per annum for the concessional ordinary capital resources (OCR) loan; and
  (ii) 5-year United States dollar fixed swap rate plus an effective contractual spread of 0.5% and a maturity premium
  of 0.1% for the regular OCR loan. Commitment charges for the regular OCR loan are 0.15% per year to be charged
  on the undisbursed loan amount. Financial charges during implementation for the European Investment Bank loan
  were calculated based on the same assumptions as ADB’s regular OCR loan.
Source: ADB estimates.

20.     Table 2 shows the financing plan of tranche 3. The government has requested a regular
loan of $25.05 million and a concessional loan of $18.60 million from ADB's OCR to help finance
the project. The regular loan will have a 26-year term, including a grace period of 6 years, an
annual interest rate determined in accordance with ADB's London interbank offered rate-based
lending facility; a commitment charge of 0.15% per year (the interest and other charges during
construction to be capitalized in the loan); and such other terms and conditions set forth in the
draft loan and project agreements. Based on the custom-tailored repayment method, the average
maturity is 16 years, and the maturity premium payable to ADB is 0.10% per year. The
concessional loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period of 5 years, an interest rate
of 2.0% per year during the grace period and thereafter, and such other terms and conditions set
forth in the draft loan and project agreements. The government will relend the proceeds of the
loans to the MUB upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB.

21.      Cofinancing and counterpart funds. The EIB will provide parallel cofinancing totaling
$18.65 million for water supply and sewerage subprojects, including contingencies and financial
charges during implementation. The EIB loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period
of 5 years and an interest rate in accordance with its London interbank offered rate-based lending
facility. The MUB will provide counterpart funding of $51.90 million for land acquisition and
resettlement support, civil works and equipment, taxes and duties, and contingencies.

                                    Table 2: Summary Financing Plan
    Source                                                      Amount ($ million)          Share of Total (%)
    Asian Development Bank
        Ordinary capital resources (regular loan)                     25.05                        21.93
        Ordinary capital resources (concessional loan)                18.60                        16.29
    European Investment Bank (loan)a                                  18.65                        16.33
    Municipality of Ulaanbaatarb                                      51.90                        45.45
                     Total                                           114.20                       100.00
a The European Investment Bank is providing parallel collaborative cofinancing (not administered by the Asian
  Development Bank) for water supply and sanitation of up to $60.30 million equivalent for the multitranche financing
  facility investment program. If this cofinancing does not materialize as planned, the Government of Mongolia will
  undertake necessary measures to substitute for the shortfall with suitable funding.
b Includes value-added taxes and custom duties, which will be financed by the government through exemption.

Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

22.     Climate mitigation is estimated to cost $1.12 million and climate adaptation is estimated
to cost $12.17 million. ADB will finance $0.87 million (77.7%) of mitigation costs and $2.84 million
(23.3%) of adaptation costs. Details are in the climate change assessment (Appendix 15).

D.        Implementation Arrangements

23.    The implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in
the updated facility administration manual (Appendix 5).
                                                                                                            7


                       Table 3: Implementation Arrangements for Tranche 3
 Aspects                                                       Arrangements
 Implementation period            July 2020–December 2023
 Estimated completion date        11 June 2023
 Estimated loan closing date      11 December 2023
 Management
     (i) Oversight body           Steering committee (Mayor of Ulaanbaatar [chair]; and representatives
                                  from the Ministry of Construction and Urban Development; Ministry of
                                  Environment and Tourism; Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Labor and
                                  Social Protection; Ministry of Education, Culture, Science and Sports;
                                  and relevant departments of the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar [members])
     (ii) Executing agency        Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
     (iii) Key implementing       Project Management and Regulation Division under the Municipality of
           agency                 Ulaanbaatar
     (iv) Implementation unit     The Ulaanbaatar program management office was established under the
                                  deputy governor in charge of infrastructure and ger areas development;
                                  it has 27 staff
 Procurement                      International competitive bidding 5 contracts              $44.36 million
                                  National competitive bidding         10 contracts          $20.91 million
 Consulting services              Quality- and cost-based              International:         $1.80 million
                                  selection                            24 person-months
                                                                       National:
                                                                       57 person-months
                                  Consultants’ qualifications          National: 68           $0.36 million
                                  selection                            person-months
 Advance contracting              Advance contracting is requested for the participatory urban planning
                                  consulting services and civil works contracts for socioeconomic facilities.
 Disbursement                     The loan proceeds will be disbursed following the Asian Development
                                  Bank's Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to
                                  time) and detailed arrangements agreed between the government and
                                  the Asian Development Bank.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

E.      Tranche Readiness

24.      The draft feasibility study report for tranche 3 has been submitted and accepted by ADB,
and all required due diligence has been conducted. The updated land acquisition and resettlement
framework and environmental assessment and review framework, including the initial
environmental examination and resettlement plan, were disclosed on the ADB website on
8 April 2020. The consulting firms engaged under tranche 2 are preparing the detailed design and
will update the resettlement plan for tranche 3.

                                        IV.     DUE DILIGENCE

A.      Technical

25.    Technical design and specifications are based on the detailed design of tranches 1 and 2.
They are in line with local plans produced by the MUB for the targeted locations and include
comparative analyses, needs assessments, and design methods that promote best solutions for
ger areas and for better structured and efficient urban development. Cold climate factor has been
incorporated based on Mongolian and international standards. Heat production is based on the
most environment-friendly solution currently in use. Green building features, such as solar panels
and glass greenhouses, have been incorporated in some of the project facilities. Primary health
8


care center design follows the relevant Mongolian standard (MNS 5292:2017). Climate change
assessment was conducted (Appendix 15) and includes responses to climate risk management
measures, which will be incorporated in the detailed design.

B.       Economic and Financial

26.     Overall, the project is economically viable, with a total economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of 15.3%, higher than the 12.0% threshold rate used for consistency with the economic
analyses for tranches 1 and 2. Investments in each project area are also found to be viable, with
EIRRs of 16.8% in Sharkhad and 13.8% in Tolgoit. The individual subprojects were also found to
be economically viable, except for the sewerage improvement subproject whose EIRR is below
12.0% in both Sharkhad and Tolgoit. However, benefits for the sewerage and heating
improvements subprojects are believed to be understated because the analysis does not
incorporate communities’ willingness to pay for reliable sewerage and heating services. Sensitivity
analyses show that subprojects remain largely viable under adverse scenarios, but are most
sensitive to changes or delays in benefits as well as the worst-case scenario, wherein costs are
increased and benefits decreased.

27.     The financial analysis was conducted to assess the financial viability and sustainability of
the project in accordance with ADB guidelines. 22 The financial evaluation of the revenue-
generating heating subprojects results in a financial internal rate of return of 8.95%, exceeding
the weighted average cost of capital of 1.94%. The sensitivity analysis indicates that the combined
heating projects remain financially viable under all scenarios. When separately assessed, the
Tolgoit heating subproject is most sensitive because of its higher investment cost. The financial
sustainability analysis shows that the fiscal burden of the non-revenue-generating subprojects in
relation to the government budget is negligible. However, the MUB is implementing several
foreign-funded projects, including various ADB-funded projects and programs. Thus, to ensure
the required counterpart financing is properly allocated and provided, an assurance is included in
the loan and project agreements.

28.      The affordability analysis indicates that the proposed combined tariffs of Ulaanbaatar city
for water supply and sewerage services is $0.48 per cubic meter, similar to the willingness to pay
in the Sharkhad and Tolgoit project areas. In addition, the households in these project areas are
willing to pay $9.85 and $9.50 per month for improved heating services. The unified tariffs for
clean water, wastewater, and heating services will not exceed 17.0% of the monthly income of
the lowest-income households during winter. Except during winter, the household water and
sewerage cost is 6.2% of the monthly income of the lowest-income households in the Sharkhad
and Tolgoit project areas.

C.       Governance

29.    The project procurement risk assessment concludes that the MUB and program
management office (PMO), through the implementation of tranches 1 and 2, have acquired
experience in procurement and in managing ADB projects, in accordance with ADB policies and
procedures as well as national laws and regulations. Through tranche 3 implementation, the MUB
and PMO will continue to receive adequate practical knowledge and training support for
procurement. The financial management risk is moderate. The MUB, which will administer the

22 ADB. 2015. Financial Management Technical Guidance Note: Financial Management Assessment. Manila; ADB.

    2005. Financial Management and Analysis of Projects. Manila; and ADB. 2009. Financial Due Diligence: A
    Methodology Note. Manila.
                                                                                                   9


advance accounts, has sufficient experience in managing projects financed by multilateral
agencies, including ADB. Although the implementing agency and PMO have financial
management capacity and project management experience, a component to strengthen their
capacity to implement tranche 3 in line with ADB policies and procedures is still required. The
financial management assessment recommends mitigation and capacity development measures
to be executed by the MUB and PMO during project preparation and implementation, including
procurement of accounting software, updating of the financial management manual, and training
of PMO financial management staff.

30.    ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed
with the government and the MUB. The specific policy requirements and supplementary
measures are described in the updated facility administration manual (Appendix 5).

D.      Poverty, Social, and Gender

31.     Tranche 3 will directly benefit 15,799 residents in the Sharkhad and Tolgoit subcenters.
Social development and gender action plans have been developed for tranche 3 (Appendix 13)
to mitigate the social risks related to the project and to ensure the positive benefits of project
components for vulnerable groups. A community action plan and stakeholders' communication
strategy have also been prepared to strengthen community participation in the urban
redevelopment process and communication with stakeholders. Social measures will be monitored
through the project performance management system, project progress reports, and ADB review
missions. Social and gender indicators will be included in the project performance management
system, and consultant inputs will be provided for implementation and monitoring.

32.      Gender. Tranche 3 is categorized effective gender mainstreaming. The project will have
significant benefits for women and will allow them to participate in a behavioral change and
awareness-raising campaign, capacity building, and decision-making. Women strongly support
the project across all subprojects, and they perceive that the project will improve their quality of
life and create education, employment, and income opportunities for them and their family
members. The gender action plan prepared for tranche 3 (i) incorporates gender-sensitive actions
in the design and operation of urban infrastructure and social facilities, including roads, community
development and service centers, sports complex, kindergartens, primary health care center, and
green public spaces; (ii) strengthens response and prevention services for victims of domestic
violence and gender-based violence through at least two capacity building activities of five
multidisciplinary teams comprising frontline service providers; (iii) increases community and
service providers’ knowledge on gender inequality and the safety of girls and women through at
least 10 public awareness-raising events in each subcenter, with at least 70% female participation;
(iv) strengthens the role of women within the community-based organizations such as community
development councils and subcenter development councils through empowerment and
leadership in community-based organizations; and (v) supports the prevention of sexual
harassment, exploitation, and abuse.

E.      Safeguards

33.    In compliance with ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the project's safeguard
categories are as follows. 23



23 ADB. Safeguard Categories.
10


34.      Environment (category B). The initial environmental examination and environmental
management plan for tranche 3 were prepared based on the feasibility study report, and were
disclosed on the ADB website on 8 April 2020. A general environmental impact assessment for
tranche 3 was issued by the Ministry of Environment and Tourism in October 2019, which
concluded that tranche 3 is subject to detailed environmental impact assessment (DEIA) pursuant
to the requirements of the Mongolian Law on Environmental Impact Assessment (2012). The draft
DEIA has been prepared and is expected to be approved by the Ministry of Environment and
Tourism after public consultation meetings at the khoroo (municipal subdistrict) level are
conducted. 24 Approval of the DEIA is a prerequisite for starting the civil works. Potential
environmental impacts, which are largely site-specific and short-term disturbances, are
insignificant and reversible. Construction-related disturbances such as noise, dust, soil erosion,
surface water sedimentation, solid and liquid waste pollution, worker camp disturbances, traffic
safety, and worker and public safety can be managed with national standards and guidelines on
construction practices. Operation-related disturbances such as increased traffic congestion, water
consumption, wastewater, and waste can be managed by operational entities based on the
operation and maintenance plan. Public consultation meetings that identified environmental
issues and concerns, and appropriate impact mitigations, were conducted in June 2019 in
Sharkhad and Tolgoit. The environmental assessment and review framework prepared for the
entire investment program was updated and disclosed on the ADB website on 8 April 2020. The
project implementation consulting team will develop and deliver training courses to MUB and PMO
staff to strengthen their capacity to oversee and monitor contractors' implementation of the
environmental management plan.

35.     Involuntary resettlement (category A). The 2016 resettlement framework for the MFF
has been updated based on the implementation experiences in tranche 1 and to reflect the
changes in the national requirements. The updated resettlement framework for tranches 2 and 3
is compliant with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement and does not lower the standards adopted
in the 2016 resettlement framework. A land acquisition and resettlement plan (LARP) for the two
tranche 3 subcenters has been prepared based on the feasibility designs and the updated
resettlement framework. The LARP will be updated upon completion of the detailed designs of
the subprojects. A total of 846 land parcels with a land area of 297,740 square meters will be
affected, of which 474 will be fully affected. A total of 1,350 householdswill be affected, including
1,324 residential households and 26 business entities; 1,270 of the 1,350 affected households
will experience major impacts. 25 In addition to the 26 business entities, economic displacement
impacts will occur to 87 residential households that have income-generating activities on their
residential parcels. A total of 5,170 people are estimated to be affected. A social housing facility
with 50 apartment units will be constructed under tranche 3 and will be utilized for relocation of
affected households without legal title to the impacted properties. The institutional arrangements
and grievance redress mechanisms for resettlement implementation established under tranche 1
will be continued for tranche 3, with adequate enhancements incorporating tranche 1
implementation experiences and lessons. While the PMO and MUB have the required capacity
and staff with experience in implementing LARPs, ADB will continue its technical assistance
programs for capacity building initiatives on livelihood restoration and the training of PMO, MUB,
and Land Management Agency staff on the implementation of LARPs. The PMO will be supported
by consultants on the preparation and implementation of LARPs. The MUB is committed to work
closely with ADB to ensure compliance with ADB requirements on involuntary resettlement.

24 Because of the outbreak of coronavirus disease, the government has suspended any public gathering of more than

  eight people. The consultant will organize public consultations as soon as the moratorium is lifted.
25 Affected households that (i) are physically displaced from housing or (ii) lose 10% or more of their productive assets

  (income generating) are considered households with major impacts.
                                                                                                      11


36.     Indigenous peoples (category C). The indigenous peoples safeguard requirements are
not triggered, as the population in the project areas does not include communities that could be
treated as such under ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement.

F.      Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan

37.     There are no high or substantial risks identified for tranche 3. The overall risk assessment
of the project is moderate, and the benefits and impact are expected to outweigh the costs.
Significant risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 4 and described in detail in
the risk assessment and risk management plan. 26

                       Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
Risks                                                     Mitigation Measures
Policy reforms are delayed or   The program will continue to support the development and
prevented by political          implementation of a reform road map, and strengthen the awareness of
interference                    the program stakeholders through a combination of high-level advocacy
                                and awareness campaigns.
Delays in commencement of       The program management office will ensure that requirements for
civil works because of the long resettlement will be minimized through extensive community
preparation period required for consultations during the detailed design of tranche 3 to reach a
negotiated settlements with     consensus on the project scope and resettlement plans. Baselines for
affected people                 land compensation for affected people will be agreed with the
                                Municipality of Ulaanbaatar.
Possibility of tranche 3 not    Tranche 2 project implementation consulting team is preparing a
being completed by the end of detailed engineering design for tranche 3 and will continue to provide
the multitranche financing      project implementation support for tranche 3. Resettlement plan
facility validity period        updating will also be conducted under tranche 2. The Municipality of
                                Ulaanbaatar has committed to provide adequate counterpart funds and
                                human resources to complete tranche 3 in time for the Asian
                                Development Bank’s project completion review in case it is not
                                completed by end of the multitranche financing facility validity period.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                          V.       ASSURANCES

38.     The government and the MUB have assured ADB that implementation of the project shall
conform to all applicable ADB policies including those concerning anticorruption measures,
safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement as described in detail
in the updated facility administration manual and loan documents.

39.    The government and the MUB have agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the project,
which are set forth in the loan and project agreements.

                                  VI.    THE PRESIDENT'S DECISION

40.     On the basis of the approval by ADB's Board of Directors for the provision of loans and
grant under the multitranche financing facility in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding
$163,700,000 equivalent to Mongolia for the Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas
Development Investment Program, the President has approved the tranche as described in para.
20 and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance with those set forth in
the draft loan and project agreements.

26 The updated risk assessment and risk management plan is in Appendix 14.
