__________________________________________________________________________

                                                           LOAN NUMBER 3098-MON




                                LOAN AGREEMENT
                                (Ordinary Operations)

(Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program – Project 1)




                                      between




                                    MONGOLIA




                                        and




                           ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               DATED 30 JUNE 2014




                                                                          MON 45007
                                   LOAN AGREEMENT
                                  (Ordinary Operations)


            LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 June 2014 between MONGOLIA (“Borrower”)
and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

              WHEREAS

              (A)     by a framework financing agreement dated 9 December 2013
between the Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility
to the Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and
Ger Areas Development Investment Program;

               (B)   by a periodic financing request dated 9 December 2013, the Borrower
has applied to ADB for loans for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to the
Special Operations Loan Agreement, as hereinafter defined;

            (C)    by a separate agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower
and ADB (“Special Operations Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower
from its Special Funds resources an amount in various currencies equivalent to
SDR14,542,000 upon terms and conditions set forth therein;

               (D)    the Borrower has also applied to the Urban Environmental
Infrastructure Fund (“UEIF”) for financial assistance for the Project, and UEIF has approved
the provision of a grant to the Borrower in the amount of $3,700,000 (“UEIF Grant”), to be
administered by ADB pursuant to applicable cofinancing arrangements with UEIF, and
subject to the terms and conditions of an externally financed grant agreement of even date
herewith between the Borrower and ADB (“Grant Agreement”);

                (E)    the Borrower has also applied to the European Investment Bank
(“EIB”), who agreed to provide a loan in the amount up to EUR21,300,000 (“EIB Loan”) for
purposes of parallel cofinancing certain parts of the Project as described in paragraphs 2(i)
and 2(ii)(b) of Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement;

               (F)    the Project will be carried out by MUB, as hereinafter defined, and for
this purpose the Borrower will make available to MUB the proceeds of the loan provided for
herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

               (G)   ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein, in the Special Operations
Loan Agreement, in the Grant Agreement, and in the Project Agreement of even date
herewith between ADB and MUB;

              NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:
                                             2


                                        ARTICLE I

                             Loan Regulations; Definitions


              Section 1.01.           All the provisions of the Ordinary Operations Loan
Regulations Applicable to LIBOR-Based Loans Made from ADB's Ordinary Capital
Resources, dated 1 July 2001 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this Loan
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject,
however, to the following modifications:

              (a)    Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

                             Commitment Charge; Credit.     (a)    The Borrower
                     shall pay a commitment charge on the unwithdrawn amount of
                     the Loan at the rate and on the terms specified in the Loan
                     Agreement.

                             (b)     ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at
                     the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall
                     remain fixed for the term of the Loan. ADB shall apply the
                     credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.

              (b)    Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

                             Rebate.         (a)    Following any announcement by
                     ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
                     reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an
                     outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is
                     applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
                     multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread
                     applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that
                     will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per
                     annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on
                     which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
                     commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed
                     Spread that will be applied to new Loans.

                             (b)    Following any announcement by ADB that its
                     Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
                     Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
                     ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the
                     Borrower. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
                     multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
                     percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
                     on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
                     commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
                     Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall apply the
                     amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the
                     Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
                                             3


                     the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
                     calculated.

              (c)    Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

                              Surcharge. (a)         Following any announcement by
                     ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
                     increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a
                     lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge.
                     The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by
                     multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will
                     be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to
                     the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum),
                     by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which
                     the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
                     commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed
                     Spread that will be applied to new Loans.

                             (b)    Following any announcement by ADB that its
                     Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
                     Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
                     ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a
                     Surcharge. The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined
                     by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
                     percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
                     on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
                     commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
                     Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall add the
                     amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the
                     Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
                     the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
                     calculated.

              Section 1.02.         Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several
terms defined in Section 1.02 of the Special Operations Loan Agreement and in the Loan
Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the
context otherwise requires.



                                        ARTICLE II

                                         The Loan


               Section 2.01.        (a)    ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty seven million five hundred thousand Dollars
($27,500,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.
                                               4


               (b)     The Loan has a principal repayment period of 15 years, and a grace
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

               (c)     The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.

               Section 2.02.     The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest
Period equal to the sum of:

              (a)     LIBOR; and

              (b)     0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
                      credit of 0.20% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

              Section 2.03.       The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15%
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

              Section 2.04.      Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

              Section 2.05.      The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to
this Loan Agreement.

              Section 2.06.       (a)   The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt
management:

                      (i)     a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the
                              principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and
                              outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

                      (ii)    a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any
                              portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
                              outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa;
                              and

                      (iii)   the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any
                              portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
                              outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or
                              Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

              (b)   Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.
                                               5


                                          ARTICLE III

                                Use of Proceeds of the Loan


             Section 3.01.        (a)     The Borrower shall relend the proceeds of the
Loan to MUB upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB.

              (b)    The Borrower shall cause MUB to apply such proceeds to the
financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions of this Loan
Agreement, the Special Operations Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

              Section 3.02.        The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

                Section 3.03.      Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Special
Operations Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item
has not been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed
between the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not
satisfactory to ADB.

                Section 3.04.          Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project.

              Section 3.05.         The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2018 or such other date as may from time to time
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.



                                         ARTICLE IV

                                    Particular Covenants


                Section 4.01.         (a)   The Borrower shall cause the Project to be
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, and development practices.

               (b)    In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities,
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5
to the Special Operations Loan Agreement and in the Project Agreement.

                 Section 4.02.         The Borrower shall make available, or cause to be
made available, promptly as needed, and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds
of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project.
                                                6


              Section 4.03.       (a)    Whenever applicable, in the carrying out of the
Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors,
acceptable to ADB, to be employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory
to the Borrower and ADB.

                (b)     The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance
with plans, design standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods
acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable. The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to
be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards,
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made
therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.

                 Section 4.04.      The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative
policies and procedures.

               Section 4.05.        The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

                Section 4.06.           (a)    The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for
auditing or the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have
the auditors prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial
statements, use of the Loan proceeds and compliance with the financial covenants of this
Loan Agreement as well as on the use of the procedures for imprest fund and statement of
expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time
reasonably request.

                 (b)    ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 30 days of the date
of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s website.

               (c)    The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall
otherwise agree.

                Section 4.07.         The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to
the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices.
                                              7


               Section 4.08.        The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be
necessary on its part to enable MUB to perform its obligations under the Project Agreement,
and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the performance of such
obligations.

              Section 4.09.       (a)     The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and
ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

             (b)    No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be
assigned, amended, abrogated or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.



                                        ARTICLE V

                          Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity


                Section 5.01.           The following is specified as an additional event for
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the
purposes of Section 9.01(l) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower and/or MUB shall have
failed to perform any of its/their respective obligations under the EIB Loan agreement.

               Section 5.02.          The following is specified as an additional event for
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: the
event specified in Section 5.01 above shall have occurred and continued for a period of 60
days after the notice thereof shall have been given by ADB to the Borrower.



                                        ARTICLE VI

                                       Effectiveness

.

                Section 6.01.          A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of
the Loan Regulations.



                                        ARTICLE VII

                                  Delegation of Authority


              Section 7.01.          The Borrower hereby designates MUB as its agent for
the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted under
                                               8


Sections 3.02 and 3.03 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 6.01, 6.02, and 6.03 of
the Loan Regulations.

               Section 7.02.        Any action taken or any agreement entered into by
MUB pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement shall be
fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by the
Borrower.

              Section 7.03.      The authority conferred on MUB under Section 7.01 of
this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower and
ADB.



                                       ARTICLE VIII

                                      Miscellaneous


               Section 8.01.         The Minister of Economic Development of the Borrower
is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan
Regulations.

               Section 8.02.         The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

              For the Borrower

                      Ministry of Economic Development
                      Government Building-2
                      United Nations Street 5/2
                      Ulaanbaatar – 15160
                      Mongolia

                      Facsimile Number:

                             (976) 11-327914.

              For ADB

                      Asian Development Bank
                      6 ADB Avenue
                      Mandaluyong City
                      1550 Metro Manila
                      Philippines

                      Facsimile Numbers:

                             (632) 636-2444
                             (632) 636-2407.
                                              10


                                        SCHEDULE 1

                                   Amortization Schedule

   (Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program -
                                    Project 1)


1.               The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the
first Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on
each Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total
principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment
Date; by (b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount
to be adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies.


                  Date Payment                      Installment Share
                       Due                         (Expressed as a %)
             15 May 2019                               3.333333
             15 November 2019                          3.333333
             15 May 2020                               3.333333
             15 November 2020                          3.333333
             15 May 2021                               3.333333
             15 November 2021                          3.333333
             15 May 2022                               3.333333
             15 November 2022                          3.333333
             15 May 2023                               3.333333
             15 November 2023                          3.333333
             15 May 2024                               3.333333
             15 November 2024                          3.333333
             15 May 2025                               3.333333
             15 November 2025                          3.333333
             15 May 2026                               3.333333
             15 November 2026                          3.333333
             15 May 2027                               3.333333
             15 November 2027                          3.333333
             15 May 2028                               3.333333
             15 November 2028                          3.333333
                                              11
                                                                                    Schedule 1

             15 May 2029                                3.333333
             15 November 2029                           3.333333
             15 May 2030                                3.333333
             15 November 2030                           3.333333
             15 May 2031                                3.333333
             15 November 2031                           3.333333
             15 May 2032                                3.333333
             15 November 2032                           3.333333
             15 May 2033                                3.333333
             15 November 2033                           3.333343
             TOTAL                                    100.000000

2.            If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

                (a)     To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule.

              (b)     Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

3.             Withdrawals made within two calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of
withdrawal.

4.             Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.
                                           12
                                                                               Schedule 1

5.             If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.
                                              13


                                        SCHEDULE 2

                        Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds


General

1.            The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in
the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3.           The amount allocated to Category 2 is for financing the interest and
commitment charges on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project.

Reallocation

4.           Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

                 (a)    if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the
Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures; and (ii) if such reallocation
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

              (b)    if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate
such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

6.             Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made for reimbursement of
eligible expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than
12 months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with the Consulting
                                            14
                                                                               Schedule 2

Services and Project management support, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20%
of the Loan amount.

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account

7.               Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account until the Subsidiary Loan Agreement, in form and
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and
delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized government entity) and the MUB, and
is legally binding upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms.

8.            Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for Works that relate to the EIB-cofinanced
components of a Subproject until the Borrower has certified to ADB in writing that the
execution and delivery of the EIB Loan agreement on behalf of the Borrower and EIB shall
have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary corporate and governmental action.
                                                          15
                                                                                    Attachment to Schedule 2

                                                       TABLE


                 ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
 (Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program – Project 1)

                                               Total Amount Allocated
                                                 for ADB Financing                Basis for Withdrawal from the
Number                 Item
                                                        ($)                               Loan Account
                                                Category        Subcategory
  1      Works                                  23,500,000

         Heat distribution                                                        55% of total expenditure
  1A                                                                4,949,010
         networks**                                                               claimed*

         Other Works (excluding                                                   69.60% of total expenditure
  1B                                                               18,550,990
         heat distribution networks)                                              claimed*

         Interest and commitment
  2                                               2,240,000                       100% of amounts due
         charges

  3      Unallocated                              1,760,000

         Total                                  27,500,000

  * Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
  ** Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 8 of Schedule 3 of this Loan Agreement.
