Periodic Financing Request Report




 Project Number: 45007
 MFF Number: 0078
 March 2017



 Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger
 Areas Development Investment Program (Tranche
 2)




 Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by Management. Following
 such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB's Public
 Communications Policy 2011.
           CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
               (as of 6 March 2017)
       Currency unit    –    togrog (MNT)
           MNT1.00      =    $0.000403
              $1.00     =    MNT2,478.39


                  ABBREVIATIONS
ADB    –     Asian Development Bank
CAP    –     community action plan
EIB    –     European Investment Bank
EIRR   –     economic internal rate of return
EMP    –     environmental management plan
FAM    –     facility administration manual
FFA    –     framework financing agreement
FIRR   –     financial internal rate of return
FMA    –     financial management assessment
GAP    –     gender action plan
GRM    –     grievance redress mechanism
IEE    –     initial environmental examination
km     –     kilometer
LARP   –     land acquisition and resettlement plan
m3     –     cubic meter
MFF    –     multitranche financing facility
MUB    –     Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
O&M    –     operation and maintenance
OCR    –     ordinary capital resources
PMO    –     program management office
PPMS   –     project performance management system
SDAP   –     social development action plan
SME    –     small- and medium-sized enterprise
SPS    –     Safeguard Policy Statement


                         NOTE
       In this report, “$” refers to US dollars.
 Vice-President         S. Groff, Operations 2
 Director General       A. Konishi, East Asia Department (EARD)
 Director               S. Penjor, Urban and Social Sectors Division, EARD

 Team leader            A. Heckmann, Senior Urban Development Specialist, EARD
 Team members           T. Badarch, Senior Project Officer (Infrastructure), EARD
                        T. Begzsuren, Associate Social Development Officer (Gender), EARD
                        R. Benigno, Senior Operations Assistant, EARD
                        M. Dela Cruz, Associate Project Officer, EARD
                        R. Elfving, Senior Financing Partnerships Specialist, Office of
                           Cofinancing Operations
                        S. Kawazu, Senior Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                        L. Le, Young Professional, EARD
                        R. Mamatkulov, Senior Health Specialist, EARD
                        M. Radstake, Senior Safeguards Specialist (Resettlement), EARD
                        S. Sasaki, Senior Environment Specialist, EARD
                        G. Tadevosyan, Social Development Specialist (Safeguards), EARD
                        W. Walker, Principal Social Development Specialist, EARD

 Peer reviewer          H. Jenny, Principal Urban Development Specialist, EARD




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the
Asian Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status
of any territory or area.
                                         CONTENTS

                                                                                 Page
TRANCHE AT A GLANCE
I.     BACKGROUND                                                                 1
II.    ASSESSMENT OF IMPLEMENTATION                                               2
III.   PERIODIC FINANCING REQUEST                                                 3
       A.   Impact and Outcome                                                    3
       B.   Outputs                                                               4
       C.   Investment and Financing Plans                                        4
       D.   Implementation Arrangements                                           6
       E.   Project Readiness                                                     6
IV.    DUE DILIGENCE                                                              7
       A.    Technical                                                            7
       B.    Economic and Financial                                               7
       C.    Governance                                                           8
       D.    Poverty, Social, and Gender Dimensions                               8
       E.    Safeguards                                                           9
       F.    Risks and Mitigating Measures                                       10
       G.    Risk Categorization                                                 10
V.     ASSURANCES                                                                10
VI.    RECOMMENDATION                                                            10

APPENDIXES
1.   Design and Monitoring Framework for Project 2
2.   Loan Agreements
3.   Project Agreement
4.   Updated Facility Administration Manual
5.   Contribution to the ADB Results Framework
6.   Economic Assessment for Project 2
7.   Financial Assessment for Project 2
8.   Updated Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
9.   Updated Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
10.  Initial Environmental Examination for Project 2
11.  Updated Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework
12.  Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan for Project 2
13.  Gender Action Plan for Project 2
14.  Updated Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
15.  Client Feasibility Studies and Engineering Designs (available on request)
                                                                                 Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                                   TRANCHE AT A GLANCE

 1. Basic Data                                                                                   Project Number: 45007-005
    Project Name               Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas      Department       EARD/EASS
                               Development Investment Program - Tranche 2    /Division
      Country                  Mongolia                                      Executing Agency Municipal Government of
      Borrower                 Mongolia                                                       Ulaanbaatar
      .


 2. Sector                     Subsector(s)                                                            ADB Financing ($ million)
    Water and other urban      Urban policy, institutional and capacity                                                     8.40
    infrastructure and         development
    services
                               Urban slum development                                                                         20.84
      Energy                   Energy utility services                                                                        18.56
      Transport                Urban roads and traffic management                                                             18.55
                                                                                                                Total         66.35
 3. Strategic Agenda           Subcomponents                                 Climate Change Information
    Inclusive economic         Pillar 2: Access to economic opportunities,   Climate Change impact on the                         Low
    growth (IEG)               including jobs, made more inclusive           Project
                                                                             .
    Environmentally            Urban environmental improvement
    sustainable growth
    (ESG)
 4. Drivers of Change          Components                                    Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
    Governance and             Anticorruption                                Effective gender mainstreaming
    capacity development       Civil society participation                   (EGM)
    (GCD)
    Knowledge solutions        Application and use of new knowledge
    (KNS)                      solutions in key operational areas
                               Pilot-testing innovation and learning
      Partnerships (PAR)       Civil society organizations
                               Implementation
                               International finance institutions (IFI)
                               Official cofinancing
                               Private Sector
      Private sector           Public sector goods and services essential
      development (PSD)        for private sector development
  .


 5. Poverty and SDG Targeting                                                Location Impact
    Geographic Targeting  No                                                 Urban                                                High
    Household Targeting   No
    SDG Targeting         Yes
    SDG Goals             SDG11
      .


 6. Risk Categorization:       Complex
  .


 7. Safeguard Categorization        Environment: B Involuntary Resettlement: A Indigenous Peoples: C
  .


 8. Financing
     Modality and Sources                                                                         Amount ($ million)
     ADB                                                                                                          66.35
       Sovereign MFF-Tranche (Loan) (Concessional Loan): Ordinary capital resources                               29.24
       Sovereign MFF-Tranche (Loan) (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources                                    37.11
     Cofinancing                                                                                                   0.00
       None                                                                                                        0.00
     Counterpart                                                                                                  35.15
       Government                                                                                                 35.15
                                                                                        Total                   101.50
  .


 9. Effective Development Cooperation
    Use of country procurement systems                                       Yes
    Use of country public financial management systems                       Yes




Source: Asian Development Bank                   11112016104444758925
This document must only be generated in eOps.                                            Generated Date: 16-Mar-2017 13:36:42 PM
                                                                 TRANCHE AT A GLANCE

            Date of Receipt by ADB of PFR: 16 November 2016                                  Tranche Number: 2
        .


    10. Country Operations Business Plan
        CPS                                                            https://www.adb.org/documents/mongolia-interim-country-partnership-strate
                                                                       gy-2014-2016
            COBP                                                       https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/183451/cobp-
                                                                       mon-2016.pdf
        .


    11. Tranche Summary
        Tranche 2 of the multitranche financing facility will (i) extend the urban infrastructure upgrading and spatial restructuring to two
        additional subcenters in the northern ger areas, namely Dambadarjaa and Denjiin, and provide additional investments in Selbe and
        Bayankhoshuu subcenters under Tranche 1; (ii) support the delivery of socioeconomic facilities; and (iii) further improve institutional
        strengthening and capacity building.
            .



        Impact: Improved living conditions in Ulaanbaatar.
        Outcome: A network of livable, competitive, and inclusive subcenters in Ulaanbaatar's ger areas.
            .



        Outputs: (i) roads and urban services are expanded, (ii) economic and public services in targeted areas are improved, and (iii)
        institutional capacity for program management and urban development are strengthened through the engagement of consulting
        services for (a) project management and implementation support; (b) detailed design, construction supervision, and engineering
        services inputs on Project 3 feasibility study; and (c) subcenter planning and development, community participation, small- and
        medium-sized enterprise development in Dambadarjaa and Denjiin, and completion of Project 3 feasibility study.
            .



        Implementation Arrangements: Municipal Government of Ulaanbaatar will be the executing agency.
            .



        Project Readiness: Project 2's final feasibility study report has been submitted. The program management office is adequately
        staffed to start the engagement process for Project 2 consulting services. Due diligence has been appraised, and the resettlement
        plan and framework, IEE, and updated environmental assessment and review framework were approved in December 2016.
        .


    12. Significant Developments in the MFF and Previous Tranches
        Tranche 1 has been implemented for approximately 39.0 months from approval date (70.6% of the overall implementation time).
        Significant achievements to date are (i) local plans for each of the targeted subcenters for Tranche 1 and Tranche 2 have been
        prepared; (ii) the urban redevelopment law was approved on 6 June 2015 by the Mongolian Parliament; (iii) the construction of
        khoroo buildings, a 50-transit apartment each for Selbe and Bayankhoshuu subcenters, were completed; (iv) a coordination body
        for implementation of affordable housing activities and strategy, the City Housing Corporation, was set up in August 2015 by the
        Resolution of City Council Representatives; and (v) the commitment and support from the MUB and the Government toward the
        project remains very high.
.


    13. Milestones
        Estimated Approval                             Estimated Completiona
        31 March 2017                                  28 February 2022
    14. Linked Documents
            -

                                                                           Required Document                                 Disclosure Date
                (i) Environment                 IEE - Initial Environment Examination
                                                https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/mon-uusgadip-t2-updated-dec-2
                                                                                                                           23-FEB-2017
                Weblink:                        016-iee
                                                IEE - Initial Environment Examination
                                                https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/mon-uusgadip-t2-dec-2016-iee        28-DEC-2016
                                                EARF - Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
                                                https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/mon-uusgadip-t2-aug-2016-earf       28-DEC-2016
                (ii) Involuntary resettlement   RF - Resettlement Framework
                                                https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/mon-uusgadip-t2-nov-2016-rf         14-DEC-2016
                Weblink:
                                                RP - Resettlement Plan
                                                https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/mon-uusgadip-t2-dec-2016-rp         14-DEC-2016
            -

    .                                              .



    a For Tranches, this refers to the financial closing date.




    Source: Asian Development Bank                          11112016104444758925
    This document must only be generated in eOps.                                                      Generated Date: 16-Mar-2017 13:36:42 PM
                                           I.       BACKGROUND

1.      Ulaanbaatar city is home to more than 1.4 million people. The city’s core largely comprises
apartment blocks served by comprehensive utility services, including district heating, piped water
supply, and wastewater collection and treatment. Surrounding the core is a vast and low-density
peri-urban area (so-called ger areas) with poor infrastructure that accommodates about 60% of
the city’s population (about 840,000 inhabitants).1 Ger areas have spread and expanded through
successive waves of migration. 2 These low- and medium-income household settlements are
characterized by loosely aligned plots, creating irregular pathways that remain unpaved. 3 The
majority of households have land tenure. A lack of basic urban services affects the ger area
residents' health and living conditions through (i) severe air pollution generated by unimproved
individual coal stoves used by most residents during winter; 4 (ii) poor sanitation from almost
exclusive reliance on open pit latrines; (iii) poor solid waste collection; (iv) limited access to
potable water (supplied by water kiosks);5 and (v) traffic congestion caused by unmanaged road
network. Finally, ger areas have a critical lack of public space, public facilities, commercial areas,
and economic opportunities.

2.       Investment program. On 12 December 2013, the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
approved the Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program
using the multitranche financing facility (MFF) modality. The program's framework financing
agreement (FFA) was signed on 9 December 2013 and ratified by the Mongolian Parliament on
23 May 2014. The implementation period is 9 years (December 2013–December 2022) and
comprises three tranches. It supports the Ulaanbaatar city master plan in upgrading priority
services and developing economic hubs (subcenters) in ger areas. It is geographically targeted
with multisector interventions. Responding to the urgent demand for basic urban services and the
ongoing densification, it proposes an integrated solution to initiate a redevelopment process in ger
areas and develop urban subcenters as catalysts for growth. Improving infrastructure within the
ger area subcenters is critical for the city’s inclusive development. Better urban planning
combined with infrastructure along priority roads will initiate the structural change of subcenters.
This will (i) improve residents’ access to basic urban services, public space, and socioeconomic
facilities; (ii) support local economic development; (iii) allow residents and businesses to take
advantage of urban economies; and (iv) provide better housing options. The changes in land use
and urban density will improve efficiency and financial sustainability of water, sanitation, and
heating services delivery. The first tranche is financing priority infrastructure, facilities, and
capacity building to develop the Selbe and Bayankhoshuu subcenters.6

3.     Financing plan. The overall program cost is $320 million. The Government of Mongolia
has requested an MFF of up to $163.7 million from a blend of ADB resources: the Asian
Development Fund, ordinary capital resources (OCR), concessional OCR, and ADB-administered
cofinancing from ADB trust funds. It is expected that the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB) will
finance $96 million, or 30% of the cost, including taxes and duties, resettlement, and other

1
  Almost 56% of the ger area population lives in solid houses and 44% lives in traditional gers.
2
  Since 2010, the estimated average population growth in ger areas was 25,000 inhabitants per year. This represents
  more than half of the city’s 3.8% annual growth rate. If this trend continues, the population of the ger areas will grow
  by 250,000 over the next 10 years, fueled by both in-migration and natural growth.
3
  The average household monthly income in ger areas is $380.
4                                        3
  In winter, the rate per cubic meter (m ) of particulate matter smaller than 2.5 micrometers is seven times higher than
  what is allowed by the World Health Organization. Winter in Mongolia lasts up to 5 months.
5
  Water consumption in ger areas is 8–10 liters per capita per day (more than half the recommended minimum by the
  World Health Organization in similar contexts). Residents pay 2–10 times more than non-ger area residents.
6
  In line with the Government Action Plan for 2016–2020, which is based on the “Mongolia Sustainable Development
  Vision 2030,” ADB and other national and international agencies are also supporting the sustainable development of
  priority urban settlements to balance the country territorial development and mitigate migration to Ulaanbaatar.
2


miscellaneous costs. Cofinancing, which is estimated at $60.3 million equivalent, may be provided
as loans or grants. On 30 June 2014, the European Investment Bank (EIB) signed a parallel
cofinancing of up to €50 million to finance the overall program’s water supply and sanitation
subprojects.

                           II.      ASSESSMENT OF IMPLEMENTATION

4.       Implementation performance. Tranche 1 has been implemented for 39.0 months from
the approval date (70.6% of the overall implementation time). As of 28 February 2017, the overall
contract award was at 20.5% ($10.99 million), while total disbursement was at 12.7%
($6.84 million).7 There was about a 12-month delay because of the (i) lengthy process of MFF
ratification, loans and grant agreements signing, and consulting services firms’ selection and
mobilization; (ii) necessary adjustment of infrastructure design based on the detailed local plan of
the targeted areas; and (iii) lengthy process of detailed design approvals. A program management
office (PMO) has been established.8 Improvements in the implementation capacity and efficiency
of the PMO, supported by consulting services, have increased overall project implementation
performance.9 The MUB and the government’s commitment to, ownership of, and support for the
program and its road map remains high.10 Most of the detailed design for Project 1 has been
completed and received the approval of the State expertise. Civil works construction is expected
to be substantially completed by 2018 and loan closing date is scheduled in December 2019.11

5.      Compliance with loan covenants and FFA undertakings. Compliance by the
government with the loan covenants and FFA undertakings has been satisfactory. The signing of
the relending agreement between the Borrower and the MUB, and the signing of the EIB Loan
Agreement have been complied with. Of the total 104 loan covenants, 88 (84.6%) are being
complied with, 13 (12.5%) to be complied with, and 3 (2.9%) are not yet due until project closing
date. The road map strategic objectives are still relevant to the program and align with Tranches 1
and 2 outputs and components. Activities and policy frameworks linked to the road maps have
been complied with, are being complied with, or are to be complied with. No significant deviance
from the road map and policy framework has been recorded. Details of compliance with loan
covenants and FFA undertakings are in the periodic financing request that the government
submitted. There is no change in Tranche 1 outputs. A change in procurement plan was approved
on 22 August 2016 to reflect adjustments in the detailed design. The project is found satisfactory
after safeguards and due diligence assessment.

6.     Environment. ADB reviewed and approved the initial environmental examination (IEE)
and environmental management plan (EMP) for Tranche 1. The EMP was included in bid
documents and contracts. The IEE and EMP were disclosed on ADB and MUB websites, and
information was shared with stakeholders. No major safeguard issues or gaps in implementation
were identified. The same review, approval, and disclosure process will be applied to the Tranche

7
   Total EIB disbursement is $2.00 million with $3.50 million worth of contracts awarded. MUB has disbursed
   $3.37 million for the project.
8
   Since December 2014, 14 specialist positions have been fielded, except for the resettlement specialist who was
   fielded in July 2015. The PMO budget for Tranche 1, financed by ADB, is $750,000.
9
    From June to September 2015, four consulting firms were engaged for detailed design and supervision, PMO
   support, community engagement, and improved urban planning and subcenter development. The PMO has been
   trained and is now equipped with the skills to manage ADB projects and comply with ADB requirements.
10
   Construction of engineering networks in Selbe and Bayankhoshuu subcenters is a priority action in the Government
   Action Plan 2016–2020, which was approved by the State Great Khural on 30 September 2016.
11
   The total amount of bidding documents received for review or in various stages of bidding process is around
   $20 million for ADB financing. Most of the packages will be awarded by June 2017 (70% of the contracts) and the
   rest will be awarded by December 2017 (tentatively 100% of the contracts). A 1.5-year loan extension was requested
   during midterm review mission, from original closing date of 30 June 2018 to 31 December 2019.
                                                                                                                    3


2 IEE and EMP. A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was established, and to date, no project
complaints have been received. The PMO had submitted semiannual environmental monitoring
reports, which were disclosed on the ADB website. Issues identified during due diligence review
relate to weak implementation and monitoring of construction impact mitigation and safety
measures. Areas of improvement agreed with the government are (i) ensure safety of the public
and workers during construction through public safety measures, e.g., the use of protective
pedestrian barriers and signage at all sites (though no safety incident has been reported);
(ii) update Project 1’s EMP and harmonize it with Project 2’s EMP; and (iii) update and simplify
Project 1’s GRM so that it can be applied to projects 2 and 3.

7.      Social safeguards. Project 1’s land acquisition and resettlement plans (LARPs) for Selbe
and Bayankhoshuu have been updated, and implementation is ongoing. About 300 households
are affected. Land acquisition commenced in July 2016, and most resettlement activities should
be completed by 2017. Adequate measures were used to prevent income loss and disruption.
Recommendations for urgent attention and lessons learned were discussed and agreed during
the October 2016 loan review mission and are now being complied with, including (i) immediate
land surface restoration within and/or near the right-of-way after completion of construction work,
and (ii) timely provision of compensation and assistance to the affected persons. The MUB and
PMO are cooperating to ensure that LARPs will be implemented and supervised satisfactorily.
Resettlement workshops and trainings have been organized for the newly elected and appointed
MUB and PMO staff. A social monitoring report has been submitted and disclosed. The PMO is
engaging an external monitor for Project 1. The indigenous peoples safeguard requirements are
not triggered, as the project-area population does not include communities that could be treated
as such under the ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS) (2009).

8.      A gender action plan (GAP) and social development action plan (SDAP) were developed
and agreed with the MUB and PMO. Due to the implementation delay, the GAP and SDAP have
not yet been fully implemented. As of September 2016, out of 11 GAP activities, 3 (27%) are on
track, 3 (27%) are partially on track, and 5 (46%) are not yet implemented. Both human and
financial resources are available, and there are no major obstacles to implement the action plans.
The PMO conducted several consultations and public meetings with beneficiaries, in which
female beneficiaries played an active role. The views and concerns of the beneficiaries, especially
vulnerable groups, were considered in the components’ detailed design. It is recommended to (i)
improve the monitoring of GAP and SDAP activities, including reporting through quarterly
progress reports and the project performance management system (PPMS); (ii) prioritize
identifying the missing baseline data; and (iii) continue timely collection of sex-disaggregated
project activity data and reporting of project qualitative assessments. A community action plan
(CAP) was developed to strengthen community participation in project design and
implementation. To facilitate and support subcenter redevelopment, community development
councils and a small- and medium-sized enterprise (SME) development council, with significant
female representation, were established. The information, education, and communication
campaign programs were launched and are in line with the project progress.12 The CAP progress
is monitored and reported together with the GAP and SDAP through quarterly progress reports.

                                III.    PERIODIC FINANCING REQUEST

A.         Impact and Outcome

9.     The impact of Tranche 2 is improved living conditions in Ulaanbaatar. The outcome is a
network of livable, competitive, and inclusive subcenters in Ulaanbaatar’s ger areas.13
12
     The programs focus on basic hygiene practices, water conservation, urban redevelopment, and SME development.
13
     The program’s outcome indicators, as presented in the FFA, remain valid.
4


B.       Outputs

10.      Tranche 2 will (i) extend the urban infrastructure upgrading and spatial restructuring to two
additional subcenters in the northern ger areas (Dambadarjaa and Denjiin) and provide additional
investments in Bayankhoshuu and Selbe subcenters,14 (ii) support the delivery of socioeconomic
facilities, and (iii) further improve institutional strengthening and capacity building.15

11.    Roads and urban services will be expanded within priority subcenters, and connectivity
between them will be improved through the construction of (i) 7.08 kilometers (km) of priority
roads in the subcenters (with street lighting, three bridges, and sidewalks); (ii) 200 meters of flood
channels and 7.4 km of drainage; (iii) 13.2 km of electricity cable overhead lines and a 7.1 km
cable duct for a telecommunications network; (iv) 24.1 km of water supply pipes, 25.8 km of
wastewater pipes, and 6.0 km of district heating pipes and associated equipment; and (v) three
heating facilities for a capacity of 112.5 megawatts; as well as through the rehabilitation and
expansion of (vi) 6.1 km of a water supply main and 7.2 km of a sewage main.

12.     Economic and public services in targeted areas will be improved through the
construction of (i) four kindergartens in Bayankhoshuu, Dambadarjaa, Denjiin, and Selbe using
green building design; (ii) two community development and service centers in Dambadarjaa and
Denjiin; (iii) two sports complexes in Bayankhoshuu and Dambadarjaa; and (iv) two urban parks
in Bayankhoshuu and Denjiin.

13.     Institutional capacity for program management and urban development will be
strengthened through consulting services for (i) detailed design, construction supervision, and
engineering inputs for the Project 3 feasibility study; and (ii) project management and
implementation support for Project 2, urban planning and subcenter development, community
participation and SME development, and completion of the Project 3 feasibility study.

C.       Investment and Financing Plans

14.     Tranche 2 is estimated to cost $121.14 million (Table 1). Detailed cost estimates and
financing tables are in the updated facility administration manual (FAM) (Appendix 4).

                                      Table 1: Tranche 2 Investment Plan
                                                   ($ million)
                                                                                                                  a
 Item                                                                                                   Amount
                  b
 A. Base Cost
      1. Expanded roads and urban services
         1.1 Roads improvement                                                                            30.69
         1.2 Water supply, wastewater, and drainage services                                              16.74
         1.3 Heating services                                                                             32.90
                    Subtotal (1.1+1.2+1.3)                                                                80.33
      2. Improved economic and public services                                                            18.84
      3. Institutional strengthening and capacity development                                              4.29
                    Subtotal (A)                                                                         103.46
                       c
 B. Contingencies                                                                                         11.06
                                                    d
 C. Financing Charges During Implementation                                                                6.62
                    Total (A+B+C)                                                                        121.14


14
   Tranche 2 targeted areas have been selected because they are compliant with FFA selection criteria—(i) central
   characteristics, i.e., agglomeration and densification processes are already ongoing; (ii) large influence areas;
   (iii) socioeconomic impacts; (iv) high pollution levels; (v) economic potentials; (vi) alignment with the city master plan;
   and (vii) potential synergies with Tranche 1 investments.
15
   Tranche 2 does not have provision for activities that justify mentioning the overall program output on service provider
   efficiency, even though this output remains valid under Tranche 1 implementation.
                                                                                                                           5

a
  Includes value-added tax and import duties estimated at $8.28 million for Tranche 2. The government will finance
   these taxes and duties through tax exemptions. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) may also finance taxes and
   duties, particularly for recurrent costs, based on the following principles: (i) the amount is within reasonable country
   thresholds, (ii) the amount will not represent an excessive share of the project investment plan, (iii) the taxes and
   duties apply only to ADB-financed expenditures, and (iv) the financing of the taxes and duties is material and relevant
   to the project’s success.
b
  In mid-2016 prices.
c
   Physical contingencies are computed at 5% of civil works, goods, and consulting services. Price contingencies are
   computed applying purchasing power parity based on exchange rate and domestic inflation rates: 7.6% in 2016 and
   7.0% from 2017 onward; and foreign inflation rates: 1.5% in 2016, 1.4% in 2017, and 1.5% from 2018 onward.
d
   Includes interest and commitment charges. Financing charges during implementation of ADB loans are computed at
   (i) 2.0% per annum for Tranche 2 loan from ADB's concessional ordinary capital resources (OCR); and (ii) 5-year US
   dollar fixed swap rate plus an effective contractual spread of 0.5%, a maturity premium of 0.1%, and a commitment
   charge of 0.15% on the undisbursed portion for Tranche 2 loan from ADB's OCR. Financing charges during
   implementation for the European Investment Bank loan were calculated based on the same assumptions as ADB’s
   OCR loan.
Source: ADB estimates.

15.     Table 2 shows the financing plan for Tranche 2. The total investment cost is
$121.14 million, for which the government has requested a loan from ADB for $66.35 million, or
54.77% of the investment requirement. Of this, 24.14%, or $29.24 million equivalent, will be
financed from concessional OCR, and 30.63%, or $37.11 million, will be financed from OCR. The
concessional OCR loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period of 5 years, a 2.0%
annual interest rate, and repayments in equal amortization. The OCR loan will have a 25-year
term, including a grace period of 5 years, an interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s
London interbank offered rate-based lending facility, a maturity premium of 0.1%, a commitment
charge of 0.15% per year (the interest and commitment charges during construction to be
capitalized in the loan), and such other terms and conditions to be set forth in the loan
agreements. The government will relend the proceeds of the loans to the MUB upon terms and
conditions satisfactory to ADB. Any concessional resource allocation will be subject to (i) the
general availability of such resources, (ii) Mongolia’s access to such resources pursuant to ADB’s
then-applicable graduation policy, and (iii) the availability of such resources to Mongolia pursuant
to ADB’s then-applicable policy on performance-based allocation of these resources.

                                         Table 2: Tranche 2 Financing Plan
                                                                               Amount                 Share of Total
    Source                                                                    ($ million)                  (%)
    Asian Development Bank
        Concessional ordinary capital resources (loan)                           29.24                   24.14
        Ordinary capital resources (loan)                                        37.11                   30.63
             Subtotal                                                            66.35                   54.77
                a
    Cofinancier                                                                  19.64                   16.21
    Municipality of Ulaanbaatar                                                  35.15                   29.02
             Total                                                             121.14                   100.00
    a
      The European Investment Bank has expressed interest in providing parallel collaborative cofinancing (not
      administered by the Asian Development Bank) for water supply and sanitation of up to $60.30 million equivalent for
      the multitranche financing facility. For Tranche 2, the European Investment Bank will cofinance $19.64 million. If this
      cofinancing does not materialize, the Government of Mongolia will undertake measures to substitute for the shortfall
      with suitable funding.
    Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

16.      Cofinancing and counterpart funds. EIB will finance $19.64 million, or 16.21%, of the
total financing plan. The EIB loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period of 5 years
and an interest rate in accordance with its London interbank offered rate-based lending facility.
EIB will cofinance Tranche 2 for civil works and equipment specific to water supply and sewerage
improvements, including contingencies and financing charges during implementation. The MUB
6


will finance the remaining $35.15 million, or 29.02%, for land acquisition and resettlement support,
civil works and equipment, taxes and duties, and contingencies.

D.      Implementation Arrangements

17.    Tranche 2 will be implemented from April 2017 to February 2022. The investment
program’s implementation arrangements remain valid. The MUB is the program’s executing
agency. The implementing agency will be the MUB’s project and cooperation unit, headed by
Ulaanbaatar Deputy-Governor in charge of infrastructure and ger areas development. A PMO has
been established under the deputy governor responsible for infrastructure and ger districts
development. A program steering committee, chaired by the mayor of Ulaanbaatar and comprised
of government officials, has been formed to provide strategic and policy guidance. The
implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3. A procurement plan is included in the
updated FAM. Goods, works, and consulting services procured under the ADB loans will follow
ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time). The project management
and implementation support consultant will assist the PMO in implementation. Details of
consulting services and terms of reference are in the updated FAM.

                                 Table 3: Implementation Arrangements
Aspects                                                                Arrangements
Implementation period (program)         December 2013–December 2022
Estimated completion date (project 2)   August 2021 (loan closing date: February 2022)
Management
(i) Oversight body                 Program steering committee (mayor of Ulaanbaatar [chair] and representatives
                                   of the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Construction and Urban Development,
                                   Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Environment and Green
                                   Development and Tourism, and other concerned agencies, as needed).
(ii) Executing agency              MUB
(iii) Key implementing agency      MUB’s project and cooperation unit, headed by Ulaanbaatar Deputy-Governor
                                   in charge of infrastructure and ger areas development
(iv) Implementation unit           The PMO is established under the deputy governor in charge of infrastructure
                                   and ger areas development. It will add 10 new staff to the current 14.
Procurement (project 2)            International competitive     6 contracts                         $49.98 million
                                   bidding
                                   National competitive          5 contracts                         $16.77 million
                                   bidding
                                   Community participation       1 contract                           $1.00 million
                                   in procurement
Consulting services (project 2)    Quality- and cost-based       International: 246 person-months     $8.60 million
                                   selection                     National: 743 person-months
Advance contracting                MUB has requested advance contracting for recruitment of consulting services
                                   for detailed engineering design and supervision, and project management
                                   support. MUB has been informed that advance contracting is part of the
                                   normal procedure, and that ADB's support for advance contracting does not
                                   commit ADB to approve the loan project or to finance the recruitment costs.
Disbursement                       The concessional ordinary capital resources loan and ordinary capital
                                   resources loan will be disbursed following ADB's Loan Disbursement
                                   Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements
                                   agreed upon between the government and ADB.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, PMO = program management office.
Source: ADB.

E.      Project Readiness

18.     Project 2’s final feasibility study report has been submitted. The PMO is adequately staffed
to start the engagement process for Project 2 consulting services. Due diligence has been
                                                                                                                     7


appraised, and the resettlement plan and framework, IEE, and updated environmental
assessment and review framework were approved in December 2016.

                                           IV.      DUE DILIGENCE

A.         Technical

19.     Project 2’s technical design and specifications are based on the Project 1 detailed design.
They align with the MUB’s plans for the targeted locations and include comparative analyses,
needs assessment, and design methods that promote solutions for ger areas and for structured
and efficient urban development. Cold climate considerations have been incorporated based on
Mongolian and international standards. Heat production is based on most environmentally friendly
solutions, and green building features have been incorporated in some of the project facilities.

B.         Economic and Financial

20.     The proposed subprojects are economically viable. The resulting base case economic
internal rate of returns (EIRRs) for the project components (urban roads, water supply and
sewerage, heating services, and socioeconomic facilities) range from 15.22% to 28.83%, which
are higher than ADB’s economic opportunity cost of capital of 12.00%. Sensitivity analysis was
also undertaken to further test the economic viability of the road subprojects. The results indicate
that the EIRRs are most vulnerable to delays in the subprojects’ benefits, but the EIRRs are still
higher than the 12.00% hurdle rate (EIRRs of 23.89% for Denjiin and 21.55% for Dambadarjaa).
For the EIRRs to drop to the economic opportunity cost of capital (12.00% hurdle rate), capital
costs will have to increase by 97% in Denjiin and 84% in Dambadarjaa, while benefits will require
reduction of 81% in Denjiin and 70% in Dambadarjaa. For the other subprojects (water supply and
sewerage, heating services, and socioeconomic facilities), the sensitivity analysis indicates that
the EIRRs are higher than the 12.00% hurdle rate in all cases.

21.     The subprojects are considered financially viable. The financial internal rate of return
(FIRR) for the water supply and sewerage and heating services components range from 2.90% to
5.01%, which is above the real weighted average cost of capital of 2.17%. 16 The sensitivity
analyses also show that the FIRR is sensitive in some cases. In the Denjiin water supply and
sewerage subprojects, FIRR is sensitive to a 10% increase in operation and maintenance (O&M),
10% decrease in benefits, 10% increase in capital and O&M costs with a 10% decrease in
benefits, and a 1-year delay in realizing benefits. In the Dambadarjaa water supply and sewerage
subprojects, the FIRR is sensitive to a 10% increase in capital and O&M costs with a 10%
decrease in benefits, and a 1-year delay in the realization of benefits.

22.    The affordability analysis indicates that the proposed combined tariff for water supply and
sewerage services of $0.32 per cubic meter (m3) of water consumed is within the limit that Denjiin
and Dambadarjaa residents are willing to pay for improved water supply and sewerage services,
which is $0.72 per m3 of water consumed for Denjiin and $0.79 per m3 for Dambadarjaa. The
proposed combined tariff for water and sewerage of $0.32 per m3 represents 1.3%–1.9% of the
household monthly income of the two lowest income groups in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa. For
heating services, the proposed tariff of $5.6 per megawatt-hour is also deemed affordable and

16
     Tariffs for water and heating have steadily increased since 2013, which has improved the cost recovery of these
                                                                                      3
     utilities. The wholesale water tariff increased from MNT255 per cubic meter (m ) for domestic customers in 2012–
                              3                 3
     2013 to MNT420 per m –MNT460 per m in 2014. A proposed 35% increase in both water and wastewater tariffs is
     pending the price commission’s decision. The heating tariff increased from MNT341 per square meter (one of the
     tariff categories) in 2013 to MNT460 per square meter at current tariff level, with about a 17% increase each year
     during 2014–2015.
8


would comprise 2.0%–2.8% of the household monthly income of the two lowest income groups.
Therefore, the combined tariffs for water and sewerage, and heating services represent 3.28%–
4.69% of the household monthly income of the two lowest income groups. This is still affordable
for low income households since the general rule is that utility expenses should not exceed 5% of
the monthly income of the lowest income households.

C.       Governance

23.    ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed
with the government and the MUB. The specific policy requirements and supplementary
measures are described in the updated FAM. The financial management assessment (FMA) was
updated for the MUB and PMO. 17 The overall financial management risk before mitigating
measures is rated as moderate. The FMA recommended an action plan and capacity
development measures to be executed by the MUB and PMO during project preparation and
implementation. It concludes that, although the implementing agency and/or PMO have financial
management capacity and project management experience, a component to strengthen their
capacity to implement Project 2 in line with ADB policies and procedures is still required. The
MUB, which will operate and administer the imprest accounts, has sufficient experience in
managing projects financed by multilateral agencies, including ADB. The project procurement risk
assessment establishes that the MUB has gained procurement capacity through Tranche 1,
however, additional support through consulting services is still required to ensure strict
compliance with ADB policies and procedures, as well as national laws and regulations.

D.       Poverty, Social, and Gender Dimensions

24.      The project will benefit about 200,000 persons with improved access to water supply and
sewerage, roads, heating services, kindergarten facilities, transitional housing, business incubator
components, parks, and sports complexes. To ensure the benefits of project components,
activities have been designed and included in the CAP, GAP, and SDAP for public awareness,
education, consultation, and participation during the project; with consulting support. The CAP
and SDAP were prepared to ensure consultation and participation of local communities
throughout implementation. Social measures will be monitored through the PPMS, project
progress reports, and ADB review missions. Social and gender indicators will be included in the
PPMS, and consultant inputs will be provided for implementation and monitoring.

25.      The project is categorized as effective gender mainstreaming. The project’s effective
gender mainstreaming measures are presented in the GAP. The GAP outlines the project’s main
strategies to provide access to services and opportunities, i.e., affordability to poor women-
headed households, protection of women’s land tenure and property rights, and equal
participation of women in the decision-making activities of the khesegs and khoroos.18 The project
will address these issues through improved infrastructure, expanded social facilities (including
transitional housing for women victims of domestic violence), increased employment and
business training, and strengthened service delivery agencies. The project’s general strategy is to
ensure the proposed infrastructure’s design features will be gender-responsive, appropriate, and
affordable to its target users. The project will also foster women’s involvement and decision
making to maximize the opportunity for them to shape their community’s development.


17
   The Tranche 1 capacity-building program supported financial management capacity strengthening. Tranche 2 will
   carry out further capacity-strengthening activities for the PMO and the executing agency, as indicated in the FMA
   action plan.
18
   Khoroo is an administrative subdivision of Ulaanbaatar below the district level. Kheseg, is a subdivision of a khoroo,
   with no formal administrative role, equivalent to neighborhood.
                                                                                                                           9


E.       Safeguards

26.     Environment. Project 2 is classified as category B for environment. The IEE and
environmental management plan (EMP) were prepared based on Project 2’s detailed
environmental impact assessment, per the requirements of the Mongolian Law on Environmental
Impact Assessment (2012) and ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS) (2009). Public
consultation meetings were held with affected households and stakeholders and identified
environmental issues, concerns, and appropriate impact mitigations. The investment program’s
environmental assessment and review framework was updated as part of Project 1’s detailed
design (Appendix 9). The updated assessment and framework continues to provide guidance for
screening and categorization, environmental assessment, and preparation and implementation of
environmental safeguards for project subcomponents’ compliance with ADB’s SPS and the
Mongolian Law on Environmental Impact Assessment. Potential environmental impacts, which
are largely site-specific and short-term, arising from the construction of project subcomponents,
are insignificant and reversible. Construction-related disturbances can be managed with standard
construction practices and guidelines.19 The project’s environmental management is supported by
loan assurances and capacity development and institutional strengthening activities.
Environmental complaints will be handled following the project’s grievance redress mechanism
(GRM).

27.      Resettlement. Project 2 is category A for resettlement and category C for indigenous
peoples. 20 A land acquisition and resettlement plan (LARP) for the four subcenters has been
prepared following the legislative framework of Mongolia and ADB’s SPS, and the agreed
resettlement framework (Appendix 12).21 The LARP was approved on 12 December 2016. The
estimated land acquisition and resettlement impact includes 555 entities (residential and
commercial) and 2,156 persons, who will be affected by developments in the subcenters. The
project will adopt a land acquisition and resettlement practice involving contractual agreements
negotiated between the affected persons and the MUB’s Land Administration Department on the
basis of the Civil Code of Mongolia.22 The resettlement framework, applicable to all investment
program subprojects, has been reviewed and updated. 23 It now reflects the MUB’s recent
regulation, a harmonized grievance handling system based on existing practice, 24 new
institutional arrangements,25 and other provisions derived from Project 1’s updated LARPs.26 No
principle or entitlement in the original framework has been downgraded (Appendix 11). A GRM
was established for Project 1, and a similar mechanism will be adopted for Project 2. All
safeguards documents will be reviewed and concurred by ADB, disclosed to affected people and

19
   These include noise, dust, soil erosion, surface water sedimentation, solid and liquid waste pollution, worker camp
   disturbances, reduced local access, and possible exposure to traffic, worker, and public safety risks.
20
   The project components focus on Ulaanbaatar’s mid-ger urban areas. These areas have been in existence for more
   than 30 years and are very heterogeneous in terms of residents’ socioeconomic status. The project investments will
   benefit all residents. No specific communities of ethnic minorities have been identified.
21
   In the absence of detailed design, one LARP for the four subcenters was prepared based on the feasibility study
   report. During detailed design, the LARP will be updated per subproject or component. Resettlement activities will
   only start after the detailed design that is expected to be completed not before mid-2018.
22
   Affected people will be compensated using cash, land-for-land, or relocation to existing housing units.
23
   Review and update of the resettlement framework as stipulated in the FFA, Schedule 5, para. 3.
24
   Based on the GRM set-up under Tranche 1 and integrating MUB's existing grievance redress practice.
25
   A land acquisition and resettlement committee for the Bayankhoshuu and Selbe subcenter sewer main collector
   pipes subprojects was established on 6 March 2015 by Resolution No. A/175 of the Mayor of MUB. With this
   resolution a working group for the implementation of the LARP was established as well.
26
   Such as (i) upgrading of entitlements for unlicensed occupant of land, i.e., from provision of “possession certificate” to
   provision of “ownership or possession certificate”; (ii) provision for partially affected land (less than 50%), where the
   remaining land is no longer viable or cannot be used for its original purpose, therefore, at the request of the affected
   people, the remaining land can be acquired; and (iii) provision of allowances to cover transport costs on actual cost
   basis at current market rates to be included in contractual agreement.
10


communities, and posted on ADB and MUB websites on 14 December 2016. The PMO has
adequate staff and has demonstrated capacity for grievance redress, awareness creation, and
social mobilization. Safeguards trainings will continue to be provided as specified in the LARP.
Social safeguards monitoring and reporting to ADB will continue on a semiannual basis.

F.      Risks and Mitigating Measures

28.     Table 4 summarizes the major risks and mitigating measures detailed in Appendix 14.

                         Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
Risks                                                          Mitigating Measures
Lack of community and        Throughout implementation, community engagement and private sector involvement
private sector involvement   will be supported. The MUB, supported by the program, will facilitate, supervise, and
in subcenter development     coordinate the subcenter redevelopment process, and will guide a fair land
                             redevelopment process. Along with an improved local urban plan, the activities will
                             maximize benefits to residents, encouraging them not to move away.
Corruption and inefficient   Reviews will assess procurement to validate reported procurement capacity and
procurement                  address gaps that may impede program effectiveness. Provisions of ADB’s
                             Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) are included in the investment
                             program’s loan regulations and bidding documents. The executing agency will disclose
                             to the public and annually update the program’s status and how facility proceeds are
                             used.
 Insufficient resources      The Government of Mongolia and the MUB will ensure the Project 2-financed facilities
 allocated to the operation  (community development centers, transitional house, kindergartens, sports
 and maintenance of          complexes, and public parks) have adequate resources and capacity to be properly
 socioeconomic facilities    operated and maintained by relevant departments and agencies.
 Delay in land acquisition   The MUB will make compensation funds for affected persons available early and will
 and resettlement approvals  strictly comply with the resettlement plan.
 and implementation
ADB = Asian Development Bank, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar.
Source: ADB.

G.      Risk Categorization

29.     Project 2’s risk category is complex because the safeguards categorization for involuntary
resettlement is A.

                                          V.    ASSURANCES

30.    The government and the MUB have assured ADB that implementation of the project shall
conform to all applicable ADB policies including those concerning anticorruption measures,
safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement as described in detail in
the updated facility administration manual and loan documents. The government and the MUB
have agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the project, which are set forth in the loan
agreements and project agreement.

                                    VI.        RECOMMENDATION

31.    On the basis of the approval by ADB’s Board of Directors for the provision of loans under
the multitranche financing facility in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding $163,700,000 to
Mongolia for the Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program, it
is recommended that the President approve the proposed tranche as described in para. 15 and
such other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft
loan and project agreements for the proposed tranche.
                                                                                              Appendix 1         1



                   DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK FOR PROJECT 2
Impact the Project is Aligned with
Improved living conditions in Ulaanbaatar (Ulaanbaatar City Master Plan [2030])a

                               Performance Indicators                Data Sources and
Results Chain                 with Targets and Baselines                Reporting                    Risks
Outcome                   By 2022:
A network of livable,     a.   % of population in Dambadarjaa     a–c. MUB report on urban   Insufficient time and
competitive, and               and Denjiin with improved               construction and      resources devoted to
inclusive subcenters in        access to water, heating, and           district records      community
Ulaanbaatar’s ger              sanitation increased by 20%                                   mobilization
areas                          (2015 baseline: 0% for water,
                               0% for heating, and 0% for                                    Lack of private sector
                               sanitation)                                                   participation in the
                                                                                             redevelopment
                          b.    Average density increased in                                 approaches
                                Dambadarjaa to 200 persons
                                per ha and in Denjiin to
                                180 persons per ha
                                (2015 average baseline: 104
                                [Dambadarjaa] and 94 [Denjiin]
                                persons per ha)

                          c.   Number of business
                               establishments in Dambadarjaa
                               and Denjiin increased by 10%
                               (2015 baseline: 1,845)
Outputs                   By 2021:
1. Roads and urban        1a. 24.1 km of water supply             1a–1e. PMO progress and    Rising global prices of
   services                    network and 25.8 km of                 completion reports     energy and
   expanded                    wastewater network                                            construction materials
                               constructed                                                   significantly increase
                               (2015 baseline: 5.7 km of water                               the project’s
                               supply network and 3.0 km of                                  investment and O&M
                               wastewater network)                                           costs

                          1b.   3 heating facilities with
                                112.5 MW capacity and 6.0 km
                                of heating network pipes
                                constructed
                                (2015 baseline: 18 heating
                                facilities with 7.0 MW)

                          1c.   7.08 km of priority roads
                                including street lighting,
                                3 bridges, and sidewalks
                                constructed
                                (2015 baseline: 3.9 km of
                                paved road and 2 bridges)

                          1d.   6.1 km of water supply main
                                and 7.2 km of sewage main
                                rehabilitated and expanded
                                (2015 baseline: 2.9 km of water
                                supply main and 4.2 km of
                                sewerage main)

                          1e.   25 cameras installed and
                                operating in Dambadarjaa and
                                Denjiin subcenters to promote
                                safety for women and girls in
2        Appendix 1



                               Performance Indicators                Data Sources and
Results Chain                 with Targets and Baselines                Reporting                    Risks
                               public spaces
                               (2015 baseline: 0)
2.   Economic and         By 2021:
     public services in   2a. Four kindergarten classrooms        2a–2d. PMO progress and    Insufficient resources
     targeted areas            with 6,200 m2 of floor area and        completion reports     allocated to the O&M
     improved                  capacity for 400 students              and district records   of socioeconomic
                               constructed (using green                                      facilities
                               building design) in
                               Bayankhoshuu, Dambadarjaa,
                               Denjiin, and Selbe subcenters                                 Lack of demand for
                               (sex-disaggregated)                                           commercial facilities
                               (2015 baseline: 10,500 m2 with                                built
                               capacity for 1,000 students)

                          2b.   Two community development
                                and service centers
                                constructed in Dambadarjaa
                                and Denjiin with 6,000 m2 of
                                floor area
                                (2015 baseline: 0)

                          2c.   Two urban parks constructed in
                                Banyankhoshuu and Denjiin
                                with 23,770 m2
                                (2015 baseline: 0)

                          2d.   Two sports complexes
                                constructed in Bayankhoshuu
                                and Dambadarjaa with
                                12,000 m2 of floor area
                                (2015 baseline: 0)
3.   Institutional        By 2017:
     capacity for         3.1a. PMO fully functioning with        3.1a–3.1b. PMO progress    Inadequate project
     program                    trained staff, at least 50% of        and completion         resources allotted to
     management and             whom are women                        reports                support the policy and
     urban                      (2015 baseline: 14 staff)                                    institutional reforms
     development
     strengthened                                                                            Lack of incentives to
                          By 2018:                                                           attract private sector
3.1 Project               3.1b. Sex-disaggregated data                                       participation
    management and              collected for all activities
    implementation              through project performance                                  Failure to appoint and
    support                     management system                                            retain well-qualified
                                (2015 baseline: 0)                                           and experienced
                                                                                             consultants
                          By 2018:
3.2 Detailed design,      3.2a. Project 2 detailed design         3.2a. PMO progress and
    construction                completed                             completion reports
    supervision, and            (2015 baseline: not applicable)
    engineering
    services inputs on
    Project 3
    feasibility study
                          By 2018:
3.3. Subcenter            3.3a. Tranche 3 feasibility study       3.3a. PMO progress and
     planning and               completed                             completion reports
     development,               (2015 baseline: not applicable)
     community
     participation, SME
                                                                                              Appendix 1        3


                               Performance Indicators               Data Sources and
Results Chain                with Targets and Baselines                Reporting                     Risks
   development in        By 2019:
   Dambadarjaa and       3.3b. Dambadarjaa and Denjiin plans    3.3b–3.3c. MUB and
   Denjiin, and                and redevelopment processes          district reports
   completion of               prepared and endorsed by all
   Project 3                   stakeholders, through
   feasibility study           community consultation with at
                               least 50% female participants
                               (2015 baseline: 0)

                          3.3c. CDCs and SDCs in
                                 Dambadarjaa and Denjiin fully
                                 functioning, with at least 40%
                                 female participation
                                 (2015 baseline: 0)
Key Activities with Milestones
1. Roads and urban services expanded
1.1 Detailed design of water and sewerage improvements completed by November 2018
1.2 Detailed design of heating improvements completed by November 2018
1.3 Detailed design of roads and other infrastructure completed by November 2018
1.4 Urban infrastructure constructed, commissioned, and made operational in phases between April 2019 and 2021
1.5 Implementation of LARP completed prior to construction activities
1.6 EMP, GAP, and SDAP implemented
2. Economic and public services in targeted areas improved
2.1 Detailed design of kindergarten and business incubators/vocational training centers completed by November
    2018
2.2 Facilities constructed, commissioned, and made operational in phases between September 2018 and 2021
2.3 Implementation of LARP completed prior to construction activities
2.4 EMP, GAP, and SDAP implemented
3. Institutional capacity for program management and urban development strengthened
3.1 PMO fully staffed by November 2017
3.2 Hiring of capacity development consultants completed by November 2017
3.3 Subcenter planning and development guidelines and regulations in place by June 2019
3.4 CDCs and SDCs established in target areas by June 2018
3.5 Support to financial strengthening provided and regulatory and institutional framework improved by March 2019
3.6 Tranche 3 prepared by 2018
Inputs for Tranche 2
ADB: $66.35 million (loan)
Government: $35.15 million
Assumptions for Partner Financing
European Investment Bank: $19.64 million (loan)
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CDC = community development council, EMP = environmental management plan,
GAP = gender action plan, ha = hectare, km = kilometer, LARP = land acquisition and resettlement plan, m2 = square
meter, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, MW = megawatt, O&M = operation and maintenance, PMO = program
management office, SDAP = social development action plan, SDC = small- and medium-enterprise development
council, SME = small- and medium-sized enterprise.
a
  State Great Hural (Parliament) of Mongolia. February 2013. Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban
  Development Master Plan 2020 and Development Directions 2030. Ulaanbaatar.
Source: ADB.
                                             Appendix 4




Facility Administration Manual




Project Number: 45007
Loans and Grant Number(s): {LXXXX; GXXXX }
March 2017




Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger
Areas Development Investment Program
Appendix 4



                             ABBREVIATIONS

         ADB    –   Asian Development Bank
         ADF    –   Asian Development Fund
         CDC    –   community development council
         EIB    –   European Investment Bank
         EIRR   –   economic internal rate of return
         EMP    –   environmental management plan
         FAM    –   facility administration manual
         FFA    –   financing framework agreement
         FIRR   –   financial internal rate of return
         FMA    –   financial management assessment
         GAP    –   gender action plan
         GRM    –   grievance redress mechanism
         ICB    –   international competitive bidding
         IEE    –   initial environmental examination
         km     –   kilometer
         LARP   –   land acquisition and resettlement plan
         m3     –   cubic meter
         MFF    –   multitranche financing facility
         MUB    –   Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
         NCB    –   national competitive bidding
         O&M    –   operation and maintenance
         OCR    –   ordinary capital resources
         PMO    –   program management office
         SDAP   –   social development action plan
         SDC    –   small- and medium-sized enterprise development council
         SME    –   small- and medium-sized enterprise
         USUG   –   Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority
                                                                               Appendix 4



                                       CONTENTS
I.      INVESTMENT PROGRAM DESCRIPTION                                                 1
        A.   Rationale                                                                 1
        B.   Impact and Outcome                                                        3
        C.   Outputs                                                                   4
II.     IMPLEMENTATION PLANS                                                           6
        A.   Project Readiness Activities                                              6
        B.   Updated Overall Implementation Plan for the Investment Program            7
III.    PROGRAM MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS                                               10
        A.  Program Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities          10
        B.  Key Persons Involved in Implementation                                    11
        C.  Updated Program Organization Structure                                    12
IV.     COSTS AND FINANCING                                                           13
        A.   Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions                                 13
        B.   Key Assumptions                                                          15
        C.   Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category                          17
        D.   Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds                     19
        E.   Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier                                     22
        F.   Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs and/or Components                     24
        G.   Detailed Cost Estimates by Year                                          26
        H.   Contract and Disbursement S-Curve                                        28
        I.   Funds Flow Diagrams                                                      30
V.      FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT                                                          32
        A.   Financial Management Assessment                                          32
        B.   Disbursement                                                             32
        C.   Accounting                                                               33
        D.   Auditing and Public Disclosure                                           34
VI.     PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES                                           35
        A.   Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing                            35
        B.   Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services                     35
        C.   Procurement Plans                                                        36
        D.   Consultant's Terms of Reference                                          45
VII.    SAFEGUARDS                                                                    59
VIII.   GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS                                                  65
IX.     PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND
        COMMUNICATION                                                                 88
        A.   Project Design and Monitoring Framework                                  88
        B.   Monitoring                                                               96
        C.   Evaluation                                                               98
        D.   Reporting                                                                98
        E.   Stakeholder Communication Strategy                                       98
X.      ANTICORRUPTION POLICY                                                       100
XI.     ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM                                                    101
Appendix 4



XII.    RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE FACILITY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL   102

ANNEX 1:     PROJECT PROCUREMENT RISK ASSESSMENT
                                                                                     Appendix 4




                  Facility Administration Manual Purpose and Process

The facility administration manual (FAM) describes the essential administrative and
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance
with the policies and procedures of the government and Asian Development Bank (ADB). The
FAM should include references to all available templates and instructions either through
linkages to relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the FAM.

The Municipality of Ulaanbaatar is wholly responsible for the implementation of ADB-financed
projects, as agreed jointly between the borrower and ADB, and in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the government and ADB. ADB staff is responsible for supporting
implementation including compliance by the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar of their obligations
and responsibilities for project implementation in accordance with ADB’s policies and
procedures.

At loan negotiations, the borrower and ADB shall agree to the FAM and ensure consistency
with the legal agreements. Such agreement shall be reflected in the minutes of the loan
negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the FAM and the legal
agreements, the provisions of the legal agreements shall prevail.

After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP),
changes in implementation arrangements are subject to agreement and approval pursuant to
relevant government and ADB administrative procedures (including the Project Administration
Instructions) and upon such approval, they will be subsequently incorporated in the FAM.
                                I.      INVESTMENT PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

A.      Rationale

1.       In 2015, Ulaanbaatar had a population of 1.4 million. Since the 1990s, it has had limited
formal extension of its core, which largely comprises apartment blocks with comprehensive
utility services, including dedicated heating, water, and sanitation. However, successive waves
of in-migration with ger tents have reshaped the city’s geography, with (i) little upgrading or
extension of basic urban services; and (ii) government policy, since 2003, to give each citizen
about 700 square meters of land.1 A vast low-density peri-urban area, named ger areas, now
extends around the city core, characterized by unplanned settlement of low- and medium-
income households with land ownership,2 unserviced plots, unpaved roads, and poor facilities.
The ger area population is estimated at 840,000, representing 60% of Ulaanbaatar or 30% of
the country population. Despite their size, ger areas have until recently been considered
temporary settlements. However, their official integration in the 2013 city master plan provides
the necessary provision to plan the redevelopment of a formal peri-urban area.

2.       Living conditions in ger areas are difficult. Poor sanitation—households almost
exclusively rely on open pit latrines—and poor waste collection have created highly unsanitary
living conditions. Air pollution is among the most severe in the world, particularly during winter
because of inadequate household heating systems3 and unpaved roads. Access to water,
supplied by kiosks operated by the Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (USUG),
is limited.4 In 2011, most of the 40,000 people migrating to Ulaanbaatar settled in ger areas; by
2022 the city’s population is estimated to grow by 400,000 from in-migration and natural growth.
Under current situation, the forecasted population increases is a serious threat to the city
environment and the health of the population if the situation is not improved.

3.     Lack of long-term planning, infrastructure investment, and land use regulation in ger
areas have resulted in haphazard development, limited availability of space for public facilities,
poor access to socioeconomic services, reduced livelihood opportunities, and insecure
neighborhoods. The lack of basic urban infrastructure is preventing rational and dynamic urban
development, increasing the costs of doing business and of accessing services. The city core
where jobs and services are concentrated now has unprecedented congestion. The service gap
between the city core and ger areas means ger residents are poorly integrated in the urban
economy; it is one of the most urgent and difficult development challenges. While various
government and development partner initiatives have significantly improved living conditions in
ger areas, approaches have generally focused on specific sectors, failing to design a
sustainable vision and provide integrated solutions for the problems of peri-urban development.

4.      Subcenter upgrading. High construction cost,5 lack of urban planning, and inadequate
infrastructure constrain the upgrading of ger areas. These areas are predominately residential
with pockets of activity nodes, called subcenters, providing commercial and administrative
services. The influence area of a subcenter varies from 30,000 to 100,000 people. Despite the

1
  Large-scale in-migration, started in 1991 during the economic transition, has been exacerbated by recent severe
  winters (dzud). During 2000–2010, the population of ger areas increased by about 400,000.
2
  Most ger residents have two types of land ownership: right of possession or right of use. Rights of possession are
  gradually converted into rights of ownership subject to an administrative procedure and a small fee.
3
  Most households rely on unimproved individual coal stoves.
4
  Water consumption in ger areas is low at about 10 liters per capita per day (half the recommended minimum by the
  World Health Organization in similar context). Residents pay 2–10 times more than non-ger area residents.
5
  Partly due to cold climate conditions and outdated construction standards.
2         Appendix 4



critical function of subcenters in overall spatial and local development, urban services have not
been substantially improved. The lack of basic infrastructure limits economic growth and
increases negative environmental impacts.

5.       The program approach aims to initiate a redevelopment process in ger areas. Improving
infrastructure within the ger area subcenters and connectivity with the city core center is critical
for inclusiveness and important to facilitate the movement of people and goods, develop urban
corridors, and create clusters of subcenters. Better urban planning combined with a network of
infrastructure along priority roads will initiate a structural change of subcenter urban fabric. This
will (i) improve residents’ access to basic urban services, public space, and socioeconomic
facilities; (ii) support local economic development; (iii) allow residents and businesses to take
advantage of urban economies; and (iv) provide better housing options.6 The changes in land
use and higher urban density will improve water, sanitation, and heating services delivery.

6.      Road map. Based on government and Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB) priorities to
redevelop ger areas, the road map for the program will support the MUB in establishing a
network of well-developed subcenters to provide jobs, housing, and economic opportunities with
reduced soil and air pollution. It comprises sequenced investments, municipal reforms, and
capacity building (policy, planning, and monitoring), with four strategic objectives: (i) expand
roads and basic urban services (water, sewerage, and heating) within subcenters and improve
connectivity to initiate land use transformation; (ii) increase economic and public services
through investments in socioeconomic facilities to meet population needs, increase urban
functions, and encourage job creation; (iii) increase service provider efficiency by improving
water supply, sewerage, and heating service operations; and (iv) strengthen institutions and
capacity by improving urban planning and subcenter development, community awareness,
participation and empowerment, service provider operations and management, and program
implementation capacity.

7.       Strategic context and sector policy. In February 2013, the Mongolia Parliament
approved the Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban Development Master Plan 2020 and
Development Directions 2030. The master plan produced two important outcomes:
(i) integration of ger area development into the city master plan, and (ii) acknowledgement of the
value and function of ger area subcenters as key elements of future city growth.7 The MUB has
developed the Ger Area Development Program and established a Ger Area Development
Agency, supervised by the vice mayor in charge of urban development and investment. On
30 May 2013, the city council resolution No.10/38 endorsed the program, subcenter locations
under Project 1, and coordination of the investment program with the city master plan. The MUB
proposed a special purpose development vehicle (subcenter redevelopment authority) to
facilitate, supervise, and coordinate the redevelopment process of the selected subcenters. In
addition, the Ministry of Economic Development’s Street Project improved the road conditions in
Ulaanbaatar and included a ger area component. The National Development Strategy and the
New Reconstruction Midterm Program (2008–2016) constitute the national framework for
program implementation. The program is consistent with the Asian Development Bank's (ADB)
interim country partnership strategy, 2014–2016 for Mongolia; ADB’s Strategy 2020 priorities,


6
    Up to 60% of subcenter households may consider exchanging their land for fully serviced apartment units.
7
    ADB has helped the MUB introduce a redevelopment strategy for ger areas through a policy and advisory technical
    assistance (ADB. 2010. Technical Assistance to Mongolia for Ulaanbaatar Water and Sanitation Services and
    Planning Improvement. Manila [TA 7591-MON]); and the project preparatory technical assistance (ADB. 2011.
    Technical Assistance to Mongolia for Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment
    Program. Manila [TA 7970-MON]).
                                                                                                Appendix 4        3


including environmental sustainability and private sector development; as well as the core
themes of green, competitive, and inclusive cities of ADB’s Urban Operational Plan.8

8.     Policy dialogue and capacity development. To supplement the strong policy
framework, policy dialogue and capacity development will focus (i) in communities, on
community participation, awareness, and empowerment,9 including design and implementation
of the social and gender action plan; and establishment of community development councils
(CDCs) and small- and medium-sized enterprise (SME) development councils (SDCs); (ii) in
subcenters, on subcenter upgrading, including technical guidance for preparing and
implementing local development plans, urban zoning regulation and construction standards, and
a development framework with a transparent mechanism to regulate land redevelopment
ensuring current residents are integrated in the redevelopment plan; and (iii) in the city, on the
master plan through ongoing ADB technical assistance to strengthen urban planning capacity.10
Capacity development for water and wastewater utilities will target (i) improving the MUB and
USUG management contract, (ii) defining a clearer tariff road map, and (iii) providing technical
support to the Water and Sewerage Regulatory Commission. For heating, the focus will be to
ensure financial sustainability and capacity of new and existing heating facilities operators in the
selected subcenters and to strengthen provisions in management contracts.

9.       Financing modality. Multitranche financing facility (MFF) was the proposed financing
modality to promote a long-term partnership between ADB, the government, and the MUB to
facilitate the development of sustainable, inclusive, and livable ger areas. The MFF will support
the policy framework for the redevelopment of ger areas, and provide opportunities for
constructive dialogue and capacity development on city planning, policy reforms, and physical
and nonphysical investments. It will generate critical mass, predictability, and continuity for basic
urban services provision in ger areas, and enable ADB to better respond to MUB needs.

10.     Development coordination. During program preparation, ADB coordinated closely with
development partners involved in Ulaanbaatar’s urban sector. Three ADB-financed projects
directly supported the program: (i) a bus rapid transit line from the city center to Selbe
subcenter; 11 (ii) support for housing and micro-, small-, and medium-sized enterprise financing
in ger areas targeted by the program;12 and (iii) capacity development technical assistance to
strengthen MUB urban planning capacity (footnote 10).

B.      Impact and Outcome

11.    The impact of the program is improved living conditions in Ulaanbaatar. The outcome is
a network of livable, competitive, and inclusive subcenters in Ulaanbaatar’s ger areas.

8
   ADB. 2014. Interim Country Partnership Strategy: Mongolia, 2014–2016. Manila; ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The
   Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian Development Bank, 2008–2020. Manila; ADB. 2013. Urban
   Operational Plan, 2012–2020. Manila.
9
   The consultative and participatory approach to ger area redevelopment, introduced by the United Nations Human
   Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) during program preparation, was carried out for the project 1 subcenters.
10
   ADB. 2013. Technical Assistance to Mongolia for Ulaanbaatar Urban Planning Improvement. Manila (TA 8467-
   MON). The TA was financed by the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction.
11
   ADB. 2012. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
   Financing Facility to Mongolia for the Urban Transport Development Investment Program. Manila (MFF 0070-
   MON). Implementation of the MFF is independent of and will not affect the implementation of the ger area program.
12
   TenGer Financial Group onlent a portion of an ADB private sector loan to XacBank. About $6 million–$10 million
   was made available for the targeted areas. ADB. 2013. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board
   of Directors: Proposed Senior Loans for XacBank and TenGer Financial Group for Supporting Micro, Small,
   Medium-Sized Enterprises and Leasing Finance in Mongolia. Manila.
4        Appendix 4



C.       Outputs

12.    The program has four outputs: (i) roads and urban services are expanded within priority
subcenters, and connectivity between them is improved; (ii) economic and public services in
targeted areas are improved; (iii) service providers become more efficient; and (iv) institutions
and capacity for urban development, program management, and service delivery are
strengthened. The program will be implemented over three tranches.

13.      Project 1. The first tranche will support the implementation of a city master plan to
develop Selbe and Bayankhoshuu subcenters: (i) extend the sewerage network from the city
core: collector main (6.1 kilometers [km]) and sewer pipes (2.9 km); (ii) within subcenters,
develop priority roads (15 km), water supply network (18.6 km), sewerage network (20 km),
district heating network (21 km), and five heating facilities using most suitable state-of-the-art
environmentally friendly technologies; (iii) construct social and economic facilities, i.e., two
kindergartens, green areas, and small squares; and two business incubators, associated with
two vocational training centers; (iv) improve USUG operations and service delivery efficiency of
water supply and wastewater collection; and (v) provide institutional and capacity development
to (a) prepare detailed design and construction supervision; (b) support community participation,
awareness, and SME development; (c) improve subcenter redevelopment; (d) strengthen
program management office (PMO) capacity; and (e) support service provider reforms.

14.     Project 2. The second tranche will (i) extend the urban infrastructure upgrading and
spatial restructuring to two additional subcenters in the northern ger areas (Dambadarjaa and
Denjiin) and provide additional investments in Bayankhoshuu and Selbe subcenters,13 (ii)
support the delivery of socioeconomic facilities, and (iii) further improve institutional
strengthening and capacity building.14

15.     Roads and urban services will be expanded within priority subcenters, and connectivity
between them will be improved through the construction of (i) 7.08 kilometers (km) of priority
roads in the subcenters (with street lighting, three bridges, and sidewalks); (ii) 200 meters of
flood channels and 7.4 km of drainage; (iii) 13.2 km of electricity cable overhead lines and a 7.1
km cable duct for a telecommunications network; (iv) 24.1 km of water supply pipes, 25.8 km of
wastewater pipes, and 6.0 km of district heating pipes and associated equipment; and (v) three
heating facilities for a capacity of 112.5 megawatts; as well as through the rehabilitation and
expansion of (vi) 6.1 km of a water supply main and 7.2 km of a sewage main.

16.     Economic and public services in targeted areas will be improved through the
construction of (i) four kindergartens in Bayankhoshuu, Dambadarjaa, Denjiin, and Selbe using
green building design; (ii) two community development and service centers in Dambadarjaa and
Denjiin; (iii) two sports complexes in Bayankhoshuu and Dambadarjaa; and (iv) two urban parks
in Bayankhoshuu and Denjiin.

17.    Institutional capacity for program management and urban development will be
strengthened through consulting services for (i) detailed design, construction supervision, and
engineering inputs for the Project 3 feasibility study and (ii) project management and

13
   Tranche 2 targeted areas have been selected because they are compliant with FFA selection criteria—(i) central
   characteristics, i.e., agglomeration and densification processes are already ongoing; (ii) large influence areas; (iii)
   socioeconomic impacts; (iv) high pollution levels; (v) economic potentials; (vi) alignment with the city master plan;
   and (vii) potential synergies with Tranche 1 investments.
14
   Tranche 2 does not have provision for activities that justify mentioning the overall program output on service
   provider efficiency, even though this output remains valid under Tranche 1 implementation.
                                                                              Appendix 4    5


implementation support for Project 2, urban planning and subcenter development, community
participation and SME development, and completion of the Project 3 feasibility study.

18.     Project 3. The third tranche will (i) expand coverage of similar investments in
project 1 and 2 subcenters, and in other subcenters in the northern and eastern ger areas; and
(ii) improve road connections between targeted subcenters. Ulyastai and Amgalan subcenters
are tentatively targeted for Project 3. Other subcenters may be considered.
6        Appendix 4



                                   II.           IMPLEMENTATION PLANS

A.       Project Readiness Activities

                                Table 1: Project Readiness Activities for Tranche 1
                                                    2013                                2014
                                                                                                          Responsible
Indicative Activities              Sep     Oct    Nov     Dec    Jan    Feb   Mar     Apr   May    Jun      Agency

Advance contracting actions                                                                               MUB, ADB

Retroactive financing actions                                                                             MUB, ADB
Establish project                                                                                         MUB, ADB
implementation arrangements
ADB Board approval                                                                                        ADB
Loan signing                                                                                              MED, MUB,
                                                                                                          ADB
Government legal opinion                                                                                  MED, MOJ
provided
Government budget inclusion                                                                               MOF
Loan effectiveness                                                                                        MOF, MUB
ADB = Asian Development Bank, MED = Ministry of Economic Development, MOF = Ministry of Finance, MOJ =
Ministry of Justice, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar.
Source: ADB.


                                Table 2: Project Readiness Activities for Tranche 2
                                                                 2017
                                                                                                         Responsible
Indicative Activities                Jan    Feb     Mar    Apr     May    Jun   Jul     Aug       Sep      Agency

Advance contracting actions                                                                              MUB, ADB

Strengthen project                                                                                       MUB, ADB
implementation arrangements
ADB President approval                                                                                   ADB
Loan signing                                                                                             MOF, MUB,
                                                                                                         ADB
Government legal opinion                                                                                 MOF, MOJ
provided
Government budget inclusion                                                                              MOF
Loan effectiveness                                                                                       MOF, MUB
ADB = Asian Development Bank, MOF = Ministry of Finance, MOJ = Ministry of Justice, MUB = Municipality of
Ulaanbaatar.
Source: ADB.
       B.        Updated Overall Implementation Plan for the Investment Program
                                 2012     2013        2014        2015        2016        2017        2018        2019        2020        2021
 Tasks                          Q1 Q2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Setting up of PMO
Implementation support and
capacity building
 1.1 Detailed design of
     water/sewerage
     improvements completed
 1.2 Detailed design of heating
     improvements completed
 1.3 Detailed design of
     roads/other infrastructure
     completed
 1.4 Urban infrastructure
     constructed, commissioned
     and made operational in
     phases
 2.1 Detailed design of
     kindergarten and business
     incubators/vocational
     training centers completed
 2.2 Facilities constructed,
     commissioned, and made
     operational in phases
 3.1 Support to improvements in
     operational efficiency
 3.2 Construction of upgraded
     facilities and measurement
     systems completed
 4.1 PMO fully staffed

 4.2 Hiring of capacity
     development consultants
 4.3 Subcenter planning and
     development
     guidelines/regulations in
     place
 4.4 CDCs and SDCs are
     established in targeted areas
 4.5 Support to financial



                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 4
     strengthening and improved
     regulatory and institutional
     framework
PROJECT 2
 1.1 Detailed design of
     water/sewerage
     improvements completed
     by November 2018
                                                                                                                                                    7
                                   2012     2013        2014        2015        2016        2017        2018        2019        2020        2021      8
Tasks                             Q1 Q2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
1.2 Detailed design of heating
    improvements completed



                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 4
    by November 2018
1.3 Detailed design of
    roads/other infrastructure
    completed by November
    2018
1.4 Urban infrastructure
    constructed,
    commissioned, and made
    operational in phases
    between April 2019 and
    2021
1.5 Implementation of LARP
    completed prior to
    construction activities
1.6 Implementation of EMP,
    GAP, and SDAP
2.1 Detailed design of
    Socioeconomic facilities
    completed by November
    2018
2.2 Facilities constructed,
    commissioned, and made
    operational in phases
    between September 2018
    and 2021
2.3 Implementation of LARP
    completed prior to
    construction activities
2.4 Implementation of EMP,
    GAP, and SDAP
3.1 PMO fully staffed by
    November 2017
3.2 Hiring of capacity
    development consultants
    by November 2017
3.3 Subcenter planning and
    development
    guidelines/regulations in
    place by June 2019
3.4 CDCs and SDCs
    established in target areas
    by June 2018
3.5 Support to financial
    strengthening and
    improved regulatory and
                                   2012       2013             2014           2015             2016             2017        2018        2019           2020          2021
Tasks                            Q1 Q2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
     institutional framework by
     March 2019
3.6 Tranche 3 is prepared
     by 2018
CDCs = community development councils, EMP = environmental management plan, GAP = gender action plan, LARP = land acquisition and resettlement plan, PMO = program management
office, Q = quarter, SDCs = small- and medium-sized enterprise development councils, SDAP = social development action plan.
Source: Asian Development Bank.




                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 4



                                                                                                                                                                         9
 10      Appendix 4



                        III.    PROGRAM MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS

 A.      Program Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities

Program Implementation
Organizations                                    Management Roles and Responsibilities
Asian Development Bank  Oversees the implementation, including compliance by executing and implementing
(ADB)                     agencies of their obligations and responsibilities for project implementation in
                          accordance with ADB's policies and procedures
The Government          The Borrower’s representative
                         ensures that the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB) provides timely counterpart funding;
                         screens and approves withdrawal applications;
                         will establish five imprest accounts (for loans and grant funds, respectively) in a
                          commercial bank acceptable to ADB;
                         ensures annual audit of the project accounts; and
                         negotiates project and loan agreements.
Program Steering         Chaired by the Mayor of Ulaanbaatar
Committee                Comprises representatives from the Ministry of Finance (MOF), Ministry of Construction
                          and Urban Development, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Education, Ministry of
                          Environment and Green Development and Tourism, and other concerned agencies, as
                          needed
                         Oversees progress of the investment program
                         Provides strategic guidance on program implementation
                         Meets at least once every 6 months until program completion
Executing Agency–MUB     Responsible for program oversight and administration
                         Sets up multimodal coordination committee and follow up the action plan
                         Oversees implementation of investment program road maps
                         Submits progress reports to the steering committee for decision making purposes
                         Prepares subsequent tranches
                         Be accountable and responsible for proper use of advances to the imprest accounts
                         Endorses withdrawal applications
                         Ensures compliance with project covenants
                         Holds quarterly meetings with the program management office
                         Monitors cooperation among related official development assistance (ODA)-funded
                          projects
Implementing Agency –    Reports directly to the Ulaanbaatar Deputy-Governor in charge of infrastructure and ger
Project and cooperation   areas development
Unit under MUB           Provides guidance to the program management office (PMO) and oversee the PMO’s
                          implementation of the program,
                         Works with the PMO and consultants to accurately define the technical specifications
                          and designs
                         Monitors project activities and outputs and reporting to the program steering committee
                         Prepares reports reflecting issues and time-bound actions taken (or to be taken)
                         Ensures project’s sustainability during post implementation stage and reporting to ADB
                          on the assessed development impacts
                         Ensures that the PMO posts relevant financial and project related reports to the MOF’s
                          ODA Management Information System
                         Monitors cooperation among related ODA-funded project
PMO and Procurement      Responsible for program implementation and management including finance and
Committee                 administration, technical and procurement matters, monitoring and evaluation, and
                          safeguards compliance
                         Establishes and maintain program performance management system
                         Manages detailed surveys, site investigations, and engineering designs for all
                          subcomponents
                         Prepares, updates, and submits resettlement plans and updated environmental
                          management plan for ADB approval prior to award of contracts and implements all
                          necessary documents related to land acquisition and resettlement, environmental, and
                          other social safeguards
                         Secures technical and environmental expertise for all civil works prior to bidding
                                                                                           Appendix 4        11


Program Implementation
Organizations                                    Management Roles and Responsibilities
                          Assists the MUB in procurement and management of works, goods supply, and
                           consulting services contracts (with support from relevant municipal bodies)
                          Ensures monitoring and quality control of construction works with necessary safety
                           measures
                          Coordinates with ADB on matters related to disbursements, including preparation of
                           withdrawal/replenishment applications for endorsement by the MUB and the Ministry of
                           Finance, and retaining of supporting documents
                          Submits progress reports and audit reports to ADB and the MUB on time
                          Maintains the program imprest accounts
                          Submits the withdrawal application to ADB, collect and keep supporting documents,
                           submit reporting requirements, including the annual report and financial statements
                          Ensures quality assurance of works, and services of consultants and counterpart staff
                          Prepares regular periodic progress reports and project completion report, and their
                           timely submission to the executing agency and ADB
                          Posts relevant financial and project related reports to the MOF’s ODA Management
                           Information System

B.      Key Persons Involved in Implementation
Executing Agency
Municipality of Ulaanbaatar              Mr. S. Batbold
                                         Governor of the Capital City and Mayor of Ulaanbaatar
                                         Jigjidav Street -9, Ulaanbaatar-15160 Mongolia
                                         Tel/Fax: +976 11 315347

ADB
Urban and Social Sectors                 Mr. Sangay Penjor
Division                                 Director
                                         Tel: + 63 2 632 5340
                                         Fax: +63 2 636 2407
                                         E-mail: spenjor@adb.org

Mission Leader                           Mr. Arnaud Heckmann
                                         Senior Urban Development Specialist
                                         Tel: + 976 11 329 836
                                         Fax: +976 11 311 795
                                         E-mail: aheckmann@adb.org
12        Appendix 4

C.        Updated Program Organization Structure

             MUB                         Mayor and Governor of
       Executive Agency                    Ulaanbaatar City




                    Project and Cooperation Unit
                 Headed by the Ulaanbaatar Deputy-            Program Management                   Steering
                 Governor in charge of Infrastructure                Office                       Committee
                    and Ger Areas Development




                               USUG
                  Sub-implementing Agency (for
                        Tranche 1 Only)




              = Instruct / Provide guidance to
              = Report to
     MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, USUG = Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority.
     Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                              Appendix 4          13


                                    IV.      COSTS AND FINANCING

19.     The MFF will consist of three tranches to be implemented for a period of up to 9 years,
subject to the government's submission of related periodic financing requests, execution of the
related loan and project agreements for each tranche, and fulfillment of terms and conditions
and undertakings set forth in the framework financing agreement. The government will make the
proceeds of each tranche available to the MUB, the executing agency of the program, for
purposes of financing projects under the MFF.

20.      Table 1 shows the financing plan for the investment program with a total estimated cost
of $320.0 million equivalent. The government has requested ADB for an MFF in an amount up
to $163.70 million equivalent or 51.2% of the investment program from a blend of ADB's Special
Funds resources (Asian Development Fund [ADF]), ordinary capital resources (OCR),
concessional OCR lending, and cofinancing administered by ADB. It is expected that the MUB
will finance the remaining cost of about $96 million equivalent or 30% of the total cost, including
taxes and duties, resettlement, and other miscellaneous costs. The total cost of Tranche 1 is
$104.52 million, while Tranche 2 is estimated to cost $121.14 million. All costs are inclusive of
physical and price contingencies, interest, taxes and duties, and other charges.

                                  Table 1: Summary Financing Plan
                                                               Amount                  Share of Total
    Source                                                    ($ million)                    (%)
    Investment Program
       Asian Development Bank MFF                              163.70                         51.16
       Municipality of Ulaanbaatar                               96.00                        30.00
       Cofinancinga                                              60.30                        18.84
              Total investment program                         320.00                       100.00
    Tranche 1
       Asian Development Bank
          ADF loan                                               22.50                        21.53
          OCR loan                                               27.50                        26.31
          UEIF–UFPF                                               3.70                         3.54
                   Subtotal                                      53.70                        51.38
       Municipality of Ulaanbaatar                               22.44                        21.47
       Cofinancing                                               28.38                        27.15
              Total tranche 1                                  104.52                       100.00
    Tranche 2
       Asian Development Bank
         Concessional OCR loan                                   29.24                        24.14
         OCR loan                                                37.11                        30.63
                   Subtotal                                      66.35                        54.77
       Municipality of Ulaanbaatar                               35.15                        29.02
       Cofinancing                                               19.64                        16.21
              Total tranche 2                                  121.14                       100.00
    ADF = Asian Development Fund, MFF = multitranche financing facility, OCR = ordinary capital resources,
    UEIF–UFPF = Urban Environmental Infrastructure Fund under the Urban Financing Partnership Fund.
    a
      The European Investment Bank has expressed interest in providing parallel collaborative cofinancing
      (not administered by ADB) for water supply and sanitation of up to $60.30 million equivalent for the MFF.
      If this cofinancing does not materialize as planned, the Government of Mongolia will undertake
      necessary measures to substitute for the shortfall with suitable funding.
    Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

21.     The allocation of ADF, OCR, and concessional OCR financing within the MFF is
tentative. It is understood that provision of any additional concessional OCR financing will be
accompanied by a corresponding reduction in the available OCR financing, and vice versa, so
that in any event the total financing provided by ADB will not exceed the MFF amount. Any
concessional resource allocation will be subject to (i) the general availability of concessional
14     Appendix 4

resources from time to time, (ii) Mongolia’s access to such resources pursuant to ADB’s then
applicable graduation policy, and (iii) availability of such resources to Mongolia pursuant to
ADB’s then applicable policy on performance-based allocation on concessional resources. In
addition, development partners have indicated a preliminary interest in complementing ADB’s
financing after the Board's approval of the proposed MFF through cofinancing. The amounts of
cofinancing to be provided by such development partners will be deducted from the total MFF
amount. Such cofinancing may be provided as loans or grants, and may take the form of parallel
or joint cofinancing. ADB's administration of such cofinancing from time to time will be reported
to the Board for information annually. If additional financing is needed because the funding
requirements of the MUB exceeded the original MFF allocation, a request for additional
financing will be submitted to and will require ADB Board approval.

22.      Under the investment program, ADF and concessional OCR loans and will be used to
finance (i) civil works including equipment and detailed engineering design and supervision,
(ii) program management support, (iii) consulting services, (iv) a proportionate share of the
contingencies, (v) financing charges during implementation, and (vi) associated bank charges,
transportation, and insurance costs. The OCR loan will finance (i) civil works including
equipment, (ii) a corresponding share of the contingencies, and (iii) financing changes during
implementation, and (iv) associated bank charges, transportation and insurance costs. The ADB
grant will finance civil works and all associated costs including bank charges, transportation and
insurance costs to be incurred by the Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority
(USUG) under the program. The EIB loan will finance civil works and equipment specific to
water supply and sewerage improvements including contingencies and financing charges during
implementation. The counterpart funds from the MUB will finance (i) land acquisition, (ii) civil
works, (iii) resettlement support, (iv) taxes and duties, and (v) a share of the financing charges
during implementation.

23.     For Tranche 1, ADB financed $53.70 million or 51.3% of the total investment
requirement. About 21.5% or $22.5 million equivalent was financed from ADF; $27.5 million or
26.3% from OCR; and $3.7 million as a grant from the Urban Environmental Infrastructure Fund
under the Urban Financing Partnership Facility. The ADF loan for $22.5 million equivalent has a
25-year term, including a grace period of 5 years, a 2.0% annual interest rate, and repayments
in equal amortization. The OCR loan for $27.5 million has a 20-year term including a grace
period of 5 years, an interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s London interbank
offered rate-based lending facility, a commitment charge of 0.15% per year; and such other
terms and conditions to be set forth in the relevant loan agreements. The EIB loan has a 20-
year term including a grace period of 5 years and an interest rate in accordance with its London
interbank offered rate-based lending facility. For Project 1, the portion of EIB cofinancing is
limited to water supply and sanitation. A summary investment plan, including cost estimates by
outputs for Tranche 1 and adjustments to the cost estimates for the investment program, are
presented in Table 2.

                                 Table 2: Summary Investment Plan
                                             ($ million)
                                                                 Investment Program
     Item                                                             (Revised)       Tranche 1
     A. Base Costa
          1. Expanded roads and urban services
             1.1 Roads improvement                                       67.99          24.59
             1.2 Water supply and sewerage systems improvement           58.21          25.70
             1.4 Heating services expansion                             103.35          30.14
                      Subtotal (1)                                      229.55          80.43
                                                                                             Appendix 4        15


                                                                         Investment Program
     Item                                                                     (Revised)              Tranche 1
           2. More efficient service providers                                     5.24                  3.70
           3. Increased economic and public services                              33.68                  5.00
           4. Institutional strengthening and capacity development                11.76                  4.00
                         Subtotal (A)                                            280.23                 93.13
   B. Contingenciesb                                                              24.27                  7.40
                                                         c
   C. Financing Charges During Implementation                                     15.50                  4.00
                         Total                                                   320.00                104.52
 Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
 a
   In mid-2013 prices. Includes value-added tax and import duties estimated at $16.7 million for the investment
    program and $6.18 million for Project 1. The government will finance these taxes and duties through tax
    exemptions.
 b
    Physical contingencies computed at 5% of civil works and consulting services. Price contingencies calculated
    at rates ranging from 3 to 8% for local currency costs and from 0.5% to 2.2% for foreign exchange costs;
    includes provision for exchange rate fluctuations under a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
 c
    Includes interest and commitment charges. Financing charges during implementation of the Asian
    Development Bank (ADB) loans are computed at (i) 2.0% per annum of the first tranche's loan from ADB's
    Special Funds resources (Asian Development Fund); and (ii) at the 5-year US dollar fixed swap rate plus an
    effective contractual spread of 0.4%; and a commitment charge of 0.15% on the undisbursed portion of the
    first tranche's loan from ADB's ordinary capital resources. Financing charges during implementation for the
    European Investment Bank loan were calculated based on the 5-year USD fixed swap rate.
 Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

A.          Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions

24.     The costs are estimated by the consultant in charge of the feasibility studies for the
tranches/projects. Estimated costs are reviewed by PMO engineers (for subsequent
tranches/projects), Master Plan Agency and various related departments of the MUB, and the
ADB project team. Subsequent projects costs will benefit from the detailed design, detailed cost
estimates, and bill of quantities formulated by previous projects. Feasibility studies costs are
revised during preliminary design and detailed design formulation, which are further reviewed by
PMO engineers, Master Plan Agency, State Expertise, and various related departments of the
MUB, and the ADB project team. The cost estimates may be updated prior to approval and
during the implementation of the project.

B.          Key Assumptions

25.   The following key assumptions underpin the cost estimates and financing plan for
Tranche 2:

            A.    Exchange rate: MNT2,000 = $1.00 (as of 20 January 2016).

            B.    Price contingencies based on expected                   cumulative      inflation   over    the
                  implementation period are as follows:

                      Table 3: Escalation Rates for Price Contingency Calculation
Item                                  2016             2017       2018        2019        2020        Average
Foreign rate of price inflation      1.50%            1.40%      1.50%       1.50%       1.50%         1.48%
Domestic rate of price inflation     7.60%            7.00%      7.00%       7.00%       7.00%         7.12%
Sources: Asian Development Bank estimates.

26.    For Tranche 2, the total investment cost is $121.14 million. ADB will finance
$66.35 million or 54.77% of the investment requirement. About 24.14%, or $29.24 million
equivalent, will be financed from concessional OCR; and about 30.63%, or $37.11 million, will
16     Appendix 4

be financed from OCR. The concessional OCR will have a 25-year term, including a grace
period of 5 years, a 2.0% annual interest rate, and repayments in equal amortization. The OCR
loan will have a 25-year term including a grace period of 5 years, an interest rate determined in
accordance with ADB’s London interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility, a maturity
premium of 0.1%, a commitment charge of 0.15% per year, and such other terms and
conditions to be set forth in the relevant loan agreements. The investment plan for Tranche 2 is
shown in Table 4.

                                     Table 4: Tranche 2 Investment Plan
                                                  ($ million)
Item                                                                                                     Amounta
                   b
A. Base Cost
       1. Expanded roads and urban services
           1.1 Roads improvement                                                                           30.69
           1.2 Water supply, wastewater, and drainage services                                             16.74
           1.3 Heating services                                                                            32.90
                     Subtotal (1.1+1.2+1.3)                                                                80.33
       2. Improved economic and public services                                                            18.84
       3. Institutional strengthening and capacity development                                              4.29
                     Subtotal (A)                                                                         103.46
                        c
B. Contingencies                                                                                           11.06
C. Financing Charges During Implementationd                                                                 6.62
                     Total (A+B+C)                                                                        121.14
a
  Includes value-added tax and import duties estimated at $8.28 million for Tranche 2. The government will finance
   these taxes and duties through tax exemptions. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) may also finance taxes and
   duties, particularly for recurrent costs, based on the following principles: (i) the amount is within reasonable country
   thresholds, (ii) the amount will not represent an excessive share of the project investment plan, (iii) the taxes and
   duties apply only to ADB-financed expenditures, and (iv) the financing of the taxes and duties is material and
   relevant to the project’s success.
b
   In mid-2016 prices.
c
   Physical contingencies are computed at 5% of civil works, goods, and consulting services. Price contingencies are
   computed applying purchasing power parity based on exchange rate and domestic inflation rates: 7.6% in 2016
   and 7.0% from 2017 onward; and foreign inflation rates: 1.5% in 2016, 1.4% in 2017, and 1.5% from 2018 onward.
d
   Includes interest and commitment charges. Financing charges during implementation of ADB loans are computed
   at (i) 2.0% per annum for Tranche 2 loan from ADB's concessional ordinary capital resources (OCR); and (ii) 5-
   year US dollar fixed swap rate plus an effective contractual spread of 0.5%, a maturity premium of 0.1%, and a
   commitment charge of 0.15% on the undisbursed portion for Tranche 2 loan from ADB's OCR. Financing charges
   during implementation for the European Investment Bank loan were calculated based on the same assumptions as
   ADB’s OCR loan.
Source: ADB estimates.

27.    The Government of Mongolia is the borrower of the loan and will relend the proceeds of
ADB’s loans to the MUB on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB. The grant proceeds will be
passed through the MUB without financing charges.

28.    EIB will finance $19.64 million representing 16.21% of the total financing plan. The EIB
loan will have a 25-year term including a grace period of 5 years and an interest rate in
accordance with its LIBOR-based lending facility. EIB will cofinance Tranche 2 for civil works
and equipment specific to water supply and sewerage improvements, including contingencies
and financing charges during implementation. The MUB will finance the remaining
$35.15 million, or 29.02%, for (i) land acquisition and resettlement support, (ii) civil works and
equipment, (iii) taxes and duties, and (iv) contingencies.
     C.       Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category
                                        Table 5: Detailed Cost Estimates By Expenditure Category for Project 1
                                                                     (MNT Million)                                                         (US$ Million)                 % of
                                                                          Local Currency                                             Local Currency                      Total
                                                    Foreign       Excluding                                                     Excluding                       Total    Base
     Expenditure Item                               Currency        Taxes       Taxes    Total         Total Cost    Foreign      Taxes     Taxes Total         Cost     Cost
 A. Investment Costsa
     1. Land acquisition                                  0.00     1,448.40        0.00     1,448.40     1,448.40        0.00         1.02      0.00    1.02      1.02     1.1
                   b
     2. Civil works                                  72,150.24    36,204.08    8,065.20    44,283.88   102,646.60       50.81        25.48      5.68   31.17     82.00    88.1
       2.1 Water supply and sewerage                 23,996.82    10,805.67    2,754.66    13,574.53    37,557.15       16.90         7.61      1.94    9.56     26.46    28.4
       2.2 Socioeconomic facilities                   4,302.39     1,945.30      496.98     2,442.28     6,744.67        3.03         1.37       .35    1.72      4.75     5.1
       2.3 Heat distribution networks                 8,803.57     3,975.80    1,008.15     4,983.95    13,787,52        6.20         2.80       .71    3.51      9.71    10.4
       2.4 Civil works for USUG                        5253.74         0.00        0.00         0.00     5,253.74        3.70         0.00      0.00    0.00      3.70     4.0
       2.5 Landscaping and river embankments          5,637.13     3,677.62      724.16     4,401.79    10,038.91        3.97         2.59       .51    3.10      7.07     7.6
       2.6 Other civil works                         24,156.59    15,799.69    3,081.25    18,881.33    43,052.13       17.01        11.11      2.17   13.28     30.29    32.6
     3. Detailed engineering design & supervision     6,176.70         0.00        0.00         0.00     6,176.70        4.35         0.00      0.00    0.00      4.35     4.7
     4. Resettlement support                              0.00     2,504.88        0.00     2,504.88     2,504.88        0.00         1.76      0.00    1.76      1.76     1.9
     5. Program management support                    2,840.00         0.00        0.00         0.00    2,840.000        2.00         0.00      0.00    0.00      2.00     2.1
     6. Consulting services                           2,840.00         0.00        0.00         0.00       2,840.0       2.00         0.00      0.00    0.00      2.00     2.1
                    Subtotal (A)                     84,006.93    40,157.37    8,079.80     48,237.2   132,244.09       59.16        28.28      5.68   33.97     93.13   100.0
     Total Base Cost                                 84,006.93    40,157.37    8,079.80     48,237.2   132,244.09       59.16        28.28      5.68   33.97     93.13   100.0
                     c
 B. Contingencies
     Physical contingencies                           4,247.59      1,915.02     426.00     2,341.02      6,588.61       2.99          1.35     0.30    1.65      4.64     5.0
     Price contingencies                             10,698.68      4,873.79   1,157.33     6,031.12     16,729.79       1.76          0.80     0.19    0.99      2.75     3.0
                   Subtotal (B)                      14,946.27      6,788.81   1,583.33     8,372.14     23,318.41       4.75          2.15     0.49    2.64      7.39     7.0
 C. Interest and Commitment Chargesd
     Interest during implementation                   4,610.60     1,481.06        0.00     1,481.06     6,091.66        3.02         0.97      0.00    0.97     3.99      4.0
     Commitment charges                                  20.54         0.00        0.00         0.00        20.54        0.01         0.00      0.00     0.0     0.01      0.0
                   Subtotal (C)                       4,631.14     1,481.06        0.00     1,481.06     6,112.20       3.003         0.97      0.00    0.97     4.00      4.0
     Total Project Cost (A+B+C)                     103,584.34    48,427.24    9,663.13    58,090.36   161,674.70       66.94        31.40      6.18   37.58   104.52    112.0
MNT = Mongolian togrog, USUG = Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority.
a
  In mid-2013 prices. Includes value-added tax and import duties. The taxes and duties are estimated at $6.18 million for project 1. The government will finance these taxes and
  duties through tax exemptions.
b
  Expenditure item includes equipment.


                                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 4
c
   Physical contingencies computed at 5% of civil works and consulting services. Price contingencies computed at 3%-8% for local currency costs and 0.5-2.2% for foreign
  exchange costs; includes provision for exchange rate fluctuation under a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
d
  Includes interest and commitment charges. Interest during construction on the Asian Development Bank (ADB) loans has been computed (i) at 2.0% per annum of the first
  tranche's loan from ADB's Special Funds resources (Asian Development Fund); and (ii) at the 5-year (corresponding to implementation period) USD fixed swap rate plus an
  effective contractual spread of 0.4%; and a commitment charge of 0.15% on the undisbursed portion of the first tranche's loan from ADB's ordinary capital resources.
  Financing charges during implementation for the European Investment Bank (EIB) loan were also calculated based on the 5-year dollar fixed swap rate.
Source: Asian Development Bank.                                                                                                                                                    17
                                         Table 6: Detailed Cost Estimates By Expenditure Category for Project 2
                                                                         (MNT million)                                                    ($ million)                          18
                                                                        Local Currency                                                  Local Currency



                                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 4
                                                   Foreign    Excluding                                                   ForeignExcluding                           Total
Expenditure Item                                  Currency       Taxes        Taxes          Total        Total Cost     Currency  Taxes      Taxes    Total         Cost
A. Investment Costs
      1. Civil works and equipment                 82,499.78    75,899.80     6,599.98      82,499.78 164,999.56             41.25     37.95      3.30    41.25      82.50
      1.1 Roads and associated                     50,107.53    46,098.93     4,008.60      50,107.53 100,215.06             25.05     23.05      2.00    25.05      50.11
          infrastructure including heating
      1.2 Water supply and sewerage                14,749.50    13,569.54     1,179.96      14,749.50       29,499.00         7.37      6.78      0.59     7.37      14.75
          including flood protection
      1.3 Socioeconomic facilities                 17,642.75    16,231.33     1,411.42      17,642.75       35,285.50         8.82      8.12      0.71     8.82      17.64
      2. Land acquisition and resettlement              0.00    23,427.92          0.00     23,427.92       23,427.92         0.00     11.71      0.00    11.71      11.71
      3. Detailed engineering design and            4,957.00     4,560.44       396.56       4,957.00        9,914.00         2.48      2.28      0.20     2.48       4.96
          supervision
      4. Program management support and             4,294.20     3,950.66       343.54       4,294.20        8,588.40         2.15      1.98      0.17     2.15       4.29
          capacity developmenta
                   Subtotal (A)                    91,750.98 107,838.82       7,340.08 115,178.90 206,929.88                 45.88     53.92      3.67    57.59     103.46
B. Contingencies
      1. Physical                                   4,587.57     5,298.25       460.70       5,758.97       10,346.54         2.29      2.65      0.23     2.88       5.17
      2. Price                                      5,944.68     5,369.90       466.95       5,836.85       11,781.53         2.97      2.68      0.23     2.92       5.89
                   Subtotal (B)                    10,532.25    10,668.15       927.67      11,595.82       22,128.07         5.27      5.33      0.46     5.80      11.06
C. Financing Charges During
    Implementation
    1.    Interest during construction              6,254.23     5,753.89       500.34       6,254.23       12,508.47         3.13      2.88      0.25     3.13       6.26
    2.    Commitment charges                          356.35       327.84        28.51         356.35          712.69         0.18      0.16      0.01     0.18       0.36
                    Subtotal (C)                    6,610.58     6,081.73       528.85       6,610.58       13,221.16         3.31      3.04      0.26     3.31       6.62
   Total Project Cost (A+B+C)                     108,893.81 124,588.71       8,796.59    133,385.30 242,279.11              54.45     62.29      4.40    66.69     121.14
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
MNT = Mongolian togrog.
a
  Includes salaries of program management office (PMO) staff (PMO staff will not be civil servants receiving salaries from the government); and consulting services for
  (i) detailed design, construction supervision, and engineering services inputs for Project 3 feasibility study; and (ii) program management and implementation support for
  Project 2, urban planning and subcenter development, community participation and small- and medium-sized enterprise development, and preparation and completion of
  Project 3 feasibility study.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.
                                                                                                Appendix 4       19



D.         Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds

              Table 7: Allocation and Withdrawal of ADB Ordinary Capital Resources
                                    Loan Proceeds for Project 1

                                ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
                   Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program
                                      CATEGORY                                              ADB OCR FINANCING
                                                    Total Amount Allocated for ADB        Percentage and Basis for
                                                                 Financing                Withdrawal from the Loan
                                                             (in $ equivalent)                      Account
  No.                       Item                       Category         Subcategory
1        Civil Works                                     23,500,000
           1A Heat distribution networks**                                  4,949,010 55.00% of total expenditure
           1B Other civil works excluding                                              claimed*
                 heat distribution networks                                18,550,990 69.60% of total expenditure
                                                                                       claimed
2        Interest and Commitment Charges                  2,240,000                    100.0% of total amount due.
3        Unallocated                                      1,760,000
                   TOTAL                                 27,500,000
ADB = Asian Development Bank, OCR = ordinary capital resources.
* Exclusive of taxes and duties within the territory of the Borrower.
** Disbursements for this expenditure item are preconditioned on the approval of the parallel EIB loan.
Source: Asian Development Bank.




                    Table 8: Allocation and Withdrawal of ADB Asian Development Fund
                                         Loan Proceeds for Project 1

                              ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
                    Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program
                                    CATEGORY                                        ADB ADF FINANCING
                                                 Total Amount Allocated for       Percentage and Basis for
                                                    ADB Financing (SDR)           Withdrawal from the Loan
                                                                                          Account
     No.                  Item                   Category      Subcategory
 1         Civil Works                             7,414,300                   100.00% of total expenditure
                                                                               claimed*
 2         Detailed Engineering and Design         2,810,700                   100.00% of total expenditure
           Supervision                                                         claimed*
 3         Program Management Support and          1,293,000                   100.00% of total expenditure
           Administration                                                      claimed*
 4         Consulting Services                     1,293,000                   100.00% of total expenditure
                                                                               claimed*
 5         Interest and Commitment Charges           446,000                   100.00% of total amount due
 6         Unallocated                             1,286,000
           TOTAL                                  14,542,000

ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund.
* Exclusive of taxes and duties within the territory of the Borrower.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
20       Appendix 4




     Table 9: Allocation and Withdrawal of ADB (Urban Environmental Infrastructure Fund)
                                 Grant Proceeds for Project 1

                              ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
                  Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program)
                                      CATEGORY                                            UEIF GRANT FOR USUG
                                                    Total Amount Allocated for ADB        Percentage and Basis for
                                                                  Financing              Withdrawal from the Grant
                                                          (in $ million equivalent)               Account
  No.                   Item                           Category             Subcategory
1        Works                                                3,700,000                 100.00% of total expenditure
                                                                                        claimed*
         TOTAL                                                3,700,000
ADB = Asian Development Bank, UEIF = Urban Environmental Infrastructure Fund, USUG = Ulaanbaatar Water Supply
and Sewerage Authority.
* Exclusive of taxes and duties within the territory of the Borrower.
Source: Asian Development Bank
                                                                                               Appendix 4         21


            Table 10: Allocation and Withdrawal of ADB Ordinary Capital Resources
                                  Loan Proceeds for Project 2

                               ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
           (Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program – Project 2)
                                                Total Amount Allocated for
                                                       ADB Financing              Basis for Withdrawal from the
 No.                   Item
                                                             ($)                          Loan Account
                                                          Category
 1     Works*                                                      34,630,000 60% of total expenditure claimed
 2     Interest and commitment charges                               2,480,000 100% of total amounts due
                 Total                                             37,110,000
* Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 2.
Source: Asian Development Bank.




   Table 11: Allocation and Withdrawal of ADB Concessional Ordinary Capital Resources
                                Loan Proceeds for Project 2

                               ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
            (Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program – Project 2)
                                               Total Amount Allocated for
                                                      ADB Financing              Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan
 No.                   Item
                                                           (SDR)                               Account
                                                         Category
 1      Project Cost**                                            20,976,000 100% of total expenditure claimed
 2      Interest charge                                               613,000 100% of total amounts due
        TOTAL                                                     21,589,000
SDR = special drawing right.
* Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
E.       Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier
                                                                                                                                                                           22
                                            Table 12: Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier for Project 1
                                                                                                                   European             Municipality of



                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 4
                                        ADB OCR Loan            ADB ADF Loan              UEIF Grant            Investment Bank          Ulaanbaatar
                                              % of Cost               % of Cost                % of Cost                % of Cost             % of Cost         Total
  Item                                 Amount Category         Amount Category         Amount Category         Amount Category         Total Category           Cost
  A. Investment Costsa
  1. Land acquisition                         0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     1.02    100.00          1.02
                    b
  2. Civil works
         a. Water supply and sewerage         0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00      25.00        100.00      0.00      0.00         25.00
         b. Civil works for USUG              0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       3.70      100.00        0.00          0.00     0.00      0.00          3.70
         c. Socioeconomic facilities          0.00        0.00       4.40     100.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     0.00      0.00          4.40
         d. Heat distribution networks        4.95      55.00        0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     4.05     45.00          9.00
         e. Landscaping and river
            embankments                       0.00        0.00       7.07     100.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     0.00      0.00          7.07
         f. Other civil works                18.55      69.60        0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     8.10     30.40         26.65
         Subtotal Civil Works                23.50      30.99      11.47       15.13       3.70        4.88      25.00          32.97    12.15     16.02         75.82
  3. Detailed engineering design and          0.00        0.00       4.35     100.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     0.00      0.00          4.35
        supervision
  4. Resettlement support                     0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     1.76    100.00          1.76
  5. Program management support               0.00        0.00       2.00     100.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     0.00      0.00          2.00
  6. Consulting services                      0.00        0.00       2.00     100.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     0.00      0.00          2.00
  7. Duties and taxes                         0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00     6.18    100.00          6.18
        Subtotal (A)                         23.50      25.23      19.82       21.28       3.70       43.97      25.00          26.80    21.11     22.67         93.13
                        c
  B. Contingencies                            1.76      23.78        1.99      26.89       0.00        0.00        2.34         31.70     1.30     17.57          7.40
  C. Interest and Commitment                  2.24      56.50        0.69      17.25       0.00        0.00        1.04         26.00     0.00      0.00          4.00
                  d
        Charges
  Total Project Cost (A+B+C)                 27.50      26.30      22.50       21.50       3.70        3.50      28.38          27.25    22.44     21.50        104.52
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, OCR = ordinary capital resources, UEIF = Urban Environmental Infrastructure Fund, USUG =
Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority.
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
a
    In mid-2013 prices. Includes value-added tax and import duties. The taxes and duties are estimated at $6.18 million for project 1. The government will finance these
    taxes and duties through tax exemptions.
b
    Expenditure item Includes equipment.
c
    Physical contingencies computed at 5% of civil works and consulting services. Price contingencies computed at 3%-8% for local currency costs and 0.5%-2.2% for
    foreign exchange costs.
   Includes provision for exchange rate fluctuation under a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
d
    Includes interest and commitment charges. Financing charges during implementation on the Asian Development Bank (ADB) loans has been computed (i) at 2.0%
    per annum of the first tranche's loan from ADB's Special Funds resources (Asian Development Fund); and (ii) at the 5-year (corresponding to implementation period)
    USD fixed swap rate plus an effective contractual spread of 0.4%; and a commitment charge of 0.15% on the undisbursed portion of the first tranche's loan from
    ADB's ordinary capital resources. Financing charges during implementation for the European Investment Bank loan were also calculated based on the 5-year dollar
    fixed swap rate.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                           Table 13: Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier for Project 2
                                                                    ($ million)
                                                                            ADB Concessional        European Investment          Municipality of
                                                   ADB OCR Loan                OCR Loan                    Bank                   Ulaanbaatar
                                                         % of Cost                  % of Cost                 % of Cost                  % of Cost          Total
Item                                             Amount  Category          Amount   Category        Amount     Category        Amount    Category           Cost
A. Investment Costs
     1. Civil works and equipment
     1.1 Roads and associated infrastructure       30.07          60.00         0.00           0.00         0.00        0.00      20.04         40.00       50.11
          including heating
     1.2 Water supply and sewerage                  0.00           0.00         0.00           0.00        14.75     100.00         0.00         0.00       14.75
          including flood protection
     1.3 Socioeconomic facilities                   0.00           0.00       17.64         100.00          0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00       17.64
     2. Land acquisition and resettlement           0.00           0.00         0.00           0.00         0.00        0.00      11.71        100.00       11.71
     3. Detailed engineering design and             0.00           0.00         4.96        100.00          0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00         4.96
          supervision
     4. Program management support and              0.00           0.00         4.29        100.00         0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00         4.29
                                a
          capacity development
                   Subtotal (A)                    30.07          29.06       26.89           25.99        14.75      14.26       31.75         30.69      103.46
B. Contingencies
     1. Physical                                    2.13          41.18         0.71          13.77         0.74      14.31         1.59        30.74        5.17
     2. Price                                       2.43          41.26         0.81          13.75         0.84      14.26         1.81        30.73        5.89
                   Subtotal (B)                     4.56          41.22         1.52          13.76         1.58      14.28         3.40        30.73       11.06
C. Financing Charges During
     Implementation
     1. Interest during construction                2.35          37.54         0.78          12.46         3.13      50.00         0.00         0.00        6.26
     2. Commitment charges                          0.13          36.11         0.04          11.11         0.18      50.00         0.00         0.00        0.36
                   Subtotal (C)                     2.48          37.50         0.83          12.50         3.31      50.00         0.00         0.00        6.62
Total Project Cost (A+B+C)                         37.11          30.63       29.24           24.14        19.64      16.21       35.15         29.02      121.14
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PMO = program management office.
a
   Includes salaries of PMO staff (PMO staff will not be civil servants receiving salaries from the government); and consulting services for (i) detailed design,
   construction supervision, and engineering services inputs for Project 3 feasibility study; and (ii) program management and implementation support for Project 2,
   urban planning and subcenter development, community participation and small- and medium-sized enterprise development, and preparation and completion of
   Project 3 feasibility study.


                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 4
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.




                                                                                                                                                                      23
                                                                                                                                                                                        24

            F.       Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs and/or Components

                                                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 4
                                          Table 14: Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs and/or Components for Project 1

                                                                                                                          Institutional Strengthening and Capacity
                                                  Expanded Roads and Urban Services                                                        Building
                                             % of           % of          % of       % of          % of          % of           % of            % of          % of
                                             Cost           Cost           Cost      Cost          Cost          Cost            Cost            Cost          Cost
 Item                          Total RI    Category WSSI Category SSI Category HSE Category MESP Category IEPS Category PMIS Category SSP Category SDCE Category
 A. Investment Costsa
 1. Land acquisition            1.02   0.00       0.0   0.00     0.00     0.03    3.1     0.99    97.4     0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00     0.00 0.00        0.00
 2. Civil worksb               81.99 21.61      26.4 11.76       14.3    13.05 15.9      26.89    32.8     3.70        4.3      5.0      5.8    0.00   0.00      0.00     0.00 0.00        0.00
 3. Detailed engineering
    design and supervision      4.35   1.22     28.0    0.63     14.5     0.22    5.1     2.25    51.7     0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00     0.00 0.00        0.00
 4. Resettlement support        1.76   1.76 100.0       0.00     0.00     0.00 0.00       0.00    0.00     0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00     0.00 0.00        0.00
 5. Program management
    support                     2.00   0.00       0.0   0.00     0.00     0.00 0.00       0.00    0.00     0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00    2.00 100.00      0.00     0.00 0.00        0.00
 6. Consulting services         2.00   0.00       0.0   0.00      0.0     0.00    0.0     0.00    0.00     0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00   0.00      0.50 25.00 1.50          75.00
        Subtotal (A)           93.13 24.59      26.4 12.39       13.3    13.31 14.3      30.14    32.4     3.70        4.3      5.0      5.4    2.00      2.1    0.50      0.5 1.50         1.6
 B. Contingenciesc
 1. Physical contingencies      4.64   1.27     27.4    0.85     18.2     0.66 14.3       1.41    30.4     0.00       0.00     0.25      5.4    0.10      2.2    0.03      0.5 0.08         1.6
 2. Price contingencies         2.75   0.81     29.6    0.39     14.3     0.43 15.8       0.95    34.7     0.00       0.00     0.16      5.7 0.00         0.0    0.00        0 0.00         0.0
       Subtotal (B)             7.39   2.08     28.2    1.24     16.8     1.10 14.9       2.36    32.0     0.00       0.00     0.41      5.5    0.10      1.4    0.03      0.3 0.08         1.0
 C. Interest and
    Commitment Chargesd 4.00                                                                                              -
 Total Project Cost
        (A+B+C)               104.52 26.68      26.5 13.63       13.6    14.40 14.3      32.50    33.2     3.70        3.7     5.41      5.4    2.10      2.1    0.53      0.5 1.58         1.6
HSE = heating service expansion, IEPS = increased economic and public services, MESP = more efficient service providers, PMIS = program management and implementation support, RI
= roads improvement, SDCE = subcenter development and community engagement, SSI = sewerage system improvement, SSP = strengthening service providers, WSSI = water supply
system improvement.
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
 a
    In mid-2013 prices. Includes value-added tax and import duties. The taxes and duties are estimated at $6.18 million for project 1. The government will finance these taxes and duties
    through tax exemptions.
 b
    Expenditure item includes equipment.
 c
   Physical contingencies computed at 5% of civil works and consulting services. Price contingencies computed at 3%-8% for local currency costs and 0.5-2.2% for foreign exchange costs;
    includes provision for exchange rate fluctuation under a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
 d
    Includes interest and commitment charges. Financing charges during implementation on the Asian Development Bank (ADB) loans has been computed (i) at 2.0% per annum of the first
    tranche's loan from ADB's Special Funds resources (Asian Development Fund); and (ii) at the 5-year (corresponding to implementation period) USD fixed swap rate plus an effective
    contractual spread of 0.4%; and a commitment charge of 0.15% on the undisbursed portion of the first tranche's loan from ADB's ordinary capital resources. Financing charges during
    implementation for the European Investment Bank loan were also calculated based on the 5-year dollar fixed swap rate.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                       Table 15: Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs and/or Components for Project 2
                                                                          ($ million)
                                                                                                                Improved Economic Institutional Strengthening
                                                               Expanded Roads and Urban Services                and Public Services and Capacity Development
                                                                       Water Supply,
                                                                % of    Wastewater,    % of              % of    Socio-      % of     Project
                                             Total   Roads      Cost   and Drainage Cost      Heating    Cost economic       Cost   Management % of Cost
Item                                         Cost Improvement Category   Services    Category Services Category Facilities Category   Support      Category
A. Investment costs
     1. Civil works and equipment           82.50        19.48       23.61          15.75          19.09      30.62     37.12    16.64     20.17          0.00             0.00
     2. Land acquisition and                11.71        10.58       90.28            0.00          0.00       0.00      0.00     1.14       9.72         0.00             0.00
          resettlement
     3. Detailed engineering design and      4.96         0.63       12.76            0.99         19.89       2.28     45.96     1.06     21.38          0.00             0.00
          supervision
     4. Program management support           4.29         0.00         0.00           0.00          0.00       0.00      0.00     0.00       0.00         4.29          100.00
          and capacity developmenta
            Subtotal (A)                   103.46        30.69       29.66          16.74          16.18      32.90     31.80    18.84     18.21          4.29             4.15
B. Contingencies
     1. Physical                             5.17         1.51       29.18            0.74         14.26       1.53     29.59     0.93     18.03          0.46             8.94
     2. Price                                5.89         1.45       24.69            0.89         15.07       1.93     32.81     1.23     20.84          0.39             6.58
            Subtotal (B)                    11.06         2.96       26.79            1.63         14.69       3.46     31.31     2.16     19.53          0.85             7.68
C. Financing charges During
     Implementation
     1. Interest during construction         6.26         1.44       23.00            1.06         16.93       1.81     28.91     0.76     12.14          1.20           19.17
     2. Commitment charges                   0.36         0.08       22.22            0.06         16.67       0.10     27.78     0.04     11.11          0.07           19.44
                Subtotal (C)                 6.62         1.52       22.96            1.12         16.92       1.91     28.85     0.80     12.08          1.27           19.18
       Total Project Cost (A+B+C)          121.14        35.17       29.03          19.48          16.08      38.27     31.59    21.00     17.99          6.41             5.29
  Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
  a
    Includes salaries of program management office (PMO) staff (PMO staff will not be civil servants receiving salaries from the government); and consulting services for (i) detailed
    design, construction supervision, and engineering services inputs for Project 3 feasibility study; and (ii) program management and implementation support for Project 2, urban
    planning and subcenter development, community participation and small- and medium-sized enterprise development, and preparation and completion of Project 3 feasibility
    study.
  Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.




                                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 4




                                                                                                                                                                                    25
26      Appendix 4

G.      Detailed Cost Estimates by Year
                     Table 16: Detailed Cost Estimates by Year for Project 1
                                           ($ million)
Source of Funds                                         Total       2014     2015    2016    2017      %
I. ADF and OCR loans
   A. Investment cost
      1. Land acquisition                                 0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
      2. Civil works                                     34.97       3.49     10.5  13.99    6.99    69.94
         2.1 Heating distribution networks                4.95       0.49     1.49   1.98    0.99     9.90
         2.2 Socioeconomic facilities                     4.40       0.44     1.32   1.76    0.88     8.80
         2.3 Landscaping and river embankments            7.07       0.71     2.12   2.83    1.41    14.14
         2.4 Other civil works                           18.55       1.86     5.56   7.42    3.71    37.10
      3. Detailed engineering design & supervision        4.35       0.44     1.31   1.74    0.87     8.70
      4. Resettlement support                             0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
      5. Program management support                       2.00       0.20     0.60   0.80    0.40     4.00
      6. Consulting services                              2.00       0.20     0.60   0.80    0.40     4.00
          Subtotal (A)                                   43.32       4.33    13.00  17.33    8.66    86.64
   B. Contingencies                                       3.75       0.38     1.13   1.50    0.75     7.50
   C. Duties and taxes                                    0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
   D. Interest and commitment charges                     2.93       0.29     0.88   1.17    0.59     5.86
           Subtotal (B+C+D)                               6.68       0.67     2.00   2.67    1.34    13.36
              Total ADF and OCR Loans                    50.00       5.00    15.00  20.00   10.00   100.00
II. EIB cofinancing
    A. Investment cost
       1. Land acquisition                                0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
       2. Civil works                                    25.00       2.50     7.50  10.00    5.00    88.10
       3. Resettlement support                            0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
       4. Consulting services                             0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
          Subtotal (A)                                   25.00       2.50     7.50  10.00    5.00    88.10
   B. Contingencies                                       2.34       0.23     0.70   0.93    0.47     8.20
   C. Duties and taxes                                    0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
   D. Interest and commitment charges                     1.04       0.10     0.31   0.42    0.21     3.70
          Subtotal (B+C+D)                                3.38       0.34     1.01   1.35    0.68    11.90
              Total EIB cofinancing                      28.38       2.84     8.51  11.35    5.68   100.00
III. UEIF grant
     A. Investment cost
       1. Land acquisition                                0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
       2. Civil works                                     3.70       0.37     1.11   1.48    0.74   100.00
       3. Resettlement support                            0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
       4. Consulting services                             0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
          Subtotal (A)                                    3.70       0.37     1.11   1.48    0.74   100.00
     B. Contingencies                                     0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
     C. Duties and taxes                                  0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
     D. Interest and commitment charges                   0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
          Subtotal (B+C+D)                                0.00       0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00
              Total UEIF grant                            3.70       0.37     1.11   1.48    0.74   100.00
IV. MUB counterpart fund
     A. Investment cost
       1. Land acquisition                                1.02        0.10     0.31    0.41    0.20    4.60
       2. Civil works                                    12.16        1.22     3.65    4.86    2.43   54.24
       3. Resettlement support                            1.76        0.18     0.53    0.70    0.35    7.90
       4. Consulting services                             0.00        0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
          Subtotal (A)                                   14.94        1.49     4.48    5.98    2.99   66.64
     B. Contingencies                                     1.30        0.13     0.39    0.53    0.26    5.90
     C. Duties and taxes                                  6.18        0.62     1.85    2.47    1.24   27.60
     D. Interest and commitment charges                   0.00        0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
          Subtotal (B+C+D)                                7.48        0.75     2.24    2.99    1.50   33.36
              Total MUB counterpart fund                 22.42        2.24     6.72    8.97    4.49  100.00
         Total investment (I + II + III + IV)          104.52        10.45    31.36   41.81   20.90  100.00
         % Total project cost                                        10       30      40      20
 a
    Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
 ADF = Asian Development Fund, EIB = European Investment Bank, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, OCR =
 ordinary capital resources, UEIF = Urban Environmental Infrastructure Fund.
 Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                           Appendix 4        27


                     Table 17: Detailed Cost Estimates by Year for Project 2
                                           ($ million)
Source of Funds                                       Total    2018     2019     2020       2021     2022      %
I. Concessional OCR and OCR loans
    A. Investment cost
      1. Land acquisition                               0.00    0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00
      2. Civil works                                  43.88     0.00     3.60    16.56      20.20     3.52    66.14
          2.1 Roads and associated infrastructure     27.66     0.00     3.60    10.80      12.17     1.09    41.68
               including heating
         2.2 Socioeconomic facilities                 16.23     0.00     0.00      5.76      8.04     2.43    24.46
      3. Detailed engineering design and supervision   4.96     0.99     1.98      1.98      0.00     0.00     7.47
      4. Resettlement support                           0.00    0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00
      5. Program management support                    4.30     0.86     1.72      1.72      0.00     0.00     6.47
                       Subtotal (A)                   53.14     1.85     7.30    20.26      20.20     3.52    80.08
    B. Contingencies                                   6.09     0.38     1.15      2.09      2.20     0.27     9.18
    C. Duties and taxes                                3.82        -     0.31      1.44      1.76     0.31     5.75
    D. Interest and commitment charges                 3.31     0.21     0.62      1.13      1.20     0.15     4.99
                    Subtotal (B+C+D)                  13.22     0.59     2.08      4.66      5.16     0.73    19.92
      Total Concessional OCR and OCR Loans            66.35     2.44     9.38    24.92      25.36     4.25   100.00
II. EIB cofinancing
    A. Investment cost
      1. Land acquisition                               0.00    0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00
      2. Civil works                                  13.57     0.00     2.04      5.43      6.11     0.00    69.10
      3. Resettlement support                           0.00    0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00
      4. Consulting services                            0.00    0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00
                       Subtotal (A)                   13.57     0.00     2.04      5.43      6.11     0.00    69.10
    B. Contingencies                                   1.58     0.10     0.30      0.54      0.57     0.07     8.03
    C. Duties and taxes                                1.18     0.00     0.18      0.47      0.53     0.00     6.01
    D. Interest and commitment charges                 3.31     0.21     0.62      1.13      1.20     0.15    16.86
                    Subtotal (B+C+D)                   6.07     0.31     1.10      2.15      2.30     0.22    30.90
                  Total EIB Cofinancing               19.64     0.31     3.13      7.57      8.40     0.22   100.00
III. MUB counterpart fund
    A. Investment cost
      1. Land acquisition                              5.65     2.26     3.39      0.00      0.00     0.00    16.06
      2. Civil works                                  18.44     -        2.40      7.20      8.11     0.72    52.46
      3. Resettlement support                          5.13     2.05     3.08      0.00      0.00     0.00    14.59
      4. Consulting services                           0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00
                       Subtotal (A)                   29.21     4.31     8.86      7.20      8.11     0.72    83.11
    B. Contingencies                                   3.40     0.21     0.64      1.16      1.23     0.15     9.67
    C. Duties and taxes                                2.54     0.37     0.77      0.63      0.71     0.06     7.23
    D. Interest and commitment charges                 0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00     0.00
                    Subtotal (B+C+D)                   5.94     0.59     1.41      1.79      1.93     0.21    16.89
                  Total MUB financing                 35.15     4.90   10.27       8.99     10.05     0.94   100.00
Total investment                                     121.14     7.65   22.79     41.49      43.81     5.40   100.00
% Total project cost                                            6.3    18.8       34.2      36.2      4.5
a
  Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
EIB = European Investment Bank, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, OCR = ordinary capital resources.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                                                                             28
     H.      Contract and Disbursement S-Curve

                                                Contract and Disbursement S-Curve for Project 1

                                                                                                                                             Appendix 4




                              Q3      Q4      Q1      Q2      Q3      Q4      Q1      Q2      Q3      Q4      Q1      Q2      Q3      Q4
Item                         2014    2014    2015    2015    2015    2015    2016    2016    2016    2016    2017    2017    2017    2017
Cumulative contract awards
                             15.84   19.08   44.60   48.13   48.39   48.66   49.01   49.37   49.72   50.00   50.00   50.00   50.00   50.00
(in $ million)
Cumulative disbursements
                              5.00    5.08    8.13   12.70   17.27   20.32   24.38   30.48   36.57   40.63   42.88   46.08   48.90   50.00
(in $ million)
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve for Project 2




                                                  Appendix 4




                                                  29
I.      Funds Flow Diagrams                                                                                                                         30

                                                       Project 1 Funds Flow Diagram

                                                                      Government of Mongolia                                                        Appendix 4
                                                                            (Borrower)

             Asian Development Bank
                   Cofinanciers

                                                                          Ministry of Finance



                                                                                        Subsidiary Loan Agreement

                                                                    Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
                                                                       (Executing Agency)
                                                                   Program Management Office
                                                                 Imprest Account 1 – ADF Loan
                                                                  Imprest Account 2- OCR Loan
                                                                Imprest Account 3 – UEIF Grant


                                                                                                                      Contractors, suppliers, and
                                                                                                                             consultants




                                Direct payments


              = withdrawal application prepared by MUB and forwarded to Ministry of Finance (MOF)
              = payments released to imprest accounts and/or directly to contractors
     ADF = Asian Development Fund; EA = executing agency, OCR = ordinary capital resources; PMO = program management office; UEIF =
     urban environmental infrastructure fund
                                                          Project 2 Funds Flow Diagram



                                                                          Government of Mongolia
                                                                                (Borrower)


           Asian Development Bank
                 Cofinanciers
                                                                             Ministry of Finance




                                                                                           Subsidiary Loan Agreement


                                                                         Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
                                                                            (Executing Agency)
                                                                        Program Management Office
                                                                      Imprest Account 4–Concessional
                                                                            OCR loan (Project 2)
                                                                        Imprest Account 5–OCR loan
                                                                                 (Project 2)


                                                                                                                       Contractors, suppliers, and
                                                                                                                              consultants


                                 Direct payments

         = withdrawal application prepared by Municipality of Ulaanbaatar and forwarded to the Ministry of Finance
         = payments released to imprest accounts and/or directly to contractors
OCR = ordinary capital resources.


                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 4
Source: Asian Development Bank.




                                                                                                                                                     31
32         Appendix 4



                                    V.       FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

A.         Financial Management Assessment

29.    Thee financial management assessment (FMA) was carried out in accordance with
ADB’s guidelines to update the review of the capacity of the MUB with regard to its systems and
procedures for financial management. The FMA was undertaken on MUB in its role as the
executing agency for various subprojects specifically under Tranche 2 of the Ulaanbaatar Urban
Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program. The assessment covered funds
flow arrangements, accounting policies and procedures, staffing, internal and external audit
arrangements, reporting and monitoring system, and the financial information systems. An FMA
questionnaire was used to gather information on financial management procedures from the
treasury and finance department of the MUB.

30.     In general, adequate knowledge and skills in program management, financial
management, financial analysis, and management accounting are prevalent among the officers
and staff of the MUB. The Government of Mongolia through its ministries, various decrees, and
trainings strengthened the guidelines for financial management in its hierarchy of governance.
The Public Sector Financial Management Law is the overarching decree which regulate the
financial management and reporting system of government.

31.     The MUB has undertaken studies and development projects funded by government and
various donors such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency, World Bank, and others.
Involvement had been from project conceptualization, budget preparation, detailed plans,
procurement of goods, services, and infrastructure works, project supervision, monitoring, and
evaluation. They are equipped with appropriate information and technology hardware and
software programs which enable them to perform their tasks efficiently and generate timely
reports. Accounting and finance departments are functioning efficiently with the use of electronic
accounting system based on government-prescribed accounting system. The World Bank’s
review and study of the accounting and finance system of the MUB resulted to a set of
recommendations to improve transparency in reporting system on the expenditure accounts and
better inform the citizenry to access public utilities and services, which have received municipal
funds for improvement.

32.    The results of the FMA indicates that while the MUB has the financial management
capacity and program management experience, interventions are required to strengthen its
capacity to implement Tranche 2 of the investment program in accordance with ADB policies
and procedures. The assessment rated the financial management risk of MUB before
undertaking mitigating measures as moderate. While the MUB and PMO are already
implementing Tranche 1, their staff still require training to ensure familiarity with ADB policies
and procedures, and to improve their financial management capacity.

B.         Disbursement

33.   The loan proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement
Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time),16 and detailed arrangements agreed upon
between the government and ADB. Online training for project staff on disbursement policies and



16
     Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Handbooks/Loan_Disbursement/loan-disbursement-final.pdf
                                                                                      Appendix 4       33


procedures is available.17 Project staff are encouraged to avail of this training to help ensure
efficient disbursement and fiduciary control.

34.     The MUB, through its PMO, will be responsible for all disbursement arrangements,
including (i) preparing disbursement projections, (ii) requesting budgetary allocations for
counterpart funds, (iii) collecting supporting documents, and (iv) preparing and sending
withdrawal applications to ADB.

35.     Imprest fund procedure. The government will open two separate imprest accounts for
the concessional OCR and OCR loans proceeds under Tranche 2. The imprest accounts will be
established, managed, and liquidated in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook
and detailed arrangements agreed by the government and ADB. The total outstanding advance
to the imprest accounts should not exceed the estimate of ADB’s share of expenditures to be
paid through the imprest accounts for the forthcoming 6 months. The currency of the imprest
accounts will be the US dollar. The respective imprest account, which will be opened at a
commercial bank, will be used exclusively for ADB’s share of eligible expenditures.18 The MUB
as executing agency will be accountable and responsible for proper use of advances to the
imprest accounts. The MUB may request for initial and additional advances to the respective
imprest accounts based on an Estimate of Expenditure Sheet setting out the estimated
expenditures to be financed through the respective imprest account for the forthcoming
6 months. Supporting documents should be submitted to ADB or retained by the MUB in
accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time)
when liquidating or replenishing the imprest accounts.

36.     Statement of expenditure (SOE) procedure. The SOE procedure19 may be used for
reimbursement of eligible expenditures or liquidation of advances to the imprest accounts. The
ceiling of the SOE procedure is the equivalent of $100,000 per individual payment. Supporting
documents and records for the expenditures claimed under the SOE should be maintained and
made readily available for review by ADB's disbursement and review missions, upon ADB's
request for submission of supporting documents on a sampling basis, and for independent
audit. Reimbursement and liquidation of individual payments in excess of the SOE ceiling
should be supported by full documentation when submitting the withdrawal application to ADB.

37.      Before the submission of the first withdrawal application, the borrower should submit to
ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal
applications on behalf of the government, together with the authenticated specimen signatures
of each authorized person. The minimum value per withdrawal application is in accordance with
the Loan Disbursement Handbook. Individual payments below such amount should be paid
(i) by the MUB and subsequently claimed to ADB through reimbursement, or (ii) through the
imprest fund procedure, unless otherwise accepted by ADB.

C.       Accounting

38.    The MUB will maintain separate books and records by funding source for all
expenditures incurred on the project. The PMO will prepare consolidated project financial
statements in accordance with the government's accounting laws and regulations, which are
consistent with international accounting principles and practices.
17
   Disbursement eLearning. http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning
18
   Bank charges incurred in the operation of the imprest accounts may be financed from the loans and grant
   proceeds.
19
   SOE forms are available in Appendix 9B and 9C of ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook.
34       Appendix 4




D.        Auditing and Public Disclosure

39.    The MUB will cause the detailed consolidated project financial statements to be audited
in accordance with International Standards on Auditing, by an independent auditor acceptable to
ADB. The audited project financial statements, together with the auditor’s opinion, will be
presented in the English language to ADB within 6 months from the end of the fiscal year by the
MUB.

40.     The audit report for the project financial statements will include a management letter and
auditor’s opinions, which cover (i) whether or not the project financial statements present an
accurate and fair view or are presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with the
applicable financial reporting standards; (ii) whether or not the proceeds of the loans and grant
were used only for the purposes of the project; and (iii) whether or not the borrower or executing
agency was in compliance with the financial covenants contained in the legal agreements
(where applicable).

41.    Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by
review missions and during normal program supervision, and followed up regularly with all
concerned, including the external auditor.

42.     The government and the MUB have been made aware of ADB’s approach to delayed
submission, and the requirements for satisfactory and acceptable quality of the audited project
financial statements.20 ADB reserves the right to require a change in the auditor (in a manner
consistent with the constitution of the borrower), or for additional support to be provided to the
auditor, if the audits required are not conducted in a manner satisfactory to ADB, or if the audits
are substantially delayed. ADB reserves the right to verify the project's financial accounts to
confirm that the share of ADB’s financing is used in accordance with ADB’s policies and
procedures.

43.     Public disclosure of the audited project financial statements, including the auditor’s
opinion on the project financial statements, will be guided by ADB’s Public Communications
Policy 2011.21 After the review, ADB will disclose the audited project financial statements and
the opinion of the auditors on the project financial statements no later than 14 days of ADB’s
confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website. The management letter,
additional auditor’s opinions, and audited entity financial statements will not be disclosed.22



20
   ADB’s approach and procedures regarding delayed submission of audited project financial statements:
     (i) When audited project financial statements are not received by the due date, ADB will write to the executing
           agency advising that (a) the audit documents are overdue; and (b) if they are not received within the next 6
           months, requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of imprest
           accounts, processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed.
     (ii) When audited project financial statements are not received within 6 months after the due date, ADB will
           withhold processing of requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of
           imprest accounts, processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters. ADB will (a)
           inform the executing agency of ADB’s actions; and (b) advise that the loan may be suspended if the audit
           documents are not received within the next 6 months.
     (iii) When audited project financial statements are not received within 12 months after the due date, ADB may
           suspend the loan.
21
   Public Communications Policy: http://www.adb.org/documents/pcp-2011?ref=site/disclosure/publications
22
   This type of information would generally fall under public communications policy exceptions to disclosure. ADB.
   2011. Public Communications Policy. Paragraph 97(iv) and/or 97(v).
                                                                                               Appendix 4   35


                        VI.      PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES

A.         Advance Contracting

44.      ADB has approved advance contracting for consulting services for (i) detailed design,
construction supervision, and engineering services inputs for Project 3 feasibility study; and
(ii) program management and implementation support for Project 2, urban planning and
subcenter development, community participation and SME development, and preparation and
completion of Project 3 feasibility study. All advance contracting to be financed out of the
proceeds of the loan shall be subject to and governed by ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2015,
as amended from time to time)23 and Guidelines on the Use of Consultants24 (2013, as
amended from time to time). The issuance of invitations to bid under advance contracting will be
subject to ADB approval. The borrower, and the executing and implementing agencies have
been advised that approval of advance contracting does not commit ADB to finance the project.

B.         Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services

45.    All procurement of goods and works will be undertaken in accordance with ADB’s
Procurement Guidelines.

46.    All procurement contracts will contain anticorruption provisions as specified by ADB.
Procurement will be carried out by the PMO with the support and guidance of detailed design
consultants and project implementation support consultants.

47.    Civil works at $5,000,000 and above and goods at $2,000,000 and above will be
procured through international competitive bidding (ICB). Civil works between $100,001 and
$4,999,999, and goods between $100,001 and $1,999,999 will be procured through national
competitive bidding (NCB). Packages at $100,000 and below will be procured through shopping
method. Force accounts will be used for minor works that cannot be defined in advance. Before
commencement of NCB procurement, ADB and the government may review the public
procurement laws to ensure consistency with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines. Any necessary
modifications or clarifications will be documented in the procurement plan.

48.     The procedures to be followed for national competitive bidding shall be those set forth in
the Public Procurement Law of Mongolia of 1 December 2005, effective 1 February 2006, as
amended on 6 February 2007, 16 July 2009, 10 June 2010, 9 June 2011, and December 2011
(referred to as PPLM), with the clarifications and modifications required for compliance with the
provisions of ADB's Procurement Guidelines.

49.    An 18-month procurement plan for both projects 1 and 2 indicating threshold and review
procedures, goods, works, and consulting service contract packages and national competitive
bidding guidelines are in Section C.

50.    All consultants will be recruited according to ADB‘s Guidelines on the Use of
Consultants. The terms of reference for all consulting services are detailed in Section D.




23
     Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Procurement/Guidelines-Procurement.pdf.
24
     Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Consulting/Guidelines-Consultants.pdf.
   36      Appendix 4

   C.      Procurement Plans

                                        Basic Data for Tranche 1
Project Name: Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program–Tranche 1
Project Number: 45007-004                          Approval Number: 3098/3099/0380
Country: Mongolia                                      Executing Agency: Municipality of Ulaanbaatar

Project Procurement Classification: Category A         Implementing Agency:
Project Procurement Risk: Substantial                  N/A

Project Financing Amount: US$ 104,520,000
ADB Financing: US$ 50,000,000                          Project Closing Date: 30 June 2018
Cofinancing (ADB Administered): US$ 3,700,000
Non-ADB Financing: US$ 50,820,000
                                                       Date of this Procurement Plan: 22 August 2016,
Date of First Procurement Plan:    15 May 2013
                                                                                      Version 2



    A.     Methods, Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan

    1.     Procurement and Consulting Methods and Thresholds

    Except as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) may otherwise agree, the following process
    thresholds shall apply to procurement of goods and works.

                                         Procurement of Goods and Works
                   Method                                Threshold                        Comments
  International Competitive Bidding for Goods US$ 2,000,000 and Above          Prior review
                                               Between US$ 100,001 and         Prior review; only for first
  National Competitive Bidding for Goods
                                               US$ 1,999,999                   package
  Shopping for Goods                           Up to US$ 100,000               Post review
  International Competitive Bidding for Works US$ 5,000,000 and Above          Prior review
                                               Between US$ 100,001 and         Prior review; only for first
  National Competitive Bidding for Works
                                               US$ 4,999,999                   package
  Shopping for Works                           Up to US$ 100,000               Post review

                                                  Consulting Services
                             Method                                           Comments
  Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting        90:10
  Firm
  Quality-Based Selection for Consulting Firm             90:10
  Individual Consultants Selection for Individual
  Consultant

    2.     Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost $1 Million or More

    The following table lists goods and works contracts for which the procurement activity is
    either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.
                                                                                              Appendix 4        37

                                                                    Review                Advertisement
Package                                Estimated   Procurement                 Bidding
           General Description                                      (Prior/               Date               Comments
Number                                   Value        Method                  Procedure
                                                                    Post)                 (quarter/year)
BHF06     Design, supply, and       7,180,000.00   ICB           Prior        1S1E        Q3 / 2016        Prequalification
          installation of heating                                                                          of Bidders: N
          plant in Bayankhoshuu
          subcenter                                                                                        Domestic
                                                                                                           Preference
                                                                                                           Applicable: N

                                                                                                           Bidding
                                                                                                           Document:
                                                                                                           Plant
BRDH11    Roads, heating            5,076,000.00   ICB           Prior        1S1E        Q3 / 2016        Prequalification
          network, and                                                                                     of Bidders: N
          associated
          infrastructure in                                                                                Domestic
          Bayankhoshuu                                                                                     Preference
          subcenter (Phase 1)                                                                              Applicable: N


                                                                                                           Bidding
                                                                                                           Document:
                                                                                                           Small Works
BRDH14    Roads, heating            8,304,000.00   ICB           Prior        1S1E        Q4 / 2016        Prequalification
          network, and                                                                                     of Bidders: N
          associated
          infrastructure in                                                                                Domestic
          Bayankhoshuu                                                                                     Preference
          subcenter (Phase 2)                                                                              Applicable: N


                                                                                                           Bidding
                                                                                                           Document:
                                                                                                           Small Works
BSEC13    Electricity and           1,093,000.00   NCB           Prior        1S1E        Q3 / 2016        Prequalification
          telecommunications                                                                               of Bidders: N
          network in
          Bayankhoshuu and                                                                                 Domestic
          Selbe subcenters                                                                                 Preference
                                                                                                           Applicable: N


                                                                                                           Bidding
                                                                                                           Document:
                                                                                                           Small Works
BSF05     Kindergarten,             2,917,000.00   NCB           Prior        1S1E        Q3 / 2016        Prequalification
          business incubator,                                                                              of Bidders: N
          and vocational
          training center in                                                                               Domestic
          Bayankhoshuu                                                                                     Preference
          subcenter                                                                                        Applicable: N


                                                                                                           Bidding
                                                                                                           Document:
                                                                                                           Small Works
BSLS09    Open space                1,800,000.00   NCB           Prior        1S1E        Q3 / 2016        Prequalification
          (landscape)                                                                                      of Bidders: N

                                                                                                           Domestic
                                                                                                           Preference
                                                                                                           Applicable: N


                                                                                                           Bidding
                                                                                                           Document:
                                                                                                           Small Works
        38        Appendix 4
SBR08        Three                      2,912,000.00   NCB   Prior   1S1E   Q3 / 2016   Prequalification
             bridges in                                                                 of Bidders: N
             Selbe
             subcenter                                                                  Domestic
                                                                                        Preference
                                                                                        Applicable: N


                                                                                        Bidding
                                                                                        Document:
                                                                                        Small Works
SHF06        Design, supply, and        7,958,000.00   ICB   Prior   1S1E   Q3 / 2016   Prequalification
             installation of heating                                                    of Bidders: N
             plant in Selbe
             subcenter                                                                  Domestic
                                                                                        Preference
                                                                                        Applicable: N

                                                                                        Bidding
                                                                                        Document:
                                                                                        Plant
SRDH11       Roads, heating             6,074,000.00   ICB   Prior   1S1E   Q3 / 2016   Prequalification
             network, and                                                               of Bidders: N
             associated
             infrastructure in                                                          Domestic
             Selbe subcenter                                                            Preference
             (Phase 1)                                                                  Applicable: N


                                                                                        Bidding
                                                                                        Document:
                                                                                        Small Works
SRDH14       Roads, heating             4,807,000.00   NCB   Prior   1S1E   Q4 / 2016   Prequalification
             network, and                                                               of Bidders: N
             associated
             infrastructure in Selbe                                                    Domestic
             subcenter (Phase 2)                                                        Preference
                                                                                        Applicable: N


                                                                                        Bidding
                                                                                        Document:
                                                                                        Small Works
SSF05        Kindergarten,              2,902,000.00   NCB   Prior   1S1E   Q3 / 2016   Prequalification
             business incubator,                                                        of Bidders: N
             and vocational
             training center in                                                         Domestic
             Selbe subcenter                                                            Preference
                                                                                        Applicable: N


                                                                                        Bidding
                                                                                        Document:
                                                                                        Small Works
WWOI         Design, Engineering,       3,700,000.00   NCB   Prior   1S1E   Q1 / 2016   Prequalification
             Supply, and Installation                                                   of Bidders: N
             of Pump Equipment,
             SCADA System,                                                              Domestic
             Construction and                                                           Preference
             Commissioning of
             Pumping Stations and                                                       Applicable: N
             Water Treatment Plant
                                                                                        Bidding
                                                                                        Document: Plant


                                                                                        Comments:
                                                                                        This
                                                                                        package
                                                                                        was
                                                                                        advertised
                                                                                        as ICB.
                                                                                                                 Appendix 4        39

3.        Consulting Services Contracts Estimated to Cost $100,000 or More

The following table lists consulting services contracts for which the recruitment activity is either
ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.

                                                                           Review      Advertisement
Package                                   Estimated       Recruitment                                            Type of
             General Description                                            (Prior/          Date                                  Comments
Number                                      Value           Method                                               Proposal
                                                                             Post)      (quarter/year)
CSOI        Improved Operations                           QCBS            Prior        Q2 / 2016           STP                  Assignment:
            and Management of                                                                                                   International
            Service Providers, and
            Institutional and
            Regulatory Reform                                                                                                   Quality-Cost
                                                                                                                                Ratio: 90:10


                                                                                                                                Comments:
                                                                                                                                90:10 based on
                                                                                                                                FAM




4.        Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost Less than $1 Million and
          Consulting Services Contracts Less than $100,000 (Smaller Value Contracts)

The following table lists smaller-value goods, works and consulting services contracts for which
the activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.

Goods and Works
                                                                                 Review
Package         General              Estimated    Number of      Procurement                    Bidding      Advertisement
                                                                                  (Prior/                                           Comments
Number         Description             Value      Contracts         Method                     Procedure    Date (quarter/year)
                                                                                   Post)
None

Consulting Services
                                                                                 Review        Advertisement
 Package        General              Estimated    Number of      Recruitment                                         Type of
                                                                                  (Prior/           Date                            Comments
 Number        Description             Value      Contracts        Method                                            Proposal
                                                                                   Post)        (quarter/year)
None


B.        Indicative List of Packages Required Under the Project

The following table provides an indicative list of goods, works and consulting services contracts
over the life of the project, other than those mentioned in previous sections (i.e., those expected
beyond the current period).
Goods and Works
                                            Estimated     Estimated
 Package                                                                Procurement           Review        Bidding
              General Description             Value       Number of                                                               Comments
 Number                                                                   Method            (Prior/Post)   Procedure
                                           (cumulative)   Contracts
 None



Consulting Services
                                            Estimated     Estimated
 Package                                                                 Recruitment          Review        Type of
              General Description             Value       Number of                                                               Comments
 Number                                                                    Method           (Prior/Post)    Proposal
                                           (cumulative)   Contracts
None


C.        List of Awarded and On-going, and Completed Contracts

The following tables list the awarded and on-going contracts, and completed contracts.
         40     Appendix 4

1.        Awarded and Ongoing Contracts

Goods and Works
                                                                                                       Date of ADB
                                                    Awarded                          Advertisement
 Package         General            Estimated                        Procurement                       Approval of
                                                    Contract                              Date                          Comments
 Number         Description           Value                             Method                          Contract
                                                     Value                            (quarter/year)
                                                                                                         Award
None

Consulting Services
                                                                                                       Date of ADB
                                                    Awarded                          Advertisement
 Package         General            Estimated                        Recruitment                        Approval of
                                                    Contract                              Date                          Comments
 Number         Description           Value                            Method                            Contract
                                                     Value                            (quarter/year)
                                                                                                          Award
CS1/CSDD      Detailed            4,187,700.00    4,024,241.00      QCBS            Q2 / 2014          02-JUN-15
              Engineering,
              Tendering and
              Construction
              Supervision
              Consulting
              Services
CS2/CSPM      Program             1,250,000.00    1,196,033.00      QCBS            Q1 / 2014          17-AUG-15
              Management
              Support
              Services
CS3/CSCE      Community           700,000.00      699,936.00        QCBS            Q1 / 2014          03-JUL-15
              Engagement
              and Small and
              Medium
              Enterprises
              Development
              Consulting
              Services
CS4/CSSD      Improved Urban      800,000.00      799,990.00        QCBS            Q2 / 2014          08-SEP-15
              Planning and
              Subcenter
              Development
              Consulting
              Services
ICS1-3        3 International     125,000.00      124,074.00        ICS             Q1 / 2015          10-SEP-15
              Consultants
ICS4-9        6 National          37,000.00       35,493.00         ICS             Q1 / 2015          10-SEP-15
              Consultants



D.        Non-ADB Financing

The following table lists goods, works and consulting services contracts over the life of the project,
financed by Non-ADB sources.
Goods and Works
                                          Estimated Value       Estimated Number         Procurement
          General Description               (cumulative)           of Contracts            Method                  Comments
 Sewage collector main in          1,440,577.00                1                   NCB                 EIB-financed
Bayankhoshuu subcenter
 Works of sewage collector main    1,170,000.00                1                   NCB                 EIB-financed
in Bayankhoshuu subcenter
 Flood protection and              1,800,000.00                1                   NCB                 EIB-financed
embankment (combined for
culverts and embankment
Bayankhoshuu and Selbe
subcenters)
 Water and sewage pipes in         1,085,000.00                1                   NCB                 EIB-financed
Bayankshoshuu and Selbe
subcenters (Phase 1)
 Water and sewage pipes for        746,000.00                  1                   NCB                 EIB-financed
Bayankshoshuu and Selbe
subcenters (Phase 2)
                                                                                             Appendix 4      41

 Construction of two water        4,230,000.00          1                  NCB             EIB-financed
reservoirs and supply pipes in
Bayankhoshuu and Selbe
subcenters
 Sewage collector main in Selbe   1,048,407.00          1                  NCB             EIB-financed
subcenter
 Water supply and sewage          4,000,000.00          1                  NCB             EIB-financed
connections in Bayankhoshuu
and Selbe subcenters
 Rehabilitation of water supply   4,500,000.00          1                  NCB             EIB-financed
and sewerage network
 Structural rehabilitation and    4,500,000.00          1                  NCB             EIB-financed
wastewater treatment
improvement at CWWTP


Consulting Services
                                      Estimated Value   Estimated Number     Recruitment
       General Description                                                                            Comments
                                       (cumulative)        of Contracts        Method
None
42     Appendix 4



E.          National Competitive Bidding

A.          Regulation and Reference Documents

1.        The procedures to be followed for national competitive bidding shall be those set forth
in the Public Procurement Law of Mongolia of 1 December 2005, effective 1 February 2006, as
amended in February 2007; July 2009; and February, June and December 2011 (hereinafter
referred to as PPLM), with the clarifications and modifications described in the following
paragraphs required for compliance with the provisions of the ADB Procurement Guidelines.

B.          Procurement Procedures

       1.           Eligibility [Recommended standard provision]

2.        The eligibility of bidders shall be as defined under section I of the Procurement
Guidelines; accordingly, no bidder or potential bidder should be declared ineligible for reasons
other than those provided in section I of the Guidelines, as amended from time to time.

3.        Government-owned enterprises in Mongolia shall be eligible for projects only if they
can establish that they: (i) are legally and financially autonomous; (ii) operate under the
principles of commercial law; and (iii) are not dependent agencies of the Borrower, Beneficiary,
Recipient Executing Agency and/or the Implementing Agency.

       2.           Participation of Foreign Bidders

4.        International bidders from eligible countries of ADB shall be allowed to participate in
local procurement and may
not be denied participation due to nationality.

       3.        Preferences

5.     No domestic preference shall be given for domestic bidders and for domestically
manufactured goods.

       4.        Prequalification and Registration

6.        Prequalification is discouraged for procurement contracts using NCB. When used,
particularly for works contracts, an individual prequalification exercise is acceptable for each
contract as is the use of a registration system (or approved standing list) of contractors based
on criteria such as experience, financial capacity, and technical capacity. Foreign bidders from
eligible countries must, however, be allowed to register and to bid without unreasonable cost or
additional requirements.

       5.        Rejection of All Bids and Rebidding

7.      All bids shall not be rejected or new bids invited without ADB's prior written
concurrence.

8.      No bid shall be rejected merely on the basis of a comparison with the estimated cost or
budget ceiling without ADB's prior written concurrence (with specific reference to Article 30 of
the PPLM).
                                                                                 Appendix 4     43


C.      Bidding Documents

       6.       Use of Bidding Documents

9.     National Standard Bidding Documents Goods and Works that have been approved for
procurement in ADB-financed projects shall be used.

       7.       Language

10.   Bidding documents may be prepared in other languages, but a copy of the bidding
documents must be made available in English and submitted to ADB for review.

       8.       Bid Validity

11.     Bidders shall be requested to extend the validity of their bids only under exceptional
circumstances and the Executing or Implementing Agency, as the case may be, shall
communicate such request for extension to all bidders before the date of expiry of their bids.
When the procurement is subject to ADB's prior review, the Executing or Implementing Agency,
as the case may be, shall obtain in a timely manner the prior written concurrence of ADB for the
extension of the bid validity period.

       9.       Bid Evaluation

12.     Evaluation and qualification criteria, and submission requirements, to be used in each
bidding activity shall be clearly specified in the bidding documents. The evaluation of bids shall
be done in strict adherence to the criteria specified in the bidding documents.

13.     Negotiations with bidders shall not be undertaken before award of contract, except as
provided in Paragraph 2.63 of ADB's Procurement Guidelines A bidder shall not be required, as
a condition for award, to undertake obligations not specified in the bidding documents or
otherwise to modify its bid as originally submitted.

14.      At the same time that notification on award of contract is given to the successful bidder,
the results of the bid evaluation shall be posted on a well-known freely accessible website
(namely Mongolia's Ministry of Finance
e-procurement website: www.e-procurement.mn) identifying the bid and lot numbers and
providing information on the: (i) name of each bidder that submitted a bid; (ii) bid prices as read
out at bid opening; (iii) names of bidders whose bids were rejected and the reasons for their
rejection; and (iv) name of the winning bidder, and the price it offered, as well as the duration
and summary scope of the contract awarded. The Executing Agency or Implementing Agency,
as the case may be, shall respond in writing to unsuccessful bidders who seek explanations on
the grounds on which their bids were not selected.

       10.      ADB Policy Clauses

15.      A provision shall be included in all NCB works and goods contracts financed by ADB
requiring suppliers and contractors to permit ADB to inspect their accounts and records and
other documents relating to the bid submission and the performance of the contract, and to
have them audited by auditors appointed by ADB.

16.     A provision shall be included in all bidding documents for NCB works and goods
44     Appendix 4



contracts financed by ADB stating that the Borrower shall reject a proposal for award if it
determines that the bidder recommended for award has, directly or through an agent, engaged
in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive or obstructive practices in competing for the contract in
question.

17. A provision shall be included in all bidding documents for NCB works and goods contracts
financed by ADB stating that ADB will declare a firm or individual ineligible, either indefinitely or
for a stated period, to be awarded a contract financed by ADB, if it at any time determines that
the firm or individual has, directly or through an agent, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive,
coercive or obstructive practices or any integrity violation in competing for, or in executing, ADB-
financed contract.
                                                                                 Appendix 4      45


D.     Consultant's Terms of Reference for Project 1

51.      Implementation of tranche 1 of the investment program will require 222.5 person-months
of international and 749 person-months of national consultants with expertise in (i) urban
infrastructure planning, design, tendering, construction, and operation and management; and (ii)
institutional strengthening and capacity building in urban planning and management and service
delivery. The consultants will provide the following services: (i) preparation of detailed
engineering design, specifications, bill of quantities, and bidding documents, tendering and
construction supervision for (a) urban and social infrastructure and access roads, (b) water
supply and wastewater systems and the turnkey procurement for the water and wastewater
operation improvement project for the Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority
(USUG), and (c) district heating system including heating facilities, and heat distribution pipe
networks; and (ii) institutional strengthening and capacity building covering (a) implementation
of the capacity building and institutional support plan—support to improve urban planning and
subcenter development, the implementation of institutional and regulatory reforms to improve
the service providers, and to strengthen program implementation capacities; and (b) consulting
services for community engagement and small and medium enterprise development. The
outline consulting assignments are summarized below.

52.      The preparation of detailed engineering design, tendering, and construction
supervision will require 448.5 person-months of consultants—99.5 person-months of
international and 349 person-months of national consultants and advisers. The consultants will
have expertise in engineering design and construction supervision of heating systems, water
supply and wastewater systems, urban roads and drainage, and public facilities; urban design
and landscaping; geodetic engineering; and AutoCAD operations. The consultants will (i) carry
out all surveys, field verification, studies, collection of data, and analyses needed to prepare the
detailed engineering designs and contract documents for the above components, and for the
turnkey procurement for the water and wastewater operation improvement project; (ii) prepare
detailed engineering designs, technical specifications, bill of quantities, cost estimates, and
tender documents for the above components; (iii) provide support to the program management
office (PMO) for the supervision of construction and compliance with project designs and
specifications; (iv) develop the project risk management procedures; (v) update and/or finalize
required safeguards documents, including the resettlement plan, initial environment examination
or environment impact assessment, and environment management plan in compliance with
ADB guidelines and the relevant frameworks agreed between ADB and the Government of
Mongolia; and (vi) act as resource persons for training and development activities.

53.     The implementation of the institutional strengthening and capacity building
component 1: improved subcenter planning and development will require 69 person-
months of consultants—20 person-months of international and 49 person-months of national
consultants and advisers. The consultants will have expertise in urban development finance,
urban design and planning, real estate market analysis, land management, legal aspects, urban
economics, micro-enterprise and housing finance, and project monitoring. The consultants will
(i) support the MUB in the establishment the mechanisms and regulations for subcenter
redevelopment; provide orientation and training of relevant staff engaged in the subcenter
redevelopment process; (ii) closely monitor the planning and redevelopment process to ensure
the integration of the current residents into the subcenter redevelopment plan; (iii) facilitate
community and private development and financing entities consultations on the subcenter
redevelopment concept and plans; (iv) formulate policy options, approaches, and tools and
methods to facilitate the formulation of and communication on the subcenter plans and ger
areas development; and (vi) develop appropriate urban planning/design regulations for ger
46     Appendix 4



areas, Ger Area Development Agency, Ger Area Housing Project, and PMO staff on all aspects
of urban planning and management; and (vii) act as resource persons for the training and
development activities.

54.      The implementation of the institutional strengthening and capacity building
component 2: improved operations and management by service providers and
institutional and regulatory reform will require 45 person-months of consultants—12 person-
months of international and 33 person-months of national consultants and advisers. The
consultants will have expertise in institutional and regulatory reform, public-private partnerships
and transactions, public utility tariffs and economics, water and waste water operations and
maintenance, and wastewater treatment plant operations and maintenance. The consultants will
(i) assist USUG in the implementation of operation and maintenance (O&M) management
improvements to control nonrevenue water, monitor installation of the new operational controls,
and assist USUG in developing its business planning processes; (ii) assist the MUB (PMO) in
the selection and contracting out the heating plant agency to operate the new heating facilities;
(iii) provide on the job and formal training to USUG, OSNAAG, kantor, and possible heating
agency staff on all aspects of program management; (iv) improve provisions in the OSNAAG
management and the USUG performance contracts; (v) improve the revenue base of service
providers; (vi) improve efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery; (vii) improve the capacity
of Water Supply Regulatory Commission and the Energy Regulatory Commission; (viii) set clear
policy directions based on comprehensive studies and recommendations to facilitate the
Government of Mongolia’s priority for the development state of the art environmentally friendly
gas-fired district heating; (ix) supervise the implementation of the water and wastewater
operational improvements; and (x) act as resource persons for the training and development
activities.

55.      The implementation of the institutional strengthening and capacity building
component 3: strengthened program implementation capacity will require 97.5 person-
months of consultants—33 person-months of international and 64.5 person-months of national
consultants and advisers. The consultants will have expertise in the implementation of urban
services projects, municipal engineering, urban and/or utility services finance, procurement,
social safeguards and gender, environmental management, and financial management and
accounting. The international and national financial experts to be engaged must have a
recognized professional accountancy qualification, such as Chartered Accountant or Certified
Public Accountant, and financial management and accounting. The consultants will (i) assist the
MUB in staffing the PMO and adopting procedures and safeguards—involuntary resettlement
and environment—which are consistent with the guidelines of ADB and the Government of
Mongolia; (ii) establish detailed work schedules and the work load distribution for the PMO; (iii)
provide on the job and formal training to PMO staff on all aspects of program management; (iv)
set up and operationalize the financial management and accounting system for the investment
program, including disbursements; (v) monitor and ensure the effective implementation of the
resettlement plan, the environmental management plan, and other safeguard requirements; and
(vi) act as resource persons for the training and development activities.

56.     Community engagement and small- and medium enterprise development services
will require 78 person-months of consultants—18 person-months of international and 60 person-
months of national consultants and advisers. The consultants will have expertise in social and
poverty analysis, community development, small- and medium- enterprises (SME) development,
gender, communications, social mobilization, implement and monitor SAP and GAP, and legal
aspects. The consultants will facilitate and guide (i) the capacity building of the CDCs and SME
development council; (ii) consultations; (iii) the registration of the CDCs and/or SDCs, formalize
                                                                               Appendix 4     47


their organizational, project, and financial management systems, policies and procedures, and
provide legal support to the CDCs; (iv) the implementation of the SME development plan; (v) the
consultation and participation of women and other vulnerable community members; (vi) the
CDCs to engage into community contracts with the construction companies; (vii) the
information, education, and communication of the project; (viii) the CDCs and SDCs in
mobilizing resources; (ix) the consultations with affected people to ensure smooth planning, land
acquisition and resettlement negotiation, and implementation of project 1; (x) the monitoring of
current residents integration into the redevelopment plan of the targeted areas; (xi) capacity
building on O&M, estate management, community contracting, savings mobilization and micro-
credit operations, and CDC engagement in the subcenter redevelopment process and (xii)
provide technical guidance through formal and on-the-job training.
48       Appendix 4



                                          Basic Data for Tranche 2

 Project Name: Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program–Tranche 2
 Project Number: 45007-005                          Approval Number:
 Country: Mongolia                                  Executing Agency: Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
 Project Procurement Classification: Category B     Implementing Agency:
 Project Procurement Risk: Moderate                 N/A
 Project Financing Amount: US$ 121,140,000
 ADB Financing: US$ 66,350,000
                                                    Project Closing Date: 28 February 2022
 Cofinancing (ADB Administered):
 Non-ADB Financing: US$ 54,790,000
 Date of First Procurement Plan: 27 November
                                                    Date of this Procurement Plan: 27 November 2016
 2016

 A.      Methods, Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan

 1.       Procurement and Consulting Methods and Thresholds

 Except as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) may otherwise agree, the following process
 thresholds shall apply to procurement of goods and works.

                                            Procurement of Goods and Works
                  Method                                   Threshold                               Comments
 International Competitive Bidding for Goods     US$ 2,000,000 and Above              Prior
 National Competitive Bidding for Goods          Between US$ 100,001 and              The first NCB is subject to prior
                                                 US$ 1,999,999                        review, thereafter post review.
 Shopping for Goods                              Up to US$ 100,000                    Post
 International Competitive Bidding for Works     US$ 5,000,000 and Above              Prior
 National Competitive Bidding for Works          Between US$ 100,001 and              The first NCB is subject to prior
                                                 US$ 4,999,999                        review, thereafter post review.
 Shopping for Works                              Up to US$ 100,000                    Post
 Community Participation in Procurement for      Up to US$ 1,000,000                  Prior
 Works

                                                 Consulting Services
                            Method                                                   Comments
 Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Firm       Prior review; quality-cost ratio 90:10


 2.       Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost $1 Million or More

 The following table lists goods and works contracts for which the procurement activity is
 either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.

                                                               Review                         Advertisement
     Package     General        Estimated      Procurement                    Bidding
                                                                (Prior/                            Date         Comments
     Number     Description       Value          Method                      Procedure
                                                                 Post)                         (quarter/year)
 None


 3.       Consulting Services Contracts Estimated to Cost $100,000 or More

 The following table lists consulting services contracts for which the recruitment activity is
 either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.
                                                                                                   Appendix 4       49


                                                               Review      Advertisement
  Package       General          Estimated     Recruitment                                     Type of
                                                                (Prior/         Date                            Comments
  Number       Description         Value         Method                                       Proposal
                                                                 Post)      (quarter/year)

T2-CS01       Detailed          4,960,000.00   QCBS          Prior          Q2 / 2017        FTP            Assignment:
              engineering                                                                                   International
              design and
              supervision
                                                                                                            Quality-Cost
                                                                                                            Ratio: 90:10

                                                                                                            Comments:
                                                                                                            As proposed
                                                                                                            in the
                                                                                                            updated FAM


T2-CS02       Institutional     3,660,000.00   QCBS          Prior          Q2 / 2017        FTP            Assignment:
              strengthening                                                                                 International
              and capacity
              building
                                                                                                            Quality-Cost
                                                                                                            Ratio: 90:10

                                                                                                            Comments:
                                                                                                            As proposed
                                                                                                            in the
                                                                                                            updated FAM




4.        Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost Less than $1 Million and
          Consulting Services Contracts Less than $100,000 (Smaller Value Contracts)

The following table lists smaller-value goods, works and consulting services contracts for
which the activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.

Goods and Works

                                           Number                     Review                   Advertisement
Package      General          Estimated               Procurement                 Bidding
                                             of                        (Prior/                      Date          Comments
Number      Description         Value                   Method                   Procedure
                                          Contracts                     Post)                   (quarter/year)

None


Consulting Services
                                           Number                     Review     Advertisement
Package       General         Estimated               Recruitment                                     Type of
                                             of                        (Prior/        Date                        Comments
Number       Description        Value                   Method                                       Proposal
                                          Contracts                     Post)     (quarter/year)
None



B.     Indicative List of Packages Required Under the Project

The following table provides an indicative list of goods, works and consulting services
contracts over the life of the project, other than those mentioned in previous sections (i.e.,
those expected beyond the current period).
50     Appendix 4


Goods and Works
                                  Estimated       Estimated
 Package       General                                         Procurement     Review        Bidding
                                    Value        Number of                                                   Comments
 Number       Description                                        Method      (Prior/Post)   Procedure
                                 (cumulative)     Contracts
ASKG       Kindergartens for     5,290,000.00   1             ICB            Prior          1S1E        Prequalification of
           Bayankhoshuu,                                                                                Bidders: N
           Dambadarjaa,
           Denjiin, and Selbe
                                                                                                        Domestic Preference
                                                                                                        Applicable: N

                                                                                                        Bidding Document:
                                                                                                        Small Works
BAHP       Bayankhoshuu          8,750,000.00   1             ICB            Prior          1S1E        Prequalification of
           heating plant                                                                                Bidders: N

                                                                                                        Domestic Preference
                                                                                                        Applicable: N

                                                                                                        Bidding Document:
                                                                                                        Small Works

                                                                                                        Comments: Plant
                                                                                                        (design, supply, and
                                                                                                        installation)
BDSC       Sports complexes      4,980,000.00   1             NCB            Post           1S1E        Prequalification of
           for Bayankhoshuu                                                                             Bidders: N
           amd Dambadarjaa
                                                                                                        Domestic Preference
                                                                                                        Applicable: N

                                                                                                        Bidding Document:
                                                                                                        Small Works
CEP        Community             1,000,000.00   1             CPP            Prior                      Comments: Includes
           engagement                                                                                   40 micro-projects
           package
DARI       Dambadaarja road      7,310,000.00   1             ICB            Prior          1S1E        Prequalification of
           and associated                                                                               Bidders: N
           infrastructure
                                                                                                        Domestic Preference
                                                                                                        Applicable: N

                                                                                                        Bidding Document:
                                                                                                        Small Works
DDCD       Community             4,890,000.00   1             NCB            Post           1S1E        Prequalification of
           development                                                                                  Bidders: N
           service centers for
           Dambadarjaa and
                                                                                                        Domestic Preference
           Denjiin
                                                                                                        Applicable: N

                                                                                                        Bidding Document:
                                                                                                        Small Works
DDEC       Electricity and       3,420,000.00   1             NCB            Post           1S1E        Prequalification of
           telecommunication                                                                            Bidders: N
           for Dambadaarja
           and Denjiin
                                                                                                        Domestic Preference
                                                                                                        Applicable: N

                                                                                                        Bidding Document:
                                                                                                        Small Works
DDPK       Public parks for      1,480,000.00   1             NCB            Post           1S1E        Prequalification of
           Bayankhoshuu                                                                                 Bidders: N
           and Denjiin
                                                                                          Appendix 4        51


                                Estimated     Estimated
Package         General                                   Procurement      Review        Bidding
                                  Value       Number of                                                  Comments
Number         Description                                  Method       (Prior/Post)   Procedure
                               (cumulative)   Contracts
                                                                                                    Domestic Preference
                                                                                                    Applicable: N

                                                                                                    Bidding Document:
                                                                                                    Small Works
DEHP        Denjiin heating    8,750,000.00   1           ICB            Prior          1S1E        Prequalification of
            plant                                                                                   Bidders: N

                                                                                                    Domestic Preference
                                                                                                    Applicable: N

                                                                                                    Bidding Document:
                                                                                                    Small Works

                                                                                                    Comments: Plant
                                                                                                    (design, supply, and
                                                                                                    installation)
DERI        Denjiin road and   8,760,000.00   1           ICB            Prior          1S1E        Prequalification of
            associated                                                                              Bidders: N
            infrastructure
                                                                                                    Domestic Preference
                                                                                                    Applicable: N

                                                                                                    Bidding Document:
                                                                                                    Small Works
HSSC        Heating supply     2,000,000.00   1           NCB            Prior          1S1E        Prequalification of
            secondary                                                                               Bidders: N
            connections
                                                                                                    Domestic Preference
                                                                                                    Applicable: N

                                                                                                    Bidding Document:
                                                                                                    Small Works
SEHP        Selbe heating      11,120,000.0   1           ICB            Prior          1S1E        Prequalification of
            plant              0                                                                    Bidders: N

                                                                                                    Domestic Preference
                                                                                                    Applicable: N

                                                                                                    Bidding Document:
                                                                                                    Large Works

                                                                                                    Comments: Plant
                                                                                                    (design, supply, and
                                                                                                    installation)


Consulting Services
                                Estimated     Estimated
Package         General                                    Recruitment     Review        Type of
                                  Value       Number of                                                 Comments
Number         Description                                   Method      (Prior/Post)   Proposal
                               (cumulative)   Contracts
None


C.     Non-ADB Financing

The following table lists goods, works and consulting services contracts over the life of the
project, financed by Non-ADB sources.
52     Appendix 4




Goods and Works
                                                                     Estimated
                                               Estimated Value                    Procurement
            General Description                                      Number of                  Comments
                                                (cumulative)                        Method
                                                                     Contracts
Drainage for Bayankhoshuu, Dambadarjaa, and   3,130,000.00       1               NCB
Denjiin (including ravine improvement in
Bayankhoshuu)
Water and wastewater equipment for            1,020,000.00       1               NCB
Dambadarjaa and Denjiin
Water supply network rehabilitation and       5,000,000.00       1               ICB
expansion
Wastewater network rehabilitation and         3,100,000.00       1               NCB
expansion
Water and wastewater secondary connections    2,500,000.00       1               NCB



Consulting Services
                                                                     Estimated
                                               Estimated Value                    Recruitment
            General Description                                      Number of                  Comments
                                                (cumulative)                        Method
                                                                     Contracts
None
                                                                                  Appendix 4      53


D.     National Competitive Bidding

A.     Regulation and Reference Documents

1. The procedures to be followed for national competitive bidding shall be those set forth in the
Public Procurement Law of Mongolia of 1 December 2005, effective 1 February 2006, as
amended in February 2007; July 2009; and February, June and December 2011 (hereinafter
referred to as PPLM), with the clarifications and modifications described in the following
paragraphs required for compliance with the provisions of the ADB Procurement Guidelines.

B.     Procurement Procedures

       1.      Eligibility [Recommended standard provision]

2.      The eligibility of bidders shall be as defined under section I of the Procurement
Guidelines; accordingly, no bidder or potential bidder should be declared ineligible for reasons
other than those provided in section I of the Guidelines, as amended from time to time.

3.      Government-owned enterprises in Mongolia shall be eligible for projects only if they can
establish that they: (i) are legally and financially autonomous; (ii) operate under the principles of
commercial law; and (iii) are not dependent agencies of the Borrower, Beneficiary, Recipient
Executing Agency and/or the Implementing Agency.

       2.      Participation of Foreign Bidders

4.      International bidders from eligible countries of ADB shall be allowed to participate in
local procurement and may not be denied participation due to nationality.

       3.      Preferences

5.    No domestic preference shall be given for domestic bidders and for domestically
manufactured goods.

       4.      Prequalification and Registration

6.       Prequalification is discouraged for procurement contracts using NCB. When used,
particularly for works contracts, an individual prequalification exercise is acceptable for each
contract as is the use of a registration system (or approved standing list) of contractors based
on criteria such as experience, financial capacity, and technical capacity. Foreign bidders from
eligible countries must, however, be allowed to register and to bid without unreasonable cost or
additional requirements.

       5.      Rejection of All Bids and Rebidding

7.     All bids shall not be rejected or new bids invited without ADB's prior written concurrence.

8.     No bid shall be rejected merely on the basis of a comparison with the estimated cost or
budget ceiling without ADB's prior written concurrence (with specific reference to Article 30 of
the PPLM).
54     Appendix 4



C.     Bidding Documents

       6.      Use of Bidding Documents

9.     National Standard Bidding Documents Goods and Works that have been approved for
procurement in ADB-financed projects shall be used.

       7.      Language

10.  Bidding documents may be prepared in other languages, but a copy of the bidding
documents must be made available in English and submitted to ADB for review.

       8.      Bid Validity

11.    Bidders shall be requested to extend the validity of their bids only under exceptional
circumstances and the Executing or Implementing Agency, as the case may be, shall
communicate such request for extension to all bidders before the date of expiry of their bids.
When the procurement is subject to ADB's prior review, the Executing or Implementing Agency,
as the case may be, shall obtain in a timely manner the prior written concurrence of ADB for the
extension of the bid validity period.

       9.      Bid Evaluation

12.    Evaluation and qualification criteria, and submission requirements, to be used in each
bidding activity shall be clearly specified in the bidding documents. The evaluation of bids shall
be done in strict adherence to the criteria specified in the bidding documents.

13.    Negotiations with bidders shall not be undertaken before award of contract, except as
provided in Paragraph 2.63 of ADB's Procurement Guidelines A bidder shall not be required, as
a condition for award, to undertake obligations not specified in the bidding documents or
otherwise to modify its bid as originally submitted.

14.     At the same time that notification on award of contract is given to the successful bidder,
the results of the bid evaluation shall be posted on a well-known freely accessible website
(namely Mongolia's Ministry of Finance e-procurement website: www.e-procurement.mn)
identifying the bid and lot numbers and providing information on the: (i) name of each bidder
that submitted a bid; (ii) bid prices as read out at bid opening; (iii) names of bidders whose bids
were rejected and the reasons for their rejection; and (iv) name of the winning bidder, and the
price it offered, as well as the duration and summary scope of the contract awarded. The
Executing Agency or Implementing Agency, as the case may be, shall respond in writing to
unsuccessful bidders who seek explanations on the grounds on which their bids were not
selected.

       10.     ADB Policy Clauses

15.     A provision shall be included in all NCB works and goods contracts financed by ADB
requiring suppliers and contractors to permit ADB to inspect their accounts and records and
other documents relating to the bid submission and the performance of the contract, and to
have them audited by auditors appointed by ADB.

16.    A provision shall be included in all bidding documents for NCB works and goods
                                                                                  Appendix 4      55


contracts financed by ADB stating that the Borrower shall reject a proposal for award if it
determines that the bidder recommended for award has, directly or through an agent, engaged
in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive or obstructive practices in competing for the contract in
question.

17. A provision shall be included in all bidding documents for NCB works and goods contracts
financed by ADB stating that ADB will declare a firm or individual ineligible, either indefinitely or
for a stated period, to be awarded a contract financed by ADB, if it at any time determines that
the firm or individual has, directly or through an agent, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive,
coercive or obstructive practices or any integrity violation in competing for, or in executing, ADB-
financed contract.
56     Appendix 4



F.     Consultants’ Terms of Reference for Project 2

57.      The preparation of detailed engineering design, tendering, and construction
supervision will require 565 person-months of consulting inputs—150 person-months of
international and 415 person-months of national consultants. The consultants will have
expertise in engineering design and construction supervision of public facilities, heating
systems, water supply and wastewater systems, urban roads and drainage, electricity and
telecommunications, and public facilities; urban design and landscaping; geodetic engineering;
and AutoCAD operations. The consultants will (i) carry out all surveys, field verification, studies,
collection of data, and analyses needed to prepare the detailed engineering designs and
contract documents; (ii) prepare detailed engineering designs, technical specifications, bill of
quantities, cost estimates, and tender documents; (iii) provide support to the PMO for the
supervision of construction and compliance with project designs and specifications; (iv) develop
the project risk management procedures; (v) conduct engineering works and technical due
diligence for the feasibility study for Project 3 to be prepared by PMO support consultants; and
(vi) act as resource persons for technical training and development activities.

58.      The institutional strengthening and capacity development for Tranche 2 and
feasibility studies for Tranche 3 will require 424 person-months of consulting inputs—96 person-
months of international and 328 person-months national consultants. Details are described
below.

59.     Program management and implementation support to PMO for project
implementation and technical audit, financial management, compliance with ADB's Safeguard
Policy Statement (2009) and Mongolia's safeguard requirements, institutional strengthening and
reporting, capacity building support, preparing and formulating the feasibility study for Tranche
3, and other activities as appropriate. The consultants will (i) establish detailed work schedules
and the workload distribution for the PMO; (ii) provide on-the-job and formal training to PMO
staff on all aspects of program management; (iii) ensure the use of the financial management
and accounting system for the investment program, including disbursements; (iv) monitor and
ensure the effective implementation of the land acquisition and resettlement plan, environmental
management plan, social action plan, and gender action plan; (v) act as resource persons for
training and development activities; (vi) provide procurement assistance, bidding document
review, contract bid review and evaluation, and contract management and disbursement; and
(vii) update and finalize required safeguards documents, including the resettlement plan, initial
environment examination or environment impact assessment, and environment management
plan in compliance with ADB's guidelines and the relevant frameworks agreed between ADB
and the Government of Mongolia; (viii) hire independent resettlement external monitoring
consultants; and (ix) produce Tranche 3 feasibility studies and related loans documents at a
quality standard acceptable for the MUB and ADB.

60.      Urban planning and subcenter development for improved subcenter redevelopment
policies, institutional structures, processes and regulations to support community and private
sector-led redevelopment. Technical support will be targeted at the combined Ger Area
Development Agency (GADA), Ger Area Housing Project (GAHP), Ulaanbaatar Housing
Organization (NOSK), and PMO, and the facilitation of redevelopment by government,
communities, and private sector. The component will assist in developing the long-term
institutional arrangements for subcenter and ger areas redevelopment centered on appropriate
regulations and standards for subcenter redevelopment. In addition, this assistance envisages
that subcenter planning will be strengthened with increased participation and organizational and
management capacity at the community level, and far greater involvement of the private sector.
                                                                                  Appendix 4      57


The assistance should ensure that the MUB and local government staff, communities, and
business groups are able to undertake innovative subcenter redevelopment, and manage the
land readjustment process effectively.

61.     The consultants will have expertise in urban development finance, institutional
development, urban renewal and land readjustment, land management, regulatory and legal
aspects of areas designated for redevelopment or renewal, developing appropriate standards
for ger area improvements, urban economics, and micro-enterprise and housing finance. The
consultants will (i) support the MUB in the review and refinement of the mechanisms and
strengthen regulations for subcenter redevelopment areas; (ii) review the redevelopment
process initiated under Tranche 1, especially the community-led block planning work to ensure
the integration of the views of the residents into the subcenter redevelopment plan; (iii) facilitate
community, private sector development, business, and financing entities involved in subcenter
redevelopment; (iv) facilitate the preparation of subcenter business development plans for
Tranche 2 and other subcenters; (v) strengthen an appropriate institutional structure for
subcenter redevelopment that focuses on the redevelopment on a block-by-block basis within
the context of the proposed merger of GADA, GAHP, and NOSK, and the subcenter business
development plans that guide block redevelopment; and (vi) act as resource persons for the
training and development activities, and provide orientation and training of relevant staff
engaged in the subcenter redevelopment process and relevant aspects of urban
renewal/redevelopment, land readjustment, block development, private sector involvement,
housing finance and management.. The consultants will facilitate, prepare, and engage with the
existing agencies—GADA, GAHP, NOSK, and PMO—to take up their new roles regarding
subcenter redevelopment; and provide necessary inputs for Tranche 3 feasibility studies
preparation.

62.     Community participation and micro, small- and medium-sized enterprise (MSME)
development to promote an inclusive subcenter development through active involvement and
meaningful engagement of the communities and business owners of the areas. This community
and MSME engagement and development component is envisaged to be relevant throughout
the project period, including during detailed design and implementation phases of Project 2. It
will ensure that the plans and projects developed out of the needs identified during the
community consultations are respected throughout the project period and supported for the
implementation by the local communities and MSME runners. This will be achieved through
continuous consultation, mobilization, organization, and capacity building of the community
organizations in identifying and analyzing their needs, developing their action plans, and actively
engaging with the project team to build consensus on the investment projects. Further, the
consulting services will facilitate better understanding by the vulnerable groups (i.e., women,
children, and the very poor) on how they could be capacitated to optimally benefit from the
project, as well as put in place mitigating measures to address possible negative impacts that
may result from the investment projects. Since the families will pay for the costs of connection to
water, heating, and sewerage system, economic development interventions will be a priority in
this component to prepare the families to afford the connection costs. The SME development
plan, which includes skills training for better employability, will be part of the capacity
development and empowerment. The consultants will also provide necessary inputs for Tranche
3 feasibility studies preparation.

63.     The detailed design phase outputs are to (i) mobilize and organize community
members, as well as the business owners in the two subcenters, into primary groups, block,
cluster and subcenter community development councils (CDCs), and business councils to
support the development of the land use plan, local development plan, and investment plan of
58      Appendix 4



the project; (ii) facilitate and support the block, khoroo and subcenter CDCs and business
councils identify and prioritize their needs and develop their respective community action plans
(CAPs) or SME development plans as basis for the investment plans that will be supported by
the project; (iii) facilitate the CDCs’ and business councils’ continuous engagement with the
project team to build consensus concerning overall strategy of urban functions development and
ensure that the overall strategy consider the needs and constraints of the women, children,
elderly, the very poor, and the differently-abled persons; (iv) facilitate the skills mapping (current
and skills of interest) of the community members and matching with the demand of the SMEs
leading to the SME development plan, as well as linking the community groups with training
institutions providing vocational and technical skills training; and (v) sustain awareness and
support to the project by different stakeholders.

64.     The implementation phase outputs are to (i) facilitate the linkage of trained community
members with institutions for employment to improve incomes and assist to start savings
movement to prepare them to eventually afford connection costs to basic services; (ii) facilitate
further capacity building of the CDCs/business councils to be viable organizations and
meaningfully engage in the project and ensure that the project reflect other needs for small
access infrastructures for the communities included in their CAPs and opportunities for women
to substantively get involved in the project and other activities in the subcenter; and (iii) facilitate
proper monitoring and evaluation of the different aspects of this components, which will inform
policy and program reforms in the government.
                                                                                 Appendix 4     59


                                              VII.     SAFEGUARDS

A.         Safeguards for Project I

65.    Environment. Project 1 was classified as category B for environment by the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) as it will not have significant and/or irreversible negative
environmental impacts. An initial environmental examination (IEE), including environmental
management plan (EMP) for project 1, as well as an environmental assessment and review
framework (EARF) for the entire multitranche financing facility (MFF) investment program, have
been prepared. The EARF provides guidance for the selection, screening and categorization,
environmental assessment, and preparation and implementation of environmental safeguard
plans of projects and subprojects prepared after approval of the investment program to comply
with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS) (2009) and the Law on Environmental Impact
Assessment of Mongolia (2012). The IEE, including a comprehensive EMP for project 1, was
prepared by the project preparatory technical assistance consultants on behalf of the
Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB). Domestically, project 1 was subject to general
environmental impact assessment by the Ministry of Environment and Green Development
(MEGD). The conclusion from the general environmental impact assessment required the
preparation of a detailed environmental impact assessment (DEIA) for each subcenter,
expected to get approval from MEGD in October 2013.

66.     Institutional responsibilities. The EARF and EMP specify the roles and responsibilities
of institutions (including the MUB, the program management office [PMO], project units,
contractors, and environment consultants) in overall environmental management.

67.     The MUB as executing agency has the overall responsibility for compliance with EARF,
EMPs, and IEEs. The PMO will handle day-to-day activities under the program. The PMO will
ensure compliance with assurances, including preparation, finalization, and implementation of
the EMP for each tranche. It will be staffed with at least one environmental safeguard staff (an
environmental engineer/scientist). The PMO environmental safeguard staff will be responsible
for the coordination and supervision of the implementation of the EARF and project 1 EMP,
including (but not limited to) (i) updating IEE and EMP after detailed project design for project 1
and subsequent projects; (ii) overseeing incorporation of EMP recommendations into the
bidding documents; (iii) ensuring the procurement of environmentally responsible contractors;
(iv) ensuring that DEIA approval by MEGD has been secured prior to the awarding of civil works
contract; (v) setting up of baseline ambient air quality, noise and vibration levels, ground- and
surface        water       quality,       and      baseline      in      concerned         khoroos
25
   for subsequent projects; (vi) setting up, coordinating, and reporting on the grievance redress
mechanism (GRM, see below); (vii) monitoring contractors to ensure adherence to the project 1
EMP and the contractor EMPs; (viii) preparing monthly reports on project EMP implementation
to the PMO; (ix) coordinating consultation with local stakeholders as required, informing them of
imminent construction works, updating them on the latest project development activities, GRM,
etc.; (x) supporting the environment consultants in conducting training, EMP compliance
reviews, annual reporting, etc.; and (xi) coordinating the preparation of IEEs, including EMPs,
for subsequent tranches.

68.    Contractors will be required to formulate contractor EMPs with complete management
systems for adverse impacts, e.g., dust control, noise control, traffic management, addressing
as minimum the requirements of the project 1 EMP. The contractor EMPs will be reviewed and

25
     Same with kheseg, lowest administrative structures in the community.
60         Appendix 4



cleared by the PMO, and by the MEGD, as necessary. To ensure that the contractors comply
with the project 1 EMP provisions, the PMO will prepare and provide the following specification
clauses for incorporation into the bidding procedures: (i) a list of environmental management
requirements to be budgeted by the bidders in their proposals; (ii) environmental clauses for
contractual terms and conditions; and (iii) the full project 1 EMP and detailed environmental
impact assessments (DEIAs) in Mongolian.

69.     In compliance with the agreed upon procurement plan, the PMO will procure the
services of environment consultants to provide support in (i) project preparation including
updating the project 1 EMP; (ii) training; (iii) quarterly environmental quality monitoring (air,
surface and ground water, and noise); (iv) annual project EMP implementation reporting; (v)
identifying environment-related implementation issues and necessary corrective actions; and
(vi) undertaking site visits as required.

70.     Environment GRM. Environment safeguards related complaints or disputes will be
handled in accordance with the GRM established for the investment program and project 1. The
GRM will be linked to the Citizen Service Center of the Office of the Mayor of Ulaanbaatar
(established in 2012 by virtue of Mayor’s Ordinance А/675 for a centralized system of receiving,
referring, solving, and responding to public grievances in the Capital City). The environment
specialist of the PMO will coordinate the environment GRM. The GRM is defined in the EMP

71.     Information disclosure. In compliance with the SPS, environmental information related
to tranche 1 components will be disclosed as follows: (i) the environmental impact assessments
(EIAs) or IEEs for each tranche will be disclosed on ADB’s project website (www.adb.org), and
will be available for consultation in the PMO office; (ii) DEIAs approved by the Ministry of MEGD
will be disclosed on the MEGD website; and (iii) annual EMP implementation report will be
available at www.adb.org.

72.      Resettlement. The land acquisition and resettlement plans (LARPs) for Selbe and
Bayankhoshuu for Project 1 have been updated and implementation is ongoing. MUB and PMO
are cooperating more closely to ensure that the LARPs will be implemented and monitored
satisfactorily. The resettlement framework, applicable to all subprojects implemented under the
investment program, has been reviewed and updated.26 It now reflects the MUB’s recent
regulation, a more harmonized grievance handling system based on existing practice, new
institutional arrangements, and other provisions derived from the updated LARPs from Project
1. No principle and entitlement in the original framework has been downgraded. All safeguards
documents will be reviewed and concurred by ADB, disclosed to the affected people and
communities, and posted on the ADB and MUB websites. The PMO has adequate staff and has
demonstrated capacity for grievance redress, social mobilization, and awareness creation.
Trainings related to safeguards will continue to be provided as specified in the LARPs. Social
safeguards monitoring and reporting to ADB will be continued on a semiannual basis.

73.     Institutional arrangements. The executing agency and implementing agency will be
the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar. The vice mayor in charge of urban development and investment
of the MUB will be responsible for coordinating the program implementation. A program
management office (PMO) has been established under the vice mayor in charge of
Infrastructure and Ger Districts Development Department. The PMO director will be the vice
mayor in charge of the urban development and investment. The PMO will be operational and

26
     Review and updating of the resettlement framework is stipulated in the Framework Financing Agreement, Schedule
     5, para. 3.
                                                                                Appendix 4     61


fully staffed by September 2013. External staff will be recruited as needed, including specialists
in land acquisition and resettlement (LAR). The PMO will also be assisted by a technical
assistance consultant team who will be engaged—as part of the capacity building/institutional
support to provide advisory and capacity building services to the executing agency and the
PMO. LAR process will be supported by community engagement consulting services to ensure
smooth negotiations with the affected people. Resettlement plan implementation activities will
also be overseen by a resettlement plan implementing committee (RPIC). The RPIC will be
comprised of key government officials at the district and khoroo levels, and other relevant27
government departments and agencies from the MUB, including representatives of Ulaanbaatar
property relations department, the PMO, and representatives of affected entities, women, and
NGOs. The RPIC will be formed at the start of subproject design so that affected entities’ input
may be incorporated into the design. This will also ensure that key government institutions
including local governments are involved and their coordination is ensured in finalizing the
resettlement plans for tranche 1, preparing the resettlement plans for subsequent tranches and
carrying out LAR implementation tasks.

74.      The PMO will ensure compliance with assurances, including safeguards and
preparation, finalization, and implementation of the resettlement plan for each tranche. The
resettlement plans for tranche 1 were prepared based on feasibility design; the information it
contains is preliminary and estimates only. During the detailed design, the two resettlement
plans will be finalized based on a complete census, updated detailed measurement survey,
latest replacement rates, and further consultation with and participation of affected persons. The
impacts of the subprojects under tranche 1 that are not covered by the two resettlement plans
prepared for tranche 1 will be addressed in accordance with the provisions of ADB Operations
Manual F1 (para. 51) for subprojects prepared after Board approval and in accordance with the
Resettlement Framework. The LAR impacts of these subprojects will be insignificant. The time
for implementation of the resettlement plan for tranche 1 shall be scheduled as per LAR
procedures and integrated with the project civil works implementation schedules. All activities
related to LAR must be implemented in a manner that ensures that compensation and other
entitlements are provided to affected persons prior to their displacement and to commencement
of civil works.

75.      Training workshops will be provided for the staff of PMO, khoroo, and other government
officials involved in LAR activities, including the members of RPIC, representatives of the
affected persons and other stakeholders about the resettlement plan provisions and
implementation arrangements, as well as the principles and safeguards requirements of ADB
resettlement policy, the agreed resettlement framework and legislation of Mongolia. The training
will also highlight the differences between the provisions of the ADB’s SPS (2009) and the
Mongolian laws and explain how to ensure that ADB’s SPS (2009) requirements are met.

76.      Land acquisition and resettlement grievance redress mechanism. A land
acquisition and resettlement committee (LARC) for the Bayankhoshuu and Selbe Subcenter
sewer main collector pipes subprojects was established on 6 March 2015 by Resolution No.
A/175 of the Mayor of MUB. With this resolution a Working Group (WG) for the Implementation
of the LARP was established as well. The implementation of the LARP will be the responsibility
of the working group under the guidance of LARC and with close coordination and support of
the PMO. The same institutional arrangements will be adopted for Tranche 2. On complaint
handling, a grievance redress mechanism has been established for Project 1 and a similar
mechanism will be adopted for Project 2.

27
     Agencies responsible for urban roads, water, sewerage, power, etc.
62         Appendix 4




77.     Monitoring. Internal monitoring will be carried out routinely by the PMO and monthly
reports to the city will be submitted. The results will be communicated to ADB through the
quarterly project implementation reports.28 The PMO is responsible for managing LAR
implementation and taking actions to handle the day-to-day issues. At the end of each tranche,
the PMO will prepare a resettlement plan completion report and submit to ADB. The PMO is
responsible for engaging an independent local consulting firm or nongovernment organization or
a qualified individual expert as an external monitor to investigate and assess resettlement plan
implementation in each tranche. External monitoring will be carried out semiannually during the
implementation of the resettlement plan, and its results will be reported to the MUB and ADB in
semiannual reports at the end of each input. The external monitor will carry out a post-
implementation evaluation(s) of the resettlement plan about 1 and 2 years after completion of its
implementation. The compelling reason for this evaluation is to ascertain if the objectives of the
resettlement plan have been attained or not. In case of a shortfall, the external monitor will
recommend remedial measures.

78.     Budget. The resettlement plan for each tranche under the investment program will
contain a detailed budget section with a table of costs for all compensation and other
entitlement expenses as well as administration costs and other related expenses, plus 10% for
contingencies. Finances for implementation of resettlement plans will be provided by the MUB
through the PMO from MUB funds. The MUB and the PMO are responsible for timely allocation
of funds needed to implement the resettlement plan for each tranche. Allocation will be reviewed
semiannually based on the budget requirements indicated in the resettlement plans.

79.     Indigenous peoples. The project 1 is classified as category C for indigenous peoples
as there are no ethnic minority communities in the project area. No further action is required.
Subsequent tranches will also be screened and categorized. It is anticipated that they will likely
be category C as well. If ADB’s indigenous peoples policy requirements are triggered, an ethnic
minority development plan will need to be prepared by the PMO and submitted to ADB for
approval and then implemented accordingly.

B.         Safeguards for Project 2

80.      Environment. Project 2 is classified as category B for environment. The IEE and EMP of
Project 2 was prepared based on the DEIA for Project 2 pursuant to the requirements of the
Mongolian Law on Environmental Impact Assessment (2012). Public consultation meetings that
identified environmental issues and concerns, and appropriate impact mitigations, were
conducted in August 2016 to introduce Project 2 to affected households and stakeholders in
Dambadarjaa and Denjiin. The EARF was updated as part of detailed design of Project 1. The
updated EARF continues to provide guidance for screening and categorization, environmental
assessment, and preparation and implementation of environmental safeguards for project
subcomponents to comply with ADB’s SPS (2009), and the Mongolian Law on Environmental
Impact Assessment (2012). The first environmental monitoring report for Project 1 was prepared
in March 2016. Parts of the EMP of Project 1 were updated in August 2016.




28
     As and when necessary to report significant progress, implementation issues, or status of earlier identified
     problems.
                                                                                              Appendix 4        63


81.      The IEE of Project 2, including a comprehensive EMP, was prepared based on the
current feasibility design of Project 2. The IEE is prepared by MUB and will be disclosed to the
ADB website. Potential environmental impacts which are largely site-specific and short-term
disturbances, arising from the construction of the different project subcomponents, are
insignificant and reversible. Construction-related disturbances such as noise, dust, soil erosion,
surface water sedimentation, solid and liquid waste pollution, worker camp disturbances,
reduced local access, traffic safety, and worker and public safety can be managed with standard
construction practices and guidelines.

82.      The examination of the feasibility design of Project 2 indicates the following major
benefits: (i) households and businesses will have better access to a piped potable water supply;
(ii) the infrastructure to collect and convey domestic waste away from ger homes and
businesses for proper treatment will significantly increase environmental quality (e.g., soil and
groundwater) thereby reducing sickness and disease, and improve overall quality of life;
(iii) improved access to heating system will lead to better quality of life and significantly cause
major improvements to ambient winter air quality from reductions in smog and the critical health
impairing PM2.529 from individual household coal burning; (iv) potential removal or significant
reduction in the use of coal-fired cooking stoves for heating will significantly improve indoor air
quality; (v) the physical and social service support facilities to be constructed will improve the
quality of life and reduce domestic stress; (vi) near-term improvements in air quality, surface
water quality, and soil quality in Project 2 subcenters by providing existing social, civil, and
some commercial buildings with access to new water and wastewater utility networks; and
(vii) the new urban parks, and the “green” kindergarten classrooms will create greenspace,
promote green development thinking, and complement and support densification.

83.      The PMO/MUB will be responsible for the overall implementation and compliance with
the EMP, including inspection, monitoring, reporting, and corrective actions or measures.
Environmental management is supported by loan assurances and capacity development and
institutional strengthening activities under the project. The PMO/MUB conducted meaningful
consultation with potentially affected people and project beneficiaries. Environmental complaints
will be handled in accordance with the GRM developed for the project.

84.     Resettlement. The project is category A for resettlement due to significant land
acquisition and resettlement impacts. MUB has prepared one LARP for the four subcenters
based on the feasibility study report. During detailed design, it will be updated based on census
and detailed measurement survey. The resettlement framework, applicable to all subprojects
implemented under the investment program, has been reviewed and updated30. It now reflects
the MUB’s recent regulation, a more harmonized grievance handling system based on existing
practice, new institutional arrangements, and other provisions derived from the Updated LARPs
from Project 1.

85.     The LARP has been prepared in accordance with legislative framework of Mongolia,
ADB’s SPS (2009), and agreed RF. All affected entities are eligible for entitlements, as
stipulated in the ADB policy, including owners, possessors, users, legalizable occupants, non-
titled occupants, and lessees. The eviction of unlicensed affected persons is a violation of the
ADB policy. All affected persons who are unlicensed occupants of lands designed for the land
allocation are treated as legalizable. The lost land and properties will be compensated based on

29
     PM2.5, particulate matter smaller than 2.5 micrometers.
30
     Review and updating of the resettlement framework is stipulated in the Framework Financing Agreement, Schedule
     5, paragraph 3.
64     Appendix 4



the principle of full replacement cost. The project will adopt a negotiated land acquisition and
resettlement practice involving contractual agreements negotiated between the affected persons
and the Land Administration Department of MUB on the basis of the Civil Code of Mongolia.
The grievance redress established for Project 1 will be adopted for Project 2.

86.   The estimated land acquisition and resettlement impact includes 555 entities (residential
and commercial) and 2,156 persons who are expected to be affected by the developments in
Dambadarjaa, Denjiin, Selbe and Bayankhoshuu subcenters.

87.     Indigenous peoples. The project is indigenous peoples category C. The project
components are all focused on mid-ger urban areas of Ulaanbaatar. These areas have been in
existence for some time and are very heterogeneous in terms of residents’ socioeconomic
status. The project investments will benefit all residents. No specific communities of ethnic
minorities have been identified.

88.    Prohibited investment activities. Pursuant to ADB’s SPS (2009), ADB funds may not
be applied to the activities described on the ADB Prohibited Investment Activities List set forth at
Appendix 5 of the Safeguard Policy Statement (2009).
                                                                                  Appendix 4      65


                         VIII.   GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS

89.    This section describes the required actions for gender and social dimensions, other than
social safeguards. A poverty and social analysis (PSA), including gender analysis was
undertaken during the project preparation phase in accordance with ADB guidelines on gender
and social dimensions. The PSA included a review of secondary data and collection of primary
data through stakeholders’ consultations, focus group and community discussions, and key
informant interviews. The PSA assisted in the design of the various subcomponents to ensure
they are socially inclusive and implemented with a high degree of community participation. The
program is expected to improve the living conditions of population in ger areas of Ulaanbaatar
by developing a network of livable, competitive, and inclusive subcenters in Ulaanbaatar’s ger
areas.

90.      Key issues. In 2014, 21.6% of the Mongolian population lived below the national
poverty line. The poverty level was much higher in rural areas (27%) than the urban (18%).
However, poverty reduction was slower in urban areas, especially in Ulaanbaatar (16.4%)
where poverty declined by 3% during 2012–2014 compared to 11% between 2010 and 2012.
Therefore, the urban areas continue to have the largest share of the poor in Mongolia. Gross
domestic product has fallen from 17.5% in 2012 to 2.3% in 2015 driving up unemployment to
11.6% (but unofficially much higher). Ulaanbaatar has an estimated population of 1,445,000 by
the end of 2016 based on a 2015 population of 1,396,500 growing at a rate of approximately
3.5%. This is more than double the national growth rate of 1.5% and higher than the overall
urbanization rate of 2.8%. About 60% (800,000) of Ulaanbaatar’s population live in unplanned,
underserviced informal settlements without water or sewerage connections, poor access, highly
polluted environment, limited access to social facilities, and limited employment opportunities.
Direct beneficiaries of the project include almost 25,000 residents living in the 4 subcenters
targeted by Tranche 1 and 2 investments. Direct beneficiaries will also include those utilizing
transitional housing, kindergarten, and business incubator components. Elderly and persons
with disabilities will also directly benefit from targeted improvements to inclusiveness and
access to all project facilities. Indirect beneficiaries are about 500,000 people living in the
project districts that will have better access to job opportunity, housing and public facilities, and
can be extended to the population of Ulaanbaatar City because of the overall impact of the
project on the city pollution and urban development.

A.     Social Development Action Plan for Project 1

91.     The social development action plan (SDAP) includes measures to (i) facilitate and
support the subcenter community development council (CDC) and small– and medium–
enterprise development council (SDC); (ii) identify and prioritize CDC and SDC needs and
sustain awareness and support to the project by the different stakeholders; (iii) mobilize and
organize community members as well as the business owners in the two subcenters affected
into subcenter CDC and SDC to support the development of the land use plan, local
development plan, and investment plan of the project; (iii) build consensus concerning overall
strategy of urban functions development; (iv) facilitate the skills mapping of the community
members and matching with the demand of the small– and medium–enterprises as well as
linking the community groups with training institutions to provide vocational/technical skills
training; and (v) facilitate proper monitoring and evaluation of the different aspects of these
components.

92.   The following detailed SDAP activities will be undertaken to sustain the involvement of
the community members and organized groups (CDC and SDC) in the detailed design and
 66       Appendix 4



 implementation phases of the project (Table 1). The resources for implementation of SAP are
 part of project component 4 (institutional strengthening and capacity development).

                  Table 1: Detailed Design and Implementation Phases of Project 1
                                                                                          Responsible
Activity                                           Target /Indicators                        Entity        Timeline
I. Project Preparation Phase
Conduct series of consultative    20 meetings conducted organized with primary          Staff consultant   Q2
meetings and information          groups, CDCs and SDCs attended by 50% women                              2013—
campaign at the kheseg level                                                            PMO-MUB            Q1 2014
on (i) project objectives and     SAP and SDC development plans reflect the
investments, and (ii)             needs of the communities and considered in the        CDCs, kheseg
redevelopment options and         preliminary design of the physical infrastructures    and khoroo
preferences                                                                             leaders
                                  Documentation of meeting minutes
II. Detailed Design Phase
Continuing organizational         90 primary groups in Bayankhoshuu and 70 in           Staff consultant   Q1
formation and strengthening of    Selbe organized and functioning with by-laws,         PMO-MUB            2013—
primary groups, community         policies, systems, and plans                                             Q4 2014
development councils, SME                                                               CDCs, kheseg
development councils, and         50% women members for each groups and CDCs            and khoroo
savings groups                                                                          leaders
                                  5 khoroo level CDCs and 1 subcenter CDC
                                  organized and functioning with by-laws, policies,
                                  systems, and plans

                                  Documentation of organizational strengthening
                                  activities and training/OJT modules

                                  Savings groups formed and functioning with
                                  policies, systems, and ongoing micro-credit project
Conduct series of consultations   15 meetings conducted, attended by 50% women          PMO-MUB, staff     Q1
on the scope and                                                                        consultant         2014—
technical/engineering design of   Final detailed design of proposed projects                               Q3 2014
proposed water supply,            confirmed by the beneficiaries, women, elderly,       CDCs, primary
sanitation, sewerage, heating     differently-abled persons, and affected               groups, kheseg
facilities, and affordable        persons/families                                      and khoroo
apartments                                                                              leaders
Conduct consultations with        24 meetings in both subcenters attended by all        PMO-MUB, staff     Q1
households, businesses, and       affected stakeholders                                 consultant         2014—
public institutions affected by                                                                            Q3 2014
the construction/right-of-way     Documentation of meeting/consultation minutes         CDCs, kheseg
requirements for project 1                                                              and khoroo
                                                                                        leaders
Comprehensive IEC campaign        Comprehensive IEC plan developed                      PMO-MUB, staff     Q4 2013
on the final redevelopment                                                              consultant
schemes, land valuation,          Printed IEC materials distributed (i.e., project
engineering designs,              leaflets/brochures on FAQs, posters, etc.)            Kheseg and
resettlement plan, etc.                                                                 khoroo CDC
                                  16 IEC campaign meetings in both subcenters           leaders
                                  conducted; documentation of meeting minutes
Setting up of grievance or        System for resolution of grievance/feedback           PMO-MUB, staff     Q3 2013
feedback mechanisms in the        established                                           consultant
community
                                  CDCs function as the grievance committee with         Kheseg and
                                  guidelines on handling grievances                     khoroo CDC
                                                                                        leaders
Preparation and finalization of   16 meetings of SDC with CDCs in both subcenters       PMO-MUB, staff     Q2
the proposed SME                                                                        consultant         2013—
development plan                  Skills survey and demand mapping completed and                           Q1 2014
                                  documented                                            Kheseg and
                                                                                               Appendix 4      67


                                                                                         Responsible
Activity                                         Target /Indicators                         Entity      Timeline
                                                                                       khoroo CDC
                                 Documentation of meeting minutes                      leaders

                                 50% women members actively participating
Capacity building of the CDCs    Legal support for the CDC to guide them in their      PMO-MUB, staff   starting
on how to engage meaningfully    engagement in the SRA                                 consultant       Q1 2014
in the subcenter
redevelopment process            Terms of reference of the CDCs in the SRA are         Kheseg and
                                 well-defined and understood by them                   khoroo CDC
                                                                                       leaders
                                 Curriculum/training design for CDC engagement in
                                 the SRA

                                 Documentation of capacity building approach and
                                 modules
III. Implementation/Construction Stage
Facilitate consultative meetings 20 meetings in both subcenters attended by all        PMO-MUB, staff   Q4
for resettlement/relocation      affected stakeholders                                 consultant       2013—
                                                                                                        Q2 2014
                                                                                       CDC leaders
Facilitate and support           1,000 community members trained so various            PMO-MUB, staff   Q4 2013-
implementation of SME            skills and partnership with SMEs and other            consultant       Q1 2015
development plan                 institutions are developed for employment or
                                 contracted for goods and services                     Kheseg and
                                                                                       khoroo CDC
                                 Trained community members linked with the             leaders
                                 business incubators for services like work space,
                                 business advisory, etc.

                                 Documentation of process and results—number of
                                 (i) employed, (ii) those who entered into self-
                                 employment, (iii) recorded increases in income,
                                 and (iv) of employees generated
Conduct community-led            System, tools, and templates developed and used       PMO-MUB, staff   Q1
monitoring of construction       for community-led construction project monitoring     consultant       2017—
works for quality control                                                                               Q2 2014
                                 Trained CDCs with structure on construction           Kheseg and
                                 project monitoring                                    khoroo CDC
                                                                                       leaders
Facilitate and support           Number of households provided with transfer           PMO-MUB, staff   2015
consultations on the             assistance to new apartments                          consultant
implementation of relocation
plan from temporary housing to                                                         Kheseg and
new apartments                                                                         khoroo CDC
                                                                                       leaders
Continuous capacity building     20 capacity building trainings/workshops and          PMO-MUB, staff   Q1 2014–
for the CDC and primary          learning exchange conducted in both subcenters        consultant       Q3 2014
groups
                                 Training designs of capacity building interventions   Kheseg and
                                 on leadership, team building, community               khoroo CDC
                                 contracting, participation in the SRA, contract       leaders
                                 negotiations, business planning, savings
                                 movement, etc.

                                 Registration of the CDCs as NGOs with the State
                                 Registration Authority of the Ministry of Justice
Documentation of good            Documented good practices, lessons learned, and       PMO-MUB          starting
practices, lessons learned,      community feedback shared with all stakeholders                        Q1 2014
feedback, complaints, or         and reflected in major reports                        Kheseg and
grievance issues                                                                       khoroo CDC
 68        Appendix 4


                                                                                         Responsible
Activity                                         Target /Indicators                         Entity      Timeline
                                  Complaints and grievance issues documented and       leaders
                                  resolved
IEC program for (i) basic         IEC materials developed and disseminated             PMO-MUB          Q3 2014
hygiene practices, (ii) water
conservation, (iii) community                                                          Kheseg and
involvement on the ger                                                                 khoroo CDC
redevelopment, and (iv) SME                                                            leaders
development program, etc.
Capacity development              Curriculum on O&M and estate management              PMO-MUB          Q3 2014–
activities for CDCs or small      developed and implemented                                             Q4 2014
neighborhood associations for                                                          Kheseg and
redeveloped lots on (i) O&M of    4 trainings on O&M, etc. conducted and               khoroo CDC
new facilities, (ii) estate       documented                                           leaders
management, etc.
Conduct series of consultations   Consultation plans and minutes documented            PMO-MUB          2015
on the scope and                                                                                        onwards
technical/engineering design      Designs reflect the needs of the vulnerable groups   Kheseg and
and implementation                                                                     khoroo CDC
arrangements for proposed         Implementation arrangements reflect inputs of the    leaders
social and environmental          CDCs and community members especially the
projects (i.e., kindergarten,     women and other vulnerable groups
clinics, bus station, market,
khoroo building, vocational
training centers, public
spaces/open parks)
Documentation of good             Good practices and lessons learned documented        PMO-MUB, staff   starting
practices, feedback,              and complaints and grievance issues resolved         consultant       Q3 2014
complaints, or grievance
issues and lessons learned
Documentation of                  Documented good practices and lessons learned        PMO-MUB, staff   starting
schemes/approaches that           on the approach shared with all stakeholders         consultant       Q2 2013
worked (good practices),                                                                                to end
feedback, lessons learned,        Number of complaints and grievance issues            CDCs, kheseg     2018
complaints, or grievance          documented and resolved                              and khoroo
issues                                                                                 leaders

Conduct community-based           Community empowerment and SME development            PMO-MUB, staff   starting
monitoring and evaluation of      component developed and agreed upon by all           consultant       Q4 2014
new basic infrastructure and      stakeholders                                                          to end
services for the community                                                         CDCs, kheseg         2018
empowerment and SME             Monitoring reports and final evaluation reports    and khoroo
development                     done according to quality standards of ADB and     leaders           2015
                                submitted on time
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CDC = community development council, FAQ = frequently asked questions, IEC =
information, education, and communication, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, NGO = non-government organization,
O&M = operation and maintenance, OJT = on-the-job training, PMO = program management office, SAP = social
action plan, SME = small– and medium–enterprise, SDC = small- and medium-enterprise development council, SRA =
subcenter redevelopment authority.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

 93.     Resources. A team of consultants will be fielded to implement the assistance. It is
 estimated that a total of 78 person-months will be required—18 person-months of international
 and 60 person-months of national consultants and advisers will be required. The team will work
 closely with all relevant MUB stakeholders, particularly the PMO. All team members are
 expected to act as resource persons for the training and development activities. International
 and national positions required are in Table 2. The total cost of the consulting services package
 is estimated at $0.7 million over a 3-year timeframe from 2014–2016.
                                                                                   Appendix 4        69


     Table 2: Community Engagement and Small– and Medium–Enterprise Development
                        —International and National Consultants
                                          Person-                                           Person-
  No.         International Positions     months    No.            National Positions       months
   1     Social, poverty, and community     10       1    Community development/gender         4
         development specialist                           specialist
  2      Small- and medium- enterprise       3      2     Communications specialist             10
         development specialist
  3      Gender specialist                   3      3     Social mobilizers                     36
  4      Communications specialist           2      4     Legal specialist                      10
         Total                              18            Total                                 60
Source: Asian Development Bank.

94.     Implementation and monitoring. The PMO with the assistance of the project
consulting service (see FAM Section VI, Project Consulting service on Institutional
Strengthening and Capacity Building Component 1, on community engagement and SME
development) are responsible for the implementation of SAP and gender action plan (GAP), and
reporting on progress and achievements of the project. Key indicators from both plans will be
included in the project performance management system. The impact analysis will include the
effectiveness of CDCs and SDCs, SME development and gender dimensions of project, and
social issues.

B.      Social Development Action Plan for Project 2

95.     The social development action plan (SDAP) has been prepared for Project 2 and is
presented in the Table 7 of this section. It sets out activities (i) for the mitigation of adverse
impacts and risks identified in the course of the PSA of the project, and (ii) to help maximize the
benefits to be derived from the project. Actions include (i) targets for employment of local labor,
including the poor and women during construction and operation; (ii) road safety awareness
education program for the residents and school children; (iii) on-going, inclusive information,
communication and education program for all residents to inform about improvements, benefits,
risks and impacts of the project; (iv) public participation in road, water supply, and
socioeconomic services’ improvements; and (v) citizens’ feedback mechanism for assessing
the effectiveness of service provision. Its implementation will be monitored through the project
performance management system, project progress reports, and ADB supervision missions.

96.     To address the risk of spread of HIV/AIDS, the project requires (i) inclusion of clauses on
HIV/AIDS and other communicable disease into contract bidding documents; (ii) conduct of
public health and HIV/AIDS prevention education to the civil works contractors; (iii)
establishment of health measures for construction workers (e.g., setting up a temporary
infirmary, using local medical resources); and (iv) conduct of diverse publicity activities on HIV/
AIDS (e.g., brochures, posters and picture albums).

97.      In addition to SDAP, a CAP has been developed in the frame of Project 2 to ensure
smooth implementation of the project through the communities’ mobilization and
institutionalization. The main objective of the CAP is to make sure that the communities will
benefit from the project and take the co-ownership of the subcenter development. The project 2
CAP follows the project 1 CAP logic. It envisages activities aimed at sustaining the involvement
of the community members and organized groups (CDC and SDC) for subcenters and for
small– and medium–enterprise business development.
C.      Community Action Plan                                                                                                                                      70
98.    The following detailed activities will be undertaken in the project for community and local business owners’
mobilization and engagement in the detailed design and implementation phases of the project.

                                                            Table 3: Community Action Plan                                                                         Appendix 4
                                                                                                          Indicative
                                                                                                            Budget/
 Activity                                                     Targets/Indicators                           Cost in $       Responsible Entity           Timeline
 I. Detailed design phase
 1. Conduct series of consultative          Conducted 40 meetings with organized primary groups,          10,000       PMO                            2017–
    and information dissemination            CDCs, and business councils                                                CMT                            2021
    meetings at the khorooa level on        Consultation meeting minutes                                               DDPTs
    (i) project objectives and                                                                                          CDCs and primary groups
    investments, (ii) redevelopment
    options and preferences, and (iii)
    resettlement and other issues, as
    required
 2. Conduct series of consultations on      Consultation plans and documentation of minutes               25,000       PMO                            2017–
    the scope, technical and                CAP and MSME development plans reflect the needs of                        CMT                            2020
    engineering design, and                  the communities and businesses and considered the                          DDPT
    implementation arrangements for          design of the proposed infrastructures                                     Business councils, CDCs,
    the proposed infrastructures            Designs reflect the needs of communities and businesses,                    and primary groups
                                             especially the vulnerable groups
                                            Final detailed design of proposed projects is confirmed by
                                             affected persons and families, beneficiaries, elderly,
                                             persons with disability, and women
                                            Implementation arrangements reflect inputs of the CDCs
                                             and community members, business councils and their
                                             members, and women and other vulnerable groups
 3. Conduct consultations with              24 meetings in both subcenters attended by all affected        5,000       PMO                            2017–
    households, businesses, and              stakeholders                                                               CMT                            2021
    public institutions affected by         Consultation meeting minutes                                               DDPT
    construction and right-of-way                                                                                       Land resettlement team
    requirements for the project                                                                                        CDCs and primary groups
 4. Comprehensive IEC campaign on           Comprehensive IEC plan developed                              10,000       PMO                            2017–
    the final redevelopment schemes,        Printed IEC materials (i.e., leaflets/frequently asked                     CMT                            2021
    land valuation, and engineering          questions, posters, etc.) distributed                                      CDCs and primary groups
    (i.e., project designs, resettlement    10 IEC meetings in both subcenters conducted                               Third party service provider
    plan, and brochures, etc.)              Consultation meeting minutes                                                (i.e., communication firm)
 5. Setup grievance or feedback             System for grievance or feedback mechanism established        5,000        PMO                            2017–
    mechanism in the community              CDCs function as the grievance committee with guidelines                   CMT                            2021
                                                                                                       Indicative
                                                                                                         Budget/
Activity                                                  Targets/Indicators                            Cost in $       Responsible Entity       Timeline
                                         on handling grievances                                                      Business councils, CDCs,
                                                                                                                      and primary groups
6. Prepare and finalize the proposed    10 meetings of business councils with CDCs in both              25,000      PMO                        2017–
   SME development plan                  subcenters                                                                  CMT                        2021
                                        Skills survey and demand mapping completed and                              Business councils, CDCs,
                                         documented                                                                   and primary groups
                                        Consultation meeting minutes
                                        Documentation of the training processes, i.e., on-the-job-
                                         training and apprenticeship with SMEs and construction
                                         companies, in coordination with training institutes
7. Capacity building of business        Provide legal support for the business councils and CDCs        15,000      PMO                        2017–
   councils and CDCs on how to           to guide them in their engagement in the project                            CMT                        2021
   meaningfully engage in the           Terms of reference of the business councils and CDCs are                    Business councils, CDCs,
   project                               well-defined and understood                                                  and primary groups
                                        Purpose and structure of the project are clearly understood
                                         by the business councils and CDCs
Subtotal                                                                                                 95,000
II. Implementation/construction phase
1. Facilitate consultative           20 meetings in both subcenters attended by all affected             5,000      PMO                        2017–
     meetings for                     stakeholders                                                                   CMT                        2021
     resettlement/relocation                                                                                         Design team and land
                                                                                                                      resettlement team
                                                                                                                     CDCs and primary groups
2. Facilitate and support the           500 community members trained in various skills, and            55,000      MUB                        2017–
   implementation of SME                 partnership with SMEs and other institutions are developed                  CMT                        2021
   development plan                      for employment or for contracting of goods and services                     Business councils, CDCs,
                                        Pilot Manpower Association, composed of trained                              and primary groups
                                         community members on civil works, is organized and
                                         functioning with systems, policies, and ongoing contracts
                                        Trained community members are linked with business
                                         incubators for services, i.e., work space, business



                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 4
                                         advisory, etc.
                                        Documentation of process and results, i.e., number of (i)
                                         employed persons, (ii) persons who entered into self-
                                         employment, (iii) recorded increases in income, and (iv)
                                         employees generated
                                        Documentation of manpower association piloting and
                                         operations
                                                                                                                                                            71
                                                                                                       Indicative
                                                                                                         Budget/
                                                                                                                                                            72
Activity                                                 Targets/Indicators                             Cost in $       Responsible Entity       Timeline
3. Conduct community-led               System, tools, and templates are developed and used for            5,000     PMO-MUB                    2017–


                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 4
   monitoring of construction           community-led construction project monitoring                                CMT                        2021
   works for quality control           Trained CDCs with structure on construction project                          CDCs and primary groups
                                        monitoring                                                                   Contracted construction
                                                                                                                      companies
4. Continuous capacity building        20 capacity building trainings, workshops, and learning          25,000      PMO-MUB                    2017–
   for the business councils,           exchanges conducted in both subcenters                                       CMT                        2021
   CDCs, manpower                      Training designs created for capacity building interventions                 Business councils, CDCs,
   associations, and primary            on leadership, team building, community contracting,                          and primary groups
   groups                               participation in the subcenter redevelopment process,
                                        contract negotiations, business planning, savings
                                        movement, etc.
                                       Training sessions conducted on business development
                                        and management
                                       Official registration of business councils and CDCs as
                                        non-government organizations
5. Document good practices,            Documentation of good practices, lessons learned, and            20,000      MUB                        2017–
   lessons learned, feedback,           community feedback are shared with all stakeholders and                      CMT                        2021
   complaints or grievance              reflected in major reports                                                   Business councils, CDCs,
   issues                              Complaints and grievance issues are documented and                            and primary groups
                                        resolved
6. Develop IEC program for (i)         IEC materials developed and disseminated                         20,000      MUB                        2017–
   basic hygiene practices, (ii)                                                                                     CMT                        2021
   community involvement on                                                                                          DDPT
   the gerb redevelopment, and                                                                                       Business councils, CDCs,
   (iii) MSME development                                                                                             and primary groups
   program, etc
7. Organizational capacity building    10 micro-projects for small infrastructure works developed      150,000      MUB                        2017–
   of communities and MSME              and implemented based on the CAPs of business councils                       CMT                        2021
   through community contracting of     and CDCs                                                                     DDPT
   small infrastructure works          Documentation of community implementation of micro-                          Business councils, CDCs,
                                        projects                                                                      and primary groups
Subtotal                                                                                              280,000
Total                                                                                                 375,000
CAP = community action plan, CDC = community development council, CMT = community mobilization team, DDPT = design development and planning
team, IEC = information, education, and communication, MSME = micro-, small-, and medium-sized enterprise, PMO = program management office, SME =
small- and medium-sized enterprise.
a
  A khoroo is an administrative subdivision in Ulaanbaatar.
b
  Ger is the Mongolian dwelling fit for nomadic way of life and is easily assembled and disassembled.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                     Table 4: Social Action Plan for Project 2
                                                                                                     Responsible                       Indicative
Actions and Activities                                          Target and Indicators                  Agency           Timeline        Budget
Output 1: Roads and urban services expanded
1.1 Public awareness campaign and information        Number and type of awareness and              MUB-PMO,             2017–2021   Project
    disclosure on project design                     disclosure activities                         kheseg,a and                     implementation
                                                                                                   khoroo district                  support cost
1.2 Consultation with residents and stakeholders     Number and percent of people participating    leaders and
    on roads and urban facilities’ detailed design   in consultation meetings and awareness        officials,
                                                     campaigns (sex-disaggregated)                 contractors of
1.3 Improved design of roads and urban facilities                                                  Metropolitan
    to ensure public safety and inclusiveness        Number and type of participants’              Employment
    (gender, age, and disability responsiveness)     suggestions incorporated into investment      Department of the
                                                     program components and design (sex-           Ministry of Labor,
1.4 Road safety awareness education program          disaggregated)                                and all
    for residents and schoolchildren in target                                                     infrastructure
    areas                                            Lighting installed along the improved roads   service provider
                                                     of 2.48 kilometers in Denjin and 3.25         agencies
                                                     kilometers in Dambadarjaa

                                                     Around 25 cameras installed in streets of
                                                     Denjiin and Dambadarjaa subcenters

                                                     Number and percent of people participating
                                                     in awareness education program with 50%
                                                     female participation

                                                   At least two trainings conducted for pupils
                                                   (aged 6–15) of all schools
Output 2: Economic and public services in targeted areas improved
2. 1 Consultation with beneficiaries and           Number and type of community-based              MUB-PMO,UN-          2017–2021   Project
     stakeholders regarding the location and       participation activities                        Habitat, kheseg,                 construction and
     detailed design of social facilities such as                                                  khoroo district                  operation cost
     CDSCs with business incubators, vocational    Number and percent of beneficiaries of          officials,
     training center, kindergartens, transition    social facilities, i.e., CDSC, vocational       community


                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 4
     house/shelters, public parks, and sport       training center, business incubators,           development
     facilities                                    kindergartens etc., CDSC and transition         councils, CDSCs,
                                                   house are first made available to the poor,     NGOs,
2.2 Improved design of social facilities to ensure persons with disability, and women (sex-        Metropolitan
     public safety and inclusiveness (gender, age, disaggregated)                                  Education
     and disability-responsiveness)                                                                Department
                                                   Number and type of participants’
                                                   suggestions incorporated into the project                                                           73
                                                   components and design
                                                                                                      Responsible                      Indicative
Actions and Activities                            Target and Indicators                                   Agency        Timeline       Budget
                                                                                                                                                    74
2.3 Development of sustainable business plans     Business plans are available for each social     Ministry of Labor,
    for each social facility                      facility (Baseline: 0)                           Ministry of


                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 4
                                                                                                   Education and
                                                                                                   Culture, Ministry
                                                                                                   of Health, MUB
                                                                                                   Department of
                                                                                                   Sports and
                                                                                                   Culture,
                                                                                                   private sector
                                                                                                   participants, and
                                                                                                   facility operators
2.4 One multipurpose CDSC constructed in each     100% of residents will have access to CDSC       Relevant MUB         2017–onwards
    project subcenter with day care, business     and priority will be given to the poor, women,   agency(ies),
    incubators, space for government CBO and      including single mothers and persons with        NGOs, CBOs,
    NGOs’ social programs, public toilets, and    disability                                       and implementing
    public laundry                                                                                 agency
                                                  Number of community health, education,
                                                  economic development and other support
                                                  programs conducted

                                                  Number of entrepreneurs and businesses
                                                  resulting from business incubator support
2.5 One kindergarten classroom constructed in     100 children accommodated in each facility,      Metropolitan         2017–onwards
    each Tranche 1 and Tranche 2 subcenter        8% of which are first made available to the      Education
                                                  children from the poor and vulnerable            Department,
                                                  families, including children with disability     NGOs, and CBOs
                                                  (sex-disaggregated) (Baseline: 2015
                                                                       2
                                                  baseline: 10,500 m with capacity of 1,000
                                                  students)
2.6 Pilot a transitional housing for domestic     Accommodate about 20 women and children          Relevant MUB         2017–onwards
    violence survivor women in Denjiin            (Baseline: 0)                                    agency(ies), and
                                                                                                   implementing
                                                                                                   agency
2.7 Sports facilities developed in Dambadarjaa    Combined active and passive sports facilities    MUB Department
    and Bayankhoshuu subcenters                   (Baseline: 0)                                    of Sports and
                                                                                                   Culture,
                                                  Accessible to 100% of residents including        implementing
                                                  youth, elderly, disabled                         agency, and
                                                                                                   CBOs
                                                  Number of sport programs established
2.8 Public parks and open green spaces provided   Number and type of safety measures
    in all subcenters                             conducted
                                                                                                   Responsible                       Indicative
Actions and Activities                             Target and Indicators                              Agency          Timeline       Budget
Output 3: Institutional capacity for program management and urban development strengthened
3.1 Service providers conduct ongoing, inclusive   Number and percent of information,           MUB-PMO, all          2017–onwards
    information, communication, and education      communication, and education program         service provider
    program for all residents to inform about      participants. (Sex- and income-              agencies from
    improvements, benefits, risks, impacts and     disaggregated)                               public and private,
    timelines of proposed services                                                              UN-Habitat
                                                   Number and percent of lowest-income and      Ger Area
3.2 Establish preferential service support         disadvantaged groups receiving improved      Development
    programs for lowest-income and other           services. (Sex-disaggregated) (Baseline: 0)  Agency, kheseg,
    disadvantaged groups                                                                        khoroo, district
                                                   Citizens’ feedback mechanism is established leaders/officials,
3.3 Establish citizens’ feedback mechanism for     and operating                                CDCs, CDSCs,
    assessing the effectiveness of service                                                      and NGOs
    provision
Generating job opportunities: Outputs 1–3
1. Generate 267 skilled and 533 unskilled jobs at 8% of which are first made available to the   MUB-PMO,               2017–2021     Project
    the construction stage.                        poor and 10% to women (Baseline for          kheseg, khoroo,                      construction and
                                                   female construction workers is 5%)           district                             operation funds
2. Generate 468 jobs of operation stage                                                         leaders/official,
                                                   8% of which are first made available to the  contractors of
                                                   poor and 10% to women for infrastructure     Metropolitan
                                                   facility, 70% for kindergarten and CDSC, and Employment
                                                   100% for woman transition center.            Department,
                                                                                                Ministry of Labor,
                                                                                                and all
                                                                                                infrastructure
                                                                                                service provider
                                                                                                agencies
Measures to reduce potential risks: Outputs 1–3
1. Include HIV/AIDS and other communicable         Terms of construction contract and           MUB-PMO,               2017–2021     Funds under the
    disease clauses into contract bidding          implementation                               kheseg, khoroo,                      construction


                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 4
    documents                                                                                   district leaders/                    contract
2. Public health, HIV/AIDS/sexually transmitted    Public health, HIV/AIDS/sexually transmitted officials,
    infections, gender violence, and sexual        infections, and sexual harassment            construction                         National
    harassment prevention education program        prevention training courses (Number of       contractors, CDCs                    workplace
    conducted to contractors and community         trainees disaggregated by sex and target     and SDCs,                            program (safety,
    residents                                      groups)                                      Metropolitan                         HIV/AIDS,
3. Health measures for construction workers                                                     Employment,                          harassment,
    (e.g., setting-up a temporary infirmary, using Number and type of health measures           Department,                          equity)            75
    local medical resources) are established                                                    Ministry of Labor,                   development
                                                                                                        Responsible                         Indicative
 Actions and Activities                              Target and Indicators                                 Agency            Timeline       Budget
                                                                                                                                                               76
 4. Conduct publicity activities on HIV/AIDS,        Forms of publicity on HIV/AIDS and sexual       and all                                consultant fees
     gender violence, sexual harassment, e.g.,       harassment prevention at the construction       infrastructure                         of $7,500


                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 4
     brochures, posters, and picture albums          stage, e.g., number of brochures, posters,      service provider
                                                     and picture albums distributed                  agencies
 5.  Ensure gender and disabled-friendly
     workplace facilities during the construction
 Output 4: Institutions and capacity for urban development strengthened
 4.1 Recruitment of social development and           An international specialist with 3 person-      MUB-PMO,                2017–onwards   Project capacity
     community participation international and       months and local specialist with 27 person-     kheseg, khoroo,                        building budget
     national specialists as part of the loan        months of input will be engaged                 district leaders/
     implementation consultant                                                                       officials, all urban-
                                                     One social development specialist from the      related ministries
 4.2 The PMO assigns at least one social             PMO is assigned to manage and coordinate        and agencies, and
     development specialist to be responsible for    CAP, GAP, and SDAP work                         private sector
     the implementation and reporting of the CAP,                                                    participants
     GAP, and SDAP                                   Number and percent of PMO and concerned
                                                     government agencies’ staff who received
 4.3 The PMO and relevant government agencies’       training on GAP and SDAP with at least 50%
     staff are trained to ensure effective           of training participants are women (Baseline:
     implementation of the project, particularly the 0%)
     GAP and SDAP
                                                     Number and type of consultation attendees
 4.4 Ensure that subcenter plan and                  with at least 50% are women (Baseline: 0)
     redevelopment process are prepared and
     endorsed by all stakeholders through            Indicators involving social development and
     community consultations                         gender in PPMS

 4.5 Sex-disaggregated data will be collected by     Semiannual monitoring reports on GAP and
     the PPMS to ensure monitoring, evaluation       SDAP implementation
     and reporting of the GAP and SDAP

  4.6 Monitoring and evaluation of CAP, GAP, and
      SDAP
CAP = community action plan, CBO = community-based organizations, CDSC = community development service center, GAP = gender action plan, MUB =
Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, NGOs = non-government organizations, PMO = program management office, PPMS = project performance management system,
SDAP = social development action plan.
a
  A khoroo is an administrative subdivision in Ulaanbaatar.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                 Appendix 4      77


C.     Gender Action Plan for Project 1

99.     Key actions. Project 1 is designed as effective gender mainstreaming. Improvements in
the infrastructure (roads, water supply and sanitation, and heating) will have a significant impact
on time savings, mobility, access, economic opportunity, health, safety and security of ger area
residents, particularly for women residents. A GAP has been prepared and the actions have
been agreed on. The GAP ensures that the project (i) includes design features for safety,
security, and pedestrian mobility are integrated into road network; (ii) collects sex-disaggregated
data on key issues such as utility connections, time, and cost savings; (iii) further investigates
affordability issues under improved services provision to make recommendations on providing
subsidies for the vulnerable groups including female-headed households; and (iv) provides
social service infrastructure which has targets to serve women so they can join economic
opportunity activities. Due to project implementation delay, as of September 2016, 6 out of 11
GAP activities are on track (54.5%), the rest are partially on track. There are 15 indicators, of
which nine have gender-related targets. Out of 9 gender targets, 5 are on track (55%), but with
4 of them partially on track. Since all GAP activities of Tranche 2 will be conducted in the sites
different from Tranche 1, there is no activity of Tranche 1 that will be carried forward to Tranche
2. But there are five GAP activities for Tranche 2 that are similar to the activities of the Tranche
1 GAP. Taking into account the implementation delays of Tranche 1 GAP it is recommended to
monitor and report its progress quarterly through the progress reports.
78       Appendix 4



                                Table 5: Gender Action Plan for Project 1
                                                                                                      Responsible
Outputs                     Action                      Indicator                      Budget            Party
Roads and urban       Integrate gender      6.15 km in Bayankhoshuu and           Included in the   MUB, PMO,
services are          inclusive design      8.77 km in Selbe of sidewalks built   project output    gender
expanded within       measures into         alongside improved roads                                specialist,
the targeted          road infrastructure                                                           community
subcenters and        to ensure safe        6.15 km in Bayankhoshuu and                             engagement
connectivity          and security          8.77 in Selbe of lighting provided                      consultants
between               mobility and          on improved roads
subcenters is         access
improved                                    4.5 ha and 3.43 ha in
                                            Bayankhoshuu and Selbe of
                                            landscaping (public spaces)
                                            including pedestrian pathways

                      Assess impact of      Social indicators included in PPMS
                      improved roads,       such as number of households
                      water, sanitation     connected, time and cost savings,
                      and heating on        health impact, number of nighttime
                      population            safety incidents, (disaggregated by
                                            sex, income quintile and female-
                                            headed households where
                                            possible). Focus group discussions
                                            will also be conducted to further
                                            assess impact.
Economic and          One kindergarten      At least two kindergartens            Included in       MUB, PMO,
public services are   facility in each      operating by 2018 (number of          project costs     gender
improved              subcenter with        students served and staff sex                           specialist,
                                 2
                      1,800 m of floor      disaggregated)                                          community
                      areas of                                                                      engagement
                      classrooms,           At least two business incubators                        consultants
                      administration        and vocational training centers
                      and services, and     operational by 2018 (number of
                      500 m2 of             students and staff served annually,
                      playground (2012      sex disaggregated)
                      baseline: 0)
                                            At least 20 MSME’s, 50% of which
                      One business          are women led graduated from
                      incubator and         incubation program (baseline 0 in
                      vocational training   2012)
                      center in each
                      subcenter with        At least 1,000 beneficiaries, 50%
                               2
                      1,800 m floor         of whom are women, receiving
                      area and 500 m2       vocational training (baseline 0 in
                      of open green         2012)
                      area (baseline 0 in
                      2012)

Service providers     Report on             Report by 2018                        Included in       PMO and
become more           affordability and                                           project costs     consultants
efficient             subsidies included    Survey report (providing sex-                           working with
                      in tariff             disaggregated data where                                service
                      assessment            possible)                                               providers
                      (disaggregated by
                      income quintile
                      and if possible
                      looking at female-
                      headed
                      households as a
                      special group)
                                                                                                 Appendix 4       79


                                                                                                      Responsible
Outputs                   Action                        Indicator                    Budget              Party
                    Customer
                    satisfaction survey
Institutional       Establishment of       Khoroo CDCs and SDCs fully            Included in        MUB, PMO,
capacity building   khoroo CDCs and        functioning in targeted areas, with   project costs      gender
                    SDCs with              at least 40% women participating                         specialist,
                    women’s                actively (baseline: to be                                community
                    representation         established)                                             engagement
                                                                                                    consultants, staff
                    Establishment and      Community, gender, and MSME                              of new
                    agreement on           action plans accepted and                                educational
                    community,             regularly updated in each                                establishments
                    gender and             subcenter (0 in 2012)
                    MSME plans

                    Targets                GAP report with targets and sex
                    established and        disaggregated data provided semi
                    sex disaggregated      annually
                    data collected on
                    participants for all
                    community
                    consultations on
                    urban planning
                    and project
                    activities (see
                    SAP activities)
                    collected and
                    reported on in the
                    GAP

                    Subcenters’ plan       Consultation meeting attendance
                    and                    and SAP monitoring
                    redevelopment
                    process are
                    prepared and
                    endorsed by all
                    the stakeholders
                    through
                    community
                    consultation
                    including at least
                    50% of women’s
                    participation

                    Establishment of     PMO is fully functioning with
                    PMO with 30%         trained staff at least 30% women
                    gender               (baseline 0 in 2012)
                    representation
                                                                                                 2
CDCs = community development councils, GAP = gender action plan, ha = hectare, km = kilometer, m = square
meter, MSME = micro-small- and medium- enterprise, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, PMO = program
management office, PPMS = project performance management system, SAP = social action plan, SDCs = small- and
medium- enterprise development councils.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

100. Budget and monitoring of the gender action plan. All actions in the GAP have been
integrated into the project budget. In addition, 42 person-months of consulting services have
been provided to support the PMO in establishing the mechanisms, implementing, and
monitoring the actions. This is complemented by activities under the community development
plan, and the consulting services which support these activities. Within the first three months of
80     Appendix 4



implementation, the PMO specialist along with the community development consultants will
prepare an implementation plan for the GAP to be agreed with ADB. Monitoring of
implementation will be supported by ADB gender and social development specialists during
regular review missions. GAP implementation progress reporting will be included in the overall
semiannual progress reports by the executing agency. Poverty, gender, and social assessments
will be done in preparation for subsequent tranches to determine their respective gender
categorization and required actions (e.g., GAPs).

D.     CDCs and SDCs

101. CDCs are organized community groups at the khoroo and eventually at the subcenter
levels, which will represent the larger community in the project (TA 7970). Their main function is
to (i) serve as the voice of the larger community in providing their sentiments, inputs and/or
recommendations to the project to ensure that the investment projects truly respond to their
needs through the needs identification and/or prioritization and community action plan
processes; (ii) this organization also facilitates the involvement of the community members in
the actual implementation of the investment projects so that they do not only benefit from
access to improved physical environment but also access to employment as paid labor during
construction; (iii) apart from representing the interest of the larger community, the CDCs will
also function as the grievance mechanism of the project; (iv) it will also ensure that the
requirements of the vulnerable groups, especially the women, persons with disability, very poor,
elderly and children are considered in the design and up to the implementation of the
investment projects; (v) serve or function as a monitor to ensure that their needs are not only
included in the plan but are actually implemented; (vi) serve as the lobby or advocacy group of
the community to deal with government and other institutions to push for the community-led
approach in ger area development; (vii) facilitate awareness-raising among the community
members during the land redevelopment process to foster better understanding of the land
markets, etc.; (viii) serve as the mechanism to uphold the legal rights of the people especially on
matters pertaining to land rights, through the guidance of the legal expert; (ix) work with the
private sector to ensure that the construction standards are observed, the appropriate costs are
maintained to ensure affordability of services, and that the community members are given the
opportunity for employment in the investment projects; and (x) ensure that most especially
function to highlight the meaningful involvement of women members in the community in all
processes of community development (more on qualitative involvement in issues analysis and
decision-making), that optimum benefits accrue to them and they will not be negatively or
adversely affected by the investment projects.

102. As a structure, the CDCs emanate from the primary groups composed of 10–20 families
from the larger community covered by the project. Each primary group elects their group leader
and secretary to represent them to the khoroo CDC. There are now five khoroo CDCs in
Bayankhoshuu and three khoroo CDCs in Selbe. These khoroo-level CDCs will elect their
chairpersons and vice-chairpersons who will represent them to the subcenter CDC. There will
be one subcenter CDC in each subcenter and these are still in the formation process. All the
eight khoroo CDCs are now functioning and actively engaged in the project.

103. The formation process as well as the roles and functions of the SDC are very similar to
that of the regular CDC except that the SDC is a sectoral grouping–SDC. It will function as the
voice of the sector including the micro-entrepreneurs in the areas which are mostly operated by
women, in the development of the economic facilities in the subcenter. Similar to the CDC, the
SDC also went through the needs assessment and prioritization and SDC action plan
preparation processes which were submitted to the project preparatory technical assistance for
                                                                                  Appendix 4      81


consideration in the selection and preliminary design of the economic facilities. For Selbe, the
formation has proceeded directly from the large membership to the subcenter SDC. It has
already elected its officers and now actively functions and interacts with all stakeholders in the
project. The Bayankhoshuu SDC formation is still underway.

E.     Gender Action Plan for Project 2

104. The project 2 is also categorized as effective gender mainstreaming. The project will
have significant benefits for women and will allow them to participate in trainings, income-
generating activities, family entertainment, or leisure. Women strongly support the project
across all subcomponents, and they perceive that the project will improve their quality of life and
create education, employment and income opportunities for them. The GAP which is presented
in Table 6 will help to ensure: (i) gender-sensitive design features for safety and security
purposes; (ii) education and awareness programs on financial literacy, road and public space
safety with 50% female participation; (iii) operation of multi-disciplinary teams on prevention and
response to domestic violence in target khoroos; (iv) piloting of transitional housing for domestic
violence survivors in Denjiin; and (iv) providing social service infrastructure with relevant targets
for serving women in order to provide access to economic opportunities.

105. All actions in the CAP, GAP, and SDAP for project 2 have been integrated into the
project budget. In addition, 424 person-months of consulting services have been provided to
support the PMO in establishing the mechanisms, implementing, and monitoring the actions.
Extensive human resources to address social and gender dimensions will be provided by the
consultant services and PMO staff. PMO support will require 3 person-months of international
and 27 person-months of national consultants In addition, the PMO will have a staff member
engaged for 20 person-months to supervise and implement the social and gender actions under
the project.
                                                         Table 6: Gender Action Plan for Project 2                                                                     82
                                                                                                                                                        Indicative
Activities                                                      Targets/Indicators                                 Responsible Entity       Timeline     Budget
Output 1: Roads and urban services expanded


                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 4
1. Integrate gender-responsive design    1.1 Number and type of gender-responsive design features                MUB, PMO,                   2017–     Included in
   measures into road infrastructure to  1.2 Lighting installed along the improved roads of 7.08                 district, kheseg,           2020      project costs
   ensure access and safety and security     kilometers in Denjin and Dambadarjaa                                khoroo,a and school
   mobility                                                                                                      officials
2. Conduct road safety awareness               2.   At least 50% of participants are women
   education program for residents and
   schoolchildren in target areas
3. Ensure safety of girls and women in         3.1 25 cameras installed and operating in streets of Denjiin      MUB, PMO, and school        2017–     Included in
   public places                                   and Dambadarjaa subcenters                                    officials                   2020      project costs

                                               3.2 At least four peer educators (female and male) trained for
                                                   each school in the subcenters

                                         3.3 At least two trainings conducted on Violence Against
                                              Women and Girls for adolescent girls of 3 schools in each
                                              subcenter (Baseline: 0)
4. Sensitize construction workers on     4 At least two workplace trainings conducted on gender                  MUB, PMO, and               2017–     Included in
   gender equity in labor relations           equity in labor relations including labor exploitation (sex-       construction contractors    2020      project costs
                                              disaggregated) (Baseline: 0)
Output 2: Economic and public services in targeted areas improved
5. Establish one multipurpose community        5.1 At least 50% of training participants are women (Baseline:    MUB, associated             2017–     Included in
   development services center in the              0)                                                            agency, and PMO             2020      project costs
   subcenter
                                               5.2 Sex-disaggregated data collected on community
                                                   development services center clients
6. Construct four kindergarten classrooms      6.1 Four new kindergarten classrooms with capacity of 100         MUB and PMO                 2017–     Included in
   in the subcenters                               children each is operational by 2019 (sex-disaggregated)                                  2020      project costs

                                               6.2 Rapid qualitative assessment conducted among mothers
                                                   whose children were enrolled in new kindergartens
7. Pilot a transitional housing for domestic   7.1 One transitional house with capacity of 20 women and          MUB, PMO,                   2018–     Included in
   violence survivor women in Denjiin              children is constructed                                       district, kheseg and        2020      project costs
   subcenter                                                                                                     khoroo officials
                                               7.2 Women in transitional house benefitted from skills-building   including social workers
                                                   or business development programs in business incubators
8. Train multidisciplinary teams in target     8   At least 80% of multidisciplinary teams in target khoroos     Ministry of Justice         2017–     Included in
   khoroos on prevention and response to           are trained on prevention and response to domestic            and Home Affairs,           2020      project costs
   domestic violence, and public space             violence against women and children, and public space         and Ministry of Labor
                                                                                                                                                          Indicative
Activities                                                           Targets/Indicators                            Responsible Entity         Timeline     Budget
   safety for girls and women                     safety for girls and women (Baseline to be determined in       and Social Protection
                                                  2017)                                                          MUB, PMO,
                                                                                                                 district, kheseg and
                                                                                                                 khoroo officials
                                                                                                                 including
                                                                                                                 multidisciplinary teams
 9. Raise awareness among adolescent         9    At least one behavior change communications campaign           MUB, PMO, and school          2017–     Included in
    girls and boys on public and private          held in all schools of each subcenter (Baseline: 0)            officials including social    2020      project costs
    space safety                                                                                                 workers
 Output 3: Institutional capacity for program management and urban development strengthened
10. Ensure that subcenter plan and           10.1 Dambadarjaa and Denjiin plans and redevelopment            MUB and PMO                       2017–     Included in
    redevelopment process are prepared            processes are prepared and endorsed by all the                                               2019      project costs
    and endorsed by all stakeholders              stakeholders, through community consultation, including at
    through community consultations               least 50% of women participants (2015 baseline:
                                                  0)Dambadarjaa and Denjiin plans and redevelopment
                                                  processes are prepared and endorsed by all the
                                                  stakeholders, through community consultation, including at
                                                  least 50% of women participants (2015 baseline: 0)

                                             10.2 CDCs and SDCs in Dambadarjaa and Denjiin fully
                                                  functioning, with at least 40% of women participating
                                                  actively (2015 baseline: 0)
11. Institutional capacity for program      11 PMO is fully functioning with fully trained staff, at least 50%
    management and urban development              of whom are women (2015 baseline: 14 persons)
    are strengthened
12. Train relevant officials of different    12.1 A training module on prevention and response to public         MUB, PMO,                     2017–     Included in
    administrative levels on prevention and       and private space safety including gender-based violence       district, kheseg and          2020      project costs
    response to public and private space          is developed (Baseline: 0)                                     khoroo officials, and
    safety                                                                                                       non-government
                                             12.2 At least one training for relevant officials of different      organization(s)
                                                  administrative levels is conducted (sex-disaggregated)
                                                  (Baseline: 0)
13. Sex-disaggregated data will be collected 13 Sex-disaggregated project performance and management             MUB and PMO                   2017–     Included in
    by the project performance                    system operational (2015 baseline: 0)                                                        2020      project costs


                                                                                                                                                                         Appendix 4
    management system to ensure
    monitoring, evaluation, and reporting of
    the gender action plan and social
    development action plan
14. Ensure semiannual monitoring and         14 Gender action plan progress monitoring matrix is updated         MUB and PMO                   2017–     Included in
    reporting of the gender action plan           semiannually                                                                                 2020      project costs
    implementation
                                                                                                                                                                         83
                                                                                                                                        Indicative
                                                                                                                                                      84
 Activities                                             Targets/Indicators                            Responsible Entity     Timeline    Budget
15. Provide recommendations and draft 15 Regulatory framework including standards for                Ministry of Justice      2017-   Included in
   regulatory framework including           establishment of the transitional house is drafted and   and Home Affairs,         2020   project costs


                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 4
   standards for establishment of the       submitted to line Ministries (baseline 0)                and Ministry of Labor
   transitional house.                                                                               and Social Protection
                                                                                                MUB, and PMO.
CDCs = community development councils, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, PMO = program management office, SDCs = small- and medium-enterprise
development council.
a
  A khoroo is an administrative subdivision in Ulaanbaatar.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                              Table 7: Social Development Action Plan for Project 2
                                                                                                                                                         Indicative
Actions and Activities                                      Target and Indicators                             Responsible Agency             Timeline     Budget
Output 1: Roads and urban services expanded
                                                                                                                          a
1.1 Public awareness campaigns and Number and type of awareness and disclosure activities                  PMO, kheseg, and khoroo           2017–      Project
    information disclosure on project                                                                      district leaders and officials,   2021       implementation
    design                            Number and percent of people participating in consultation           contractors of Metropolitan                  support cost
                                      meetings and awareness campaigns (sex-disaggregated)                 Employment Department of
1.2 Consultation with residents and                                                                        Ministry of Labor, and all
    stakeholders on roads and urban Number and type of participants’ suggestions incorporated into         infrastructure service
    facilities’ detailed design       investment program components and design (sex-                       provider agencies
                                      disaggregated)
1.3 Improved design of roads and
    urban facilities to ensure public Lighting installed along the improved roads of 2.48 kilometers
    safety and inclusiveness (gender, in Denjiin and 3.25 kilometers in Dambadarjaa
    age, and disability
    responsiveness)                   Around 25 cameras installed in streets of Denjiin and
                                      Dambadarjaa subcenters
1.4 Road safety awareness program
    for residents and schoolchildren  Number and percent of people participating in awareness
    in target areas                   education program with 50% female participation

                                        At least two trainings conducted for pupils (aged 6–15) of all
                                        schools
Output 2: Economic and public services in targeted areas improved
2. 1 Consultation with beneficiaries    Number and type of community-based participation activities        PMO,UN-Habitat, kheseg,           2017–      Project
     and stakeholders regarding the                                                                        khoroo district officials,        2021       construction
     location and detailed design of    Number and percent of beneficiaries of social facilities, i.e.,    CDCs, CDSCs,                                 and operation
     social facilities such as CDSCs    CDSC, vocational training center, business incubators,             NGO, and Metropolitan                        cost
     with business incubators,          kindergartens etc., with CDSC and transition house first made      Education Department
     vocational training center,        available to the poor, persons with disability, and women (sex-
     kindergartens, transition          disaggregated)
     house/shelters, public parks, and
     sport facilities                   Number and type of participants’ suggestions incorporated into
                                        the project components and design
2.2 Improved design of social



                                                                                                                                                                         Appendix 4
     facilities to ensure public safety
     and inclusiveness (gender, age,
     and disability-responsiveness)
2.3 Develop sustainable business        Business plans are available for each social facility (Baseline:   Ministry of Labor, Ministry       2017–
     plans for each social facility     0)                                                                 of Education and Culture,         onwards
                                                                                                           Ministry of Health, MUB
                                                                                                           Department of Sports and
                                                                                                           Culture,                                                      85
                                                                                                                                                  Indicative
Actions and Activities                                     Target and Indicators                          Responsible Agency          Timeline     Budget        86
                                                                                                       private sector participants,
                                                                                                       and
                                                                                                       facility operators


                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 4
2.4 One multipurpose CDSC              100% of residents will have access to CDSC. Priority will be    Relevant MUB agency(ies),
    constructed in each project        given to the poor, women, including single mothers and          NGOs, CBOs, and
    subcenter with day care,           persons-with-disability                                         implementing agency
    business incubators, space for
    government, CBO, and NGOs’         Number of community health, education, economic
    social programs, public toilets,   development and other support programs conducted
    and public laundry
                                       Number of entrepreneurs and businesses resulting from
                                       business incubator support
2.5 One kindergarten classroom         100 children accommodated in each facility, 8% of which are     Metropolitan Education
    constructed in each Tranche 1      first made available to the children from the poor and          Department, NGOs, and
    and Tranche 2 subcenters           vulnerable families, including children with disability (sex-   CBOs
                                       disaggregated) ( Baseline: X)
2.6 Pilot a transitional housing for   Accommodate about 20 women and children (Baseline: 0)           Relevant MUB agency(ies),
    domestic violence survivor                                                                         and
    women in Denjiin                                                                                   implementing agency
2.7 Sports facilities developed in     Combined active and passive sports facilities (Baseline: 0)     MUB Department of Sports
    Bayankhoshuu and Dambadarjaa                                                                       and Culture, implementing
    subcenters                         Accessible to 100% of residents including the youth, elderly,   agency, and CBOs
                                       and disabled

                                        Number of sport programs established
2.8 Public parks and open green         Number and type of safety measures conducted
    spaces provided in all subcenters
Output 3: Institutional capacity for program management and urban development strengthened
3.1 Service providers conduct           Number and percent of information, communication, and          PMO, all service provider      2017-      Project
    ongoing, inclusive information,     education program participants (Sex- and income-               agencies from public and       onwards    construction
    communication, and education        disaggregated)                                                 private, UN-Habitat                       and operation
    program for all residents to                                                                       Ger Area Development                      funds
    inform about improvements,                                                                         Agency, kheseg, khoroo,
    benefits, risks, impacts and                                                                       district leaders/officials,
    timelines of proposed services                                                                     CDCs, CDSCs, and NGOs

3.2 Establish preferential service     Number and percent of lowest income and disadvantaged
    support programs for lowest        groups receiving improved services (Sex-disaggregated)
    income and other disadvantaged     (Baseline: 0)
    groups

3.3 Establish citizens’ feedback       Citizens’ feedback mechanism is established and operating
                                                                                                                                                 Indicative
Actions and Activities                                     Target and Indicators                        Responsible Agency           Timeline     Budget
    mechanism to assess the
    effectiveness of service provision
Generating job opportunities: Outputs 1–3
1. Generate 267 skilled and 533        8% of which are first made available to the poor and 10% to   MUB-PMO, kheseg,                2017–      Project
   unskilled jobs at the construction  women (Baseline for female construction workers: is 5%)       khoroo, district                2021       construction
   stage.                                                                                            leaders/official, contractors              and operation
                                       8% of which are first made available to the poor and 10% to   of Metropolitan                            funds
2. Generate 468 jobs of at the         women for infrastructure facility, 70% for kindergarten and   Employment Department,
   operation stage                     CDSC, and 100% for woman transition center.                   Ministry of Labor, and all
                                                                                                     infrastructure service
                                                                                                     provider agencies
Measures to reduce potential risks: Outputs 1–3
1. Include HIV/AIDS and other        Terms of construction contract and implementation               MUB-PMO, kheseg,                2017–      Funds under
   communicable disease clauses                                                                      khoroo, district leaders/       2021       the
   into contract bidding documents   Public health, HIV/AIDS/sexually transmitted infections, and    officials, construction                    construction
                                     sexual harassment prevention training courses (Number of        contractors, CDCs and                      contract
2. Public health, HIV/AIDS/sexually  trainees disaggregated by sex and target groups)                SDCs, Metropolitan
   transmitted infections, gender                                                                    Employment, Department,                    National
   violence, and sexual harassment   Number and type of health measures                              Ministry of Labor, and all                 workplace
   prevention education program                                                                      infrastructure service                     program
   conducted to contractors and      Forms of publicity on HIV/AIDS and sexual harassment            provider agencies                          (safety,
   community residents               prevention at the construction stage, e.g., number of                                                      HIV/AIDS,
                                     brochures, posters, and picture albums distributed                                                         harassment,
3. Health measures for construction                                                                                                             equity)
   workers (e.g., setting-up a                                                                                                                  development
   temporary infirmary, using local                                                                                                             consultant
   medical resources) are                                                                                                                       fees of
   established                                                                                                                                  $7,500

4. Conduct publicity activities on
   HIV/AIDS, gender violence, sexual
   harassment, e.g., brochures,
   posters, and picture albums




                                                                                                                                                                Appendix 4
5. Ensure gender and disabled-
    friendly workplace facilities during
    the construction
CBOs = community-based organizations, CDCs = community development councils, CDSCs = community development service centers, PMO = program
management office.
a
  A khoroo is an administrative subdivision in Ulaanbaatar.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                                                                                                87
88       Appendix 4



           IX.        PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND
                                    COMMUNICATION

A.       Project Design and Monitoring Framework

106. The project design and monitoring frameworks for the program and projects 1 and 2 are
shown in Tables 1, 2, and 3.

       Table 1: Project Design and Monitoring Framework for the Investment Program
                                                                     Data Sources
                               Performance Targets and               and Reporting               Assumptions
Design Summary                 Indicators with Baselines              Mechanisms                   and Risks
Impact                    By 2028:                                                       Assumption
Improved living           Poverty headcount index reduced by        National             Policy environment supports
conditions in             30% (baseline: 23.5% in 2012)             Statistical Office   urban development and
Ulaanbaatar                                                         reports              increased investments in
                          Incidence of waterborne diseases          Government           urban infrastructure.
                          reduced by 30% (baseline: 90,310 in       public health        Risk
                          2012)                                     statistics           Urban infrastructure
                          Air pollution in Ulaanbaatar reduced      National             investments are constrained
                          by 30% (baseline: 1.286 PM10              Statistical Office   by fiscal and political factors.
                          concentration in 2012)                    reports
Outcome                   By 2024:                                                       Assumptions
A network of livable,     % of population with improved access      MUB report on        Political support and
competitive, and          to water, sanitation, and heating         urban                investment in urban
inclusive subcenters in   increased by 50% (baseline: 0% for        construction and     infrastructure continue
Ulaanbaatar’s ger         water 0%; 0% for sanitation, and 0%       districts records    throughout the program.
areas                     for heating in 2012) in targeted areas                         Improved services and urban
                          Average density in targeted subcenter     MUB report on        governance lead to
                          increased to 120 persons per ha           urban                sustained economic growth
                          (average baseline: 50 persons per ha      construction and     in the ger areas.
                          in 2010)                                  districts records    Risks
                                                                    MUB report on        Insufficient time and
                          Number of business establishments         urban                resources are devoted to
                          increased by 30% (baseline: 33,140 in     construction and     community mobilization.
                          2012) in targeted areas                   Districts records
                                                                                         Lack of private sector
                                                                    USUG operation       participation
                          Unit production cost of water reduced     and financial
                          by 50% (baseline: MNT59,400/ cubic        reports
                          meter in 2011)
Outputs
1. Roads and urban        By 2016:                                                       Assumption
services are expanded     18.6 km of water supply network,          PMO progress         The MUB complies with
within the targeted       20.0 km of sewer network, and 6.0 km      and completion       ADBs safeguards policies.
subcenters and            of collector mains constructed            reports              Risk
connectivity between      Five heating facilities, 21 km of                              Rising world prices of energy
subcenters is             heating network pipes, and 2.4 km of                           and construction materials
improved.                 heating service connections                                    significantly increase the
                          constructed                                                    program’s investment and
                          15 km of carriageway and 7.9 ha of                             operation and maintenance
                          landscaping and public space                                   costs.
                          including universal design features
                          such as sidewalk, lighting, and sitting

                          By 2023:
                          Water supply, sewer lines, urban
                          roads, and heating constructed in 132
                          ha in 6 subcenters (baseline:
                                                                                              Appendix 4          89


                                                                    Data Sources
                               Performance Targets and              and Reporting             Assumptions
Design Summary                 Indicators with Baselines             Mechanisms                and Risks
                        0 in 2012)
                        Improvements and construction of
                        respectively 14.8 km and 9.5 km of
                        connecting roads (baseline:
                        0 in 2012)
2. Economic and         By 2023:                                                      Assumption
public services in      At least 5,000 beneficiaries, 50% of       PMO progress       Investment in economic and
subcenters are          whom are women, receive vocational         and completion     social facilities leads to
improved.               training (baseline: 0 in 2012)             reports and        increased employment.
                        Constructed social facilities based on     district records
                        community needs fully staffed and                             Risks
                        operational in participating subcenters                       Inappropriate        vocational
                        (baseline: 0 in 2012)                                         training courses provided.
                                                                                      Lack      of   demand       for
                                                                                      commercial facilities built
3. Service providers    By 2023:                                                      Assumptions
become more efficient   Water supply network pumping               USUG operating     Service providers are
                        system is improved                         and financial      supportive of proposed
                        Distribution system is optimized           reports            policy and institutional
                                                                   PMO progress       reforms
                        Operation Control Centre is upgraded
                        and expanded                               and completion     Customers continue to pay
                                                                   reports            water and sewerage charges
                                                                                      Risk
                                                                                      The MUB fails to provide
                                                                                      adequate subsidies to
                                                                                      augment shortfalls of
                                                                                      revenues.



4. Institutional        By 2023:                                                      Assumptions
strengthening and       6 CDCs and SDCs fully functioning in       PMO progress       Urban planning and
capacity building       targeted areas, with at least 40%          and completion     subcenter development
                        women         participating     actively   reports            methodologies and tools and
4.1 Subcenter           (baseline: CDCs established only in                           supporting legislation are in
development and         Bayankhoshuu and Selbe in 2012)                               place at the start of program
community               Subcenters plan are prepared and           CDC reports        implementation.
engagement              endorsed by all the stakeholders                              Subcenter redevelopment
                        through      community      consultation                      leads to more efficient land
                        including at least 50% of women                               use and management.
                        participants                                                  Risks
                                                                                      Program implementation is
                                                                                      slowed down by a lack of
                                                                                      community        and     private
                                                                                      sector participation.
                                                                                      Women are not effectively
4.2 Operations and                                                                    mainstreamed        into     the
management of                                                                         program.
service providers       By 2017:                                                      Assumptions
                        USUG is autonomous in terms of             USUG operating     Policy reforms receive full
improved                                                           and financial
                        financial and asset management                                government support.
                        (baseline: USUG not autonomous)            reports            Appropriate user charges/
                        Utility tariffs linked to direct cost                         tariffs are not implemented
                                                                   USUG business      by the MUB, and/or not
                        recovery of O&M, including asset           plans
                        depreciation (baseline: tariffs barely                        supported by the target
                        cover O&M)                                                    consumers.
                                                                                      Risks
90      Appendix 4


                                                                  Data Sources
                              Performance Targets and             and Reporting              Assumptions
Design Summary                Indicators with Baselines            Mechanisms                  and Risks
                        Revised      performance     contract                       Inadequate program
                        between the MUB and service                                 resources are allotted to
                        providers in place                                          support the policy and
                                                                                    institutional reforms.
                                                                                    Lack of incentives to attract
                                                                                    private sector participation

4.3 Strengthened        By 2023:                                MUB reports         Assumption
program                 PMO is fully functioning with fully                         Consultants and PMO staff
implementation          trained staff, at least 30% of whom                         work effectively as a team.
capacity                are women (baseline: 0 in 2012)                             Risk
                                                                 PMO progress       Failure to appoint and retain
                         Sex-disaggregated program               and completion     well       qualified      and
                         performance and monitoring system       reports            experienced consultants
                         operational (baseline: 0 in 2012)
                         Project feasibility studies, due
                         diligence, and safeguards prepared
                         for participating subcenters (baseline:
                         0 in 2012)
Activities with Milestones for Tranche 1 (after Loan Effectiveness)                 Inputs
1. Roads and urban services expanded                                                   Amount
1.1 Detailed design of water and/or sewerage improvements completed (Apr 2014)         ($ million)
1.2 Detailed design of heating improvements completed (Apr 2014)
1.3 Detailed design of roads and/or other infrastructure completed (Apr 2014)          Investment Program
1.4 Urban infrastructure constructed, commissioned, and operating in phases from       ADB MFF      163.70
    Apr 2014 to 2016                                                                   MUB           96.00
2. Economic and public services in subcenters improved                                 Cofinancing 60.30
2.1 Detailed design of kindergarten and business incubators and/or vocational          Total        320.00
     training centers completed (mid-2014)
2.2 Facilities constructed, commissioned, and operating in phases from the end of      Project 1
     2014 to 2017                                                                      ADB
3. More efficient service providers                                                    ADF Loan       22.50
3.1 Support improvements in operating efficiency                                       OCR Loan       27.50
3.2 Construction of upgraded facilities and measurement systems completed              UEIF-UFPFa      3.70
                                                                                       MUB           22.44
4. Institutional strengthening and capacity building                                   Cofinancing 28.38
4.1 PMO fully staffed (mid-Dec 2013)                                                   Total        104.52
4.2 Hiring of capacity development consultants (Jan 2014)
4.3 Subcenter redevelopment authority established and staffed (Dec 2013)
4.4 Subcenter planning and development guidelines and regulations in place (Sep
    2014)
4.5 CDCs and SDCs fully functioning in targeted areas (mid-2014)
4.6 Support to financial strengthening and improved regulatory and institutional
    framework (mid-2015)
Tranche 2 is prepared and approved by 2016
Tranche 3 is prepared and approved by 2017
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, CDC = community development council, ha =
hectare, km = kilometer, MFF = multitranche financing facility, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, MW = megawatt,
OCR = ordinary capital resources, O&M = operation and maintenance, PMO = program management office, SDC =
small- and medium-enterprise development council, USUG = Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority.
a
  Urban Environmental Infrastructure Fund under the Urban Financing Partnership Facility.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                          Appendix 4   91


Table 2: Project Design and Monitoring Framework for Project 1
92   Appendix 4
                                                                                         Appendix 4       93




ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, CDC = community development council, ha =
                             2               3
hectare, km = kilometer, m = square meter, m = cubic meter, MFF = multitranche financing facility, MUB =
Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, OCR = ordinary capital resources, O&M = operation and maintenance, PMO = program
management office, SDC = small- and medium-enterprise development council, USUG = Ulaanbaatar Water Supply
and Sewerage Authority.
a
  Traditional tents for housing.
b
  Urban Environmental Infrastructure Fund under the Urban Financing Partnership Facility.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
94       Appendix 4



                 Table 3: Project Design and Monitoring Framework for Project 2
Impact the Project is Aligned with
Improved living conditions in Ulaanbaatar (Ulaanbaatar City Master Plan [2030])a

                             Performance Indicators with         Data Sources and
Results Chain                   Targets and Baselines          Reporting Mechanisms                 Risks
Outcome                   By 2022:
A network of livable,     a.   % of population in Dambadarjaa a–c. MUB report on urban      Insufficient time and
competitive, and               and Denjiin with improved           construction and         resources devoted to
inclusive subcenters in        access to water, heating, and       districts records        community
Ulaanbaatar’s ger              sanitation increased by 20%                                  mobilization
areas                          (2015 baseline: 0% for water,
                               0% for heating, and 0% for                                   Lack of private sector
                               sanitation)                                                  participation in the
                                                                                            redevelopment
                          b.    Average density increased in                                approaches
                                Dambadarjaa to 200 persons
                                per ha and in Denjiin to 180
                                persons per ha
                                (2015 average baseline: 104
                                [Dambadarjaa] and 94 [Denjiin]
                                persons per ha)

                          c.   Number of business
                               establishments in
                               Dambardarjaa and Denjiin
                               increased by 10% (2015
                               baseline: 1,845)
Outputs                   By 2021:                                1a–1e. PMO progress and   Rising global prices of
1. Roads and urban        1a. 24.1 km of water supply                 completion reports    energy and
   services                    network and 25.8 km of                                       construction materials
   expanded                    wastewater network                                           significantly increase
                               constructed                                                  the project’s
                               (2015 baseline: 5.7 km of water                              investment and O&M
                               supply network and 3.0 km of                                 costs
                               wastewater network)

                          1b.   3 heating facilities with
                                112.5 MW capacity and 6.0 km
                                of heating network pipes
                                constructed
                                (2015 baseline: 18 heating
                                facilities with 7.0 MW)

                          1c.   7.08 km of priority roads
                                including street lighting,
                                3 bridges, and sidewalks
                                constructed
                                (2015 baseline: 3.9 km of
                                paved road and 2 bridges)

                          1d.   6.1 km of water supply main
                                and 7.2 km of sewage main
                                rehabilitated and expanded
                                (2015 baseline: 2.9 km of water
                                supply main and 4.2 km of
                                sewerage main)

                          1e.   25 cameras installed and
                                operating in Denjiin and
                                Dambadarjaa subcenters to
                                promote safety for women and
                                                                                               Appendix 4         95


                             Performance Indicators with              Data Sources and
Results Chain                   Targets and Baselines               Reporting Mechanisms               Risks
                               girls in public spaces
                               (2015 baseline: 0)
2.   Economic and         By 2021:                                  2a–2d. PMO progress and    Insufficient resources
     public services in   2a. Four kindergarten classrooms              completion reports     are allocated to the
     targeted areas            with 6,200 m2 of floor area and          and district records   O&M of
     improved                  capacity for 400 students                                       socioeconomic
                               constructed (using green                                        facilities
                               building design) in
                               Bayankhoshuu, Dambadarjaa,
                               Denjiin, and Selbe subcenters                                   Lack of demand for
                               (sex-disaggregated)                                             commercial facilities
                               (2015 baseline: 10,500 m2 with                                  built
                               capacity for 1,000 students)

                          2b.   Two community development
                                and service centers
                                constructed in Dambadarjaa
                                and Denjiin with 6,000 m2 of
                                floor area
                                (2015 baseline: 0)

                          2c.   Two urban parks constructed in
                                Banyankhoshuu and Denjiin
                                             2
                                with 23,770 m
                                (2015 baseline: 0)

                          2d.   Two sports complexes
                                constructed in Bayankhoshuu
                                and Dambadarjaa with
                                           2
                                12,000 m of floor area
                                (2015 baseline: 0)
3.   Institutional        By 2017:
     capacity for         3.1a. PMO is fully functioning with       3.1a–3.1b. PMO progress    Inadequate project
     program                    fully trained staff, at least 50%       and completion         resources are allotted
     management, and            of whom are women                       reports                to support the policy
     urban                      (2015 baseline: 14 staff)                                      and institutional
     development                                                                               reforms
     strengthened
                          By 2018:                                                             Lack of incentives to
3.1 Program               3.1b. Sex-disaggregated data                                         attract private sector
    management and              collected for all activities                                   participation
    implementation              through project performance
    support                     management system                                              Failure to appoint and
                                (2015 baseline: 0)                                             retain well qualified
                                                                                               and experienced
                          By 2018:                                                             consultants
3.2 Detailed design,      3.2a. Project 2 detailed design           3.2a. PMO progress and
    construction                completed                               completion reports
    supervision, and            (2015 baseline: not applicable)
    engineering
    services inputs on    By 2018:
    Project 3             3.3a. Tranche 3 feasibility study         3.3a. PMO progress and
    feasibility study            completed                              completion reports
                                (2015 baseline: not applicable)

                          By 2019:
3.3. Subcenter            3.3b. Dambadarjaa and Denjiin plans       3.3b–3.3c. MUB and
     planning and               and redevelopment processes             districts reports
     development,               prepared and endorsed by all
96      Appendix 4



                            Performance Indicators with           Data Sources and
Results Chain                  Targets and Baselines            Reporting Mechanisms                Risks
   community                  stakeholders, through
   participation, SME         community consultation with at
   development in             least 50% female participants
   Dambadarjaa and            (2015 baseline: 0)
   Denjiin, and
   completion of          3.3c. CDCs and SDCs in
   Project 3                     Dambadarjaa and Denjiin fully
   feasibility study             functioning, with at least 40%
                                 female participation
                                 (2015 baseline: 0)
Key Activities with Milestones
1. Roads and urban services expanded
1.1 Detailed design of water and sewerage improvements completed by November 2018
1.2 Detailed design of heating improvements completed by November 2018
1.3 Detailed design of roads and other infrastructure completed by November 2018
1.4 Urban infrastructure constructed, commissioned, and made operational in phases between April 2019 and 2021
1.5 Implementation of LARP completed prior to construction activities
1.6 EMP, GAP, and SDAP implemented
2. Economic and public services in targeted areas improved
2.1 Detailed design of kindergarten and business incubators/vocational training centers completed by November
    2018
2.2 Facilities constructed, commissioned, and made operational in phases between September 2018 and 2021
2.3 Implementation of LARP completed prior to construction activities
2.4 EMP, GAP, and SDAP implemented
3. Institutional capacity for program management and urban development strengthened
3.1 PMO fully staffed by November 2017
3.2 Hiring of capacity development consultants completed by November 2017
3.3 Subcenter planning and development guidelines and regulations in place by June 2019
3.4 CDCs and SDCs established in target areas by June 2018
3.5 Support to financial strengthening provided and regulatory and institutional framework improved by March 2019
3.6 Tranche 3 prepared by 2018
Inputs for Tranche 2
ADB: $66.35 million (loan)
Government: $35.15 million
Assumptions for Partner Financing
European Investment Bank: $19.64 million (loan)
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CDC = community development council, EMP = environmental management plan,
                                                                                                         2
GAP = gender action plan, ha = hectare, km = kilometer, LARP = land acquisition and resettlement plan, m = square
meter, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, MW = megawatt, O&M = operation and maintenance, PMO = program
management office, SDAP = social development action plan, SDC = small- and medium-enterprise development
council, SME = small- and medium-sized enterprise.
a
  State Great Hural (Parliament) of Mongolia. February 2013. Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban
  Development Master Plan 2020 and Development Directions 2030. Ulaanbaatar.
Source: ADB.

B.      Monitoring

107. Investment program performance monitoring and evaluation. The MUB will be
assisted by a program steering committee (PSC). The PSC will be set up and will be chaired by
the Mayor of Ulaanbaatar and will comprise representatives of the MUB and national agencies.
The PSC will meet at least once in every 6 months and review the progress of implementation
and provide guidance, as necessary.

108.    ADB will regularly visit the project to monitor performance during implementation.
                                                                                             Appendix 4       97


109. ADB and the MUB will use the project performance management system (PPMS) to
monitor the effectiveness of the investment program. This will be achieved through the use of
indicators and targets covering both macro and micro issues.

110. Investment program review. ADB and the executing agency will review the investment
program and the periodic financing requests annually covering all institutional, administrative,
technical, economic, and other relevant aspects that may have an impact on the performance of
the investment program. The review will examine implementation progress and compliance with
assurances in the loan agreement.

111. Compliance monitoring. . The compliance status of loan and project covenants will be
reported and assessed through the semiannual progress reports and verified by ADB review
missions.

112. Project performance monitoring and evaluation. The government will cause the MUB
to monitor and evaluate impact through a performance monitoring system, as agreed to by the
government and ADB, to ensure that project equipment and materials are managed efficiently,
benefit are maximized, and impacts are monitored. The government will also cause the MUB to
collect the necessary information and data on project performance, as agreed to by the
government and ADB, before project implementation, and at completion of the investment
program.

113. Safeguards monitoring. The government and the MUB will ensure that laws and
regulations of Mongolia governing safeguards, as well as ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement
(2009) are followed. The MUB will ensure that all works contracts under the investment program
incorporate provisions and budgets for safeguards plans implementation. A program
management office (PMO) has been established in the MUB. The PMO includes fulltime social
and environment staff members responsible for social and environmental aspects of the project,
respectively.

           (i)     Resettlement plan. Internal monitoring for resettlement plan implementation will
                   be carried out routinely by the PMO either directly or through the services of a
                   resettlement consultant. The results will be communicated to ADB through the
                   quarterly project implementation reports.31 The PMO is responsible for managing
                   resettlement plan implementation and taking actions to handle the day-to-day
                   issues. At the end of each tranche, the PMO will prepare a resettlement plan
                   completion report and submit to ADB. The PMO is also responsible for engaging
                   a qualified external monitor to investigate and assess resettlement plan
                   implementation in each tranche. External resettlement plan implementation
                   monitoring will be carried out semiannually during the implementation of
                   resettlement plan and its results will be reported to the MUB and ADB in
                   semiannual reports.
           (ii)    Environmental management plan. During construction, contractors will develop
                   contractor environment management plans with environmental management and
                   internal monitoring systems based on the updated project 1 and project 2 EMP,
                   undertake self-check activities and fully cooperate with the environmental
                   inspectors of the municipal specialized inspection department and/or specialized
                   inspection divisions of the districts. Contractors will submit monthly contractor

31
     As and when necessary to report significant progress, implementation issues, or status of earlier identified
     problems.
98      Appendix 4



                 environment management plans implementation reports to the PMO. Projects 1
                 and 2 EMP implementation coordination and verification for the construction and
                 operation periods will be carried out routinely by the PMO with the support of the
                 services of environment consultants. Periodic environmental impact monitoring
                 will be carried out by the PMO through the services of a licensed institute or
                 consultant. The results of projects 1 and 2 EMP implementation and
                 environmental impact monitoring will be communicated to ADB through the
                 annual project EMP monitoring and progress reports, and summarized in the
                 quarterly project implementation reports.32 The annual project EMP monitoring
                 and progress reports will be disclosed on the ADB website.

114. Gender and social dimensions monitoring. The PPMS will have the monitoring of the
gender action plan (GAP) and social development action plan (SDAP). Clear targets and
indicators have been established and some indicators, such as those on employment and
training, are also captured in the design and monitoring framework. The international and
national gender and social development consultants will assist the executing and implementing
agencies to set up effective monitoring systems, and work with the focal points in the executing
and implementing agencies to ensure implementation of the GAP and SDAP. The GAP and
SDAP will be monitored and reported semiannually and during ADB review missions

C.      Evaluation

115. ADB and the government will jointly review implementation of the investment program
once a year, covering a detailed evaluation of the scope, implementation arrangements,
institutional, administrative, technical, economic, financial, achievement of scheduled targets,
and other relevant aspects that may have an impact on the performance of the investment
program. The review will examine implementation progress and compliance with assurances in
the loan agreement. Feedback from the PPMS activities will be analyzed. Within 3 months of
physical completion of tranches 1 and 2, the executing agency will submit a project completion
report to ADB.33

D.      Reporting

116. The MUB will provide ADB with (i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with
ADB's project performance management system; (ii) consolidated annual reports including (a)
progress achieved by output as measured through the indicator's performance targets, (b) key
implementation issues and solutions, (c) updated procurement plan, and (d) updated
implementation plan for next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion report within 6 months of
physical completion of first tranche. To ensure projects continue to be both viable and
sustainable, project accounts and the executing agency audited financial statements, together
with the associated auditor's report, should be adequately reviewed.

E.      Stakeholder Communication Strategy

117. The PMO with support of consultants will undertake consultations with key stakeholders.
Communication with stakeholders will be managed by the PMO environmental and/or social

32
   As and when necessary to report significant progress, implementation issues, or status of earlier identified
   problems.
33
   Project completion report format available at: http://adb.org/Consulting/consultants-toolkits/PCR-Public-Sector-
   Lanscape.rar.
                                                                               Appendix 4     99


safeguards specialist. The PMO will ensure local stakeholders are consulted, that information
on the project is disseminated, and that questions and complaints are addressed quickly and
effectively. The community participation component builds off the participation process initiated
under the PPTA and has a focus on community based planning. During implementation, the
development of a framework with a transparent mechanism to regulate urban and land
redevelopment will support continuous dialogue with the communities and will ensure the
integration of the current resident into the urban redevelopment process.

118. Public disclosure. Public disclosure of all project documents will be undertaken through
the PMO and on the ADB website, including the project data sheet, design and monitoring
framework, GAP, SDAP, and the report and recommendations of the President. Disclosure of
social and environmental monitoring reports will be undertaken during project implementation.
100       Appendix 4



                                      X.       ANTICORRUPTION POLICY


119. ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the
Anticorruption Policy relating to the investment program.1 All contracts financed by ADB shall
include provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of
the executing agency and all project contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service
providers. Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment list are ineligible to participate
in ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the program.2

120. To support these efforts, relevant provisions of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy are included
in the loan regulations and bidding documents for the program. In particular, all contracts
financed by ADB in connection with the program shall include provisions specifying the right of
ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing agency and all
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the investment
program. In relation to the program, the executing agency will ensure that (i) a supervisory body
is established for prevention of undue interference in business practices, and adequate
resources are made available for its effective operation; (ii) a leading group of officials from the
supervision division of the executing agency is located in offices involved in bidding, installation,
and other operational activities under the investment program; and (iii) periodic inspections on
the contractor’s activities related to fund withdrawals and settlements are carried out. The
executing agency shall also initiate liaison meetings with the Prosecutor’s Office, as needed, to
discuss any warnings about, or information on, alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, or coercive
practices relating to the investment program.

121. The MUB will disclose to the public, and update annually the current status of the
program and how the proceeds of the facility are used. For each contract financed under the
program, the MUB will disclose on their respective websites information on, among others, the
(i) list of participating bidders; (ii) name of the winning bidder; (iii) basic details on bidding
procedures and procurement methods adopted; (iv) amount of contract awarded; (v) list of
goods/services, including consulting services procured; and (vi) intended and actual utilization
of the facility proceeds.




1
    Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/Policies-Strategies.pdf.
2
    ADB's Integrity Office web site is available at: http://www.adb.org/integrity/unit.asp.
                                                                                         Appendix 4   101


                                  XI.      ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM

122. People who are, or may in the future be, adversely affected by the project may submit
complaints to ADB’s Accountability Mechanism. The Accountability Mechanism provides an
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects
can voice, and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s
operational policies and procedures. Before submitting a complaint to the Accountability
Mechanism, affected people should make an effort in good faith to solve their problems by
working with the concerned ADB operations department. Only after doing that, and if they are
still dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism.1




1
    Accountability Mechanism. http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp.
102         Appendix 4




     XII.         RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE FACILITY ADMINISTRATION MANUAL

123. All revisions/updates during the course of implementation are retained in this Section to
provide a chronological history of changes to implemented arrangements recorded in the FAM.

      No.            FAM Changes/Updates            Date                        Remarks
 1                        Initial draft         29 July 2013     First draft provided to executing
                                                                 agency during fact-finding mission
 2                         Agreed draft            Xxxxx         Loan negotiations
 3                       Update (Project 2)         xxxx         FAM updated due to PFR 2
                                                                 submission
 4                         Agreed draft       22 February 2017   Loan negotiations
                             PROJECT PROCUREMENT RISK ASSESSMENT

A.         Introduction

1.     As part of the project-preparation process, Asian Development Bank (ADB) requires an
assessment of the capacity of the executing agency and implementing agencies to procure
goods, works and consulting services, and recommendations to be made on actions required to
address weakness or constraints. Specifically, the assessment exercise involves:

           (i)       evaluating the ability of existing executing agency and implementing agencies
                     procurement processes to comply with ADB’s procurement guidelines;
           (ii)      identifying the need for training and specific procurement arrangements (in
                     resources or processes) to be adopted during project preparation and
                     implementation, to develop staff competence and improve effectiveness, and to
                     minimize implementation risks; and
           (iii)     defining the appropriate level of review, either prior or post by ADB.

2.         The assessment has three components:

           (i)       The assessment of the general procurement environment.
           (ii)      A questionnaire completed by the executing agency and implementing agencies.
           (iii)     The preparation of a procurement capacity assessment report, including
                     corrective recommendations.

B.         Expected Procurement under the Project

3.      The project will involve a broad range of procurement contracts covering consulting
services, goods, and works contracts. There will be 6 works contracts procured by international
competitive bidding (ICB) (above $5 million), 5 works contracts procured by NCB (between $0.1
million and $5 million) and 1 contract procured using community participation in procurement.
There will be also two consulting service contracts for Tranche 2, both by QCBS selection.
Advance contracting for recruitment of consulting services related to detailed engineering design
and supervision, and project management support has been requested by MUB. MUB has been
informed that advance contracting is part of the normal procedure, and that ADB's support for
advance contracting does not commit ADB to approve the loan project or to finance the
recruitment costs. The QCBS (90:10) method will be used to procure consulting services for the
PMO. International: 246 person-months and National: 743 person-months

C.         Assessment of General Procurement Environment

4.      The assessment of the general procurement environment for the Government of
Mongolia (GOM) is an exercise that is undertaken by ADB and updated normally on an annual
basis. The ADB assessment is shown in Table 1.

5.     This assessment is essentially to ascertain the level of risks (low, average, or high)
associated with the procurement process. The main areas with high risks are identified:

     (i)           MUB Procurement Unit has not yet acquired significant practice in both national and
                   international procurement procedures. Capacity to undertake procurement is rated
                   weak.
     (ii)          The number of staff working on MUB procurement agency is sufficient to carry out
2


                 procurement works for additional projects but the municipal staff are not fully trained
                 to carry out procurement according to the ADB Guidelines. Procurement training has
                 been provided under T1. Staff turnover is high. Procurement capacity still needs
                 strengthening.
      (iii)      Lack of a procurement manual/s specifying how the legal requirements are
                 translated into detailed work procedures.
      (iv)       Lack of procurement accreditation or professionalization program.
      (v)        High staff turnover rate

6.     However, the requirement to adhere to the procedures stated in ADB Procurement
Guidelines will mitigate these risks to acceptable levels.

                                Table 1: The National Procurement Environment

                                                                                            Risk
General Procurement Environment Assessment                                               Assessed
                                                                                               as:   Low   Average   High
1.   Is there a procurement law?                                                                      X
     The answer to this is a simple yes or no, i.e. is there a single law governing procurement,     yes
     which is representative of best practice or is procurement governed through various laws,
     decrees etc.? Assess this as either “high” or “low”.
2.   Are the laws and regulations clear and concise?                                                  X
     If there is no single law check “high”, and similarly if the law is complex and difficult to
     follow check “average”. If the law is easy to follow check “low”.
3.   What does the law (or regulations applicable to procurement) cover?                              X
     If there is a single law, “low” will apply when the law covers drafting and use of standard
     bidding documents evaluation, contracting, through to the management of contracts
     including payment, warranty, and defects liability periods. The less the procurement
     process is covered the higher the risk. If there is no single law, check “high”.
4.   Does the law cover the procurement of consulting services?                                       X
     If consulting services are not covered or there is no law the risk is high, if they are
     covered the risk is low.
5.   Does the law differentiate between processes for consulting services and Goods/Works?            X
     If there is no law, or it applies the same processes to consulting services as for goods and
     works check high. If there is some differentiation but the processes are similar, check
     average. If consulting services are dealt with separately check low.
6.   Does the law require advertisement of all procurement opportunities?                             X
     Low risk will be represented through advertisement all above $25,000, average above all
     above $100,000, high by no advertisement or advertisement at a higher threshold than
     $100,000.
7.   Are contract awards advertised?                                                                                 X
     The same thresholds as stated in question 6 should be applied.
                                                                                                                                3


                                                                                            Risk
General Procurement Environment Assessment                                               Assessed
                                                                                             as:       Low    Average        High
8.   Are there restrictions on goods works and services on the basis of origin?                         X
     If procurement is limited to solely national origin check high, if there are restrictions or a
     national preference scheme, average. If none, low.
9.   Do the law or relevant legislation and regulations provide acceptable provision for the            X
     participation of state owned enterprises?
     Only if the SOE is legally and financially autonomous and not a dependent agency of the
     purchaser low, other than this, high.
10. Are there restrictions on the nationality of bidders and consulting firms invited?                            X
     If procurement is limited to solely national firms and individuals, check high; if there are
     restrictions or a national preference scheme, average. If none, low.
11. Are foreign bidders and consultants forced to offer through or with local partners?                 X
     If yes, high; in certain circumstances, average; never, low.
12. Is there a domestic preference scheme?                                                                        X
     If there is across the board high, if applicable in limited circumstances, average, if none,
     low.
13. Is there a national standard mandated for use for quality control purposes?                                   X
     No, or Yes with direct, accessible international equivalents low, yes without international
     equivalents, high.
14. Are any agencies exempt from the law?                                                              For government
     Such as the security forces, if yes high, also high of any types of goods are exempt from         procurement, yes; for
     parts of the law such as medicines, text books or any other commodity.                            general procurement,
                                                                                                       no.
15. Is the default method for procurement open competition?                                             X
     Either yes or no, and low or high.
16. Is open procurement easily avoided?                                                                           X
     If the procurement law allows avoidance of open procurement above the national
     threshold on the basis of circumstances that are not in response to natural disasters, i.e.
     simple urgency, check high; if open procurement can be avoided by senior management
     decision average. If avoidance requires approval of an oversight agency, low.
17. Do the rules and regulations require prequalification?                                              X
     Only for complex contracts, low; no contracts, average; all contracts, high.
18. Do the rules and regulations require registration?                                                 Require registered,
     If yes, high; if only for specialist goods such as medicines, average; if no registration, low.   licensed company
19. Are there systematic procurement process audits?                                                              X
     Yes, low; only financial audits, average; none, high.
20. Is there a national procurement manual or guide?                                                    X
     A single procurement manual or guide, low; manual exists but out of date/not in wide use,
     average; none, high.
4


                                                                                          Risk
General Procurement Environment Assessment                                              Assessed
                                                                                           as:     Low   Average   High
21. Do the laws and regulations mandate the use of standard documents?                                     X
    Documents for goods, works, and consultants services, low; just for two of the three,
    average; only one or none, high.
22. Have these standard bidding documents been approved for use on ADB projects?                    X
    Yes, low; some but not all, average; no, high.
23. Do the regulations require the collection of nationwide statistics on procurement?                     X
    Yes and statistics collected, low; yes but data not collected or used, average; no, high.
24. Is consolidated historical procurement data available to the public?                                   X
    Yes, low; too much or too little, average; no, high.
25. Do the procurement laws and regulations contain provisions for dealing with misconduct?         X
    Such as fraud and corrupt practices – the procurement law or regulations may include or
    cross refer to anticorruption legislation. Yes, low; no, high.
26. Is fraud and corruption in procurement regarded as a criminal act?                                     X
    The penalties should include penal servitude (prison) yes, low; no high.
27. Have there been prosecutions for fraud and corruption?                                                 X
    If there have been successful prosecutions for fraud and corruption, low; if prosecutions
    seem to focus solely on low grade junior staff, average; none, high.
28. Is there an alternative disputes resolution process independent of government and                      X
    courts?
    If there is an arbitration law and independent process, low; if the standard contracts use
    ICC or similar dispute resolution, average; if arbitration is through the courts or can be
    overturned by courts, high.
29. Does the law allow for sovereign immunity to the executing agency for claims against it?               X
    If plaintiffs can sue the government for contractual nonperformance, low; if they cannot,
    high.
30. Do the regulations allow for black listing (disbarment) of firms and individuals?                      X
    If there is no black listing process or the process is transparent and equitable and
    undertaken by an independent oversight agency, low. If there is a process and it is
    administered by a single line agency such as finance, average. If it is administered by the
    executing agency, high.
31. Which body oversees procurement?                                                                X
    Independent body reporting to the elected body, low; single body reporting to the cabinet,     MOF
    average; no body or reports to a single state agency, such as the Prime Minister or
    Finance Minister, high.
                                                                                                                        5


                                                                                        Risk
General Procurement Environment Assessment                                           Assessed
                                                                                        as:        Low   Average   High
32. What powers does the oversight body have?                                                              X
    If the body can impose administrative sanctions on an executing agency and its staff and
    overturn contact awards including ministerial decisions, low. If the body only can impose
    sanctions through the head of the executing agency, average. If the body can only
    recommend action, high.
33. Is there a nationwide procurement training plan?                                                       X
    If procurement training is assessed and planned for nationwide, low. If this is delegated to
    line agencies, average. If there is no strategy or plan, high.
34. Is there a procurement accreditation or professionalization program?                                   X
    An externally recognized program, low. A government sponsored program, average.
    None, high.
35. Are major projects identified within an agencies appropriation or budget?                       X
    Yes low, no but a system in place for the ring-fencing of project funds average, neither
    low
36. Is the procurement cycle tied to an annual budgeting cycle i.e. can procurement activity                        X
    only commence once a budget is approved?
    No medium expenditure framework in place, low. Activity may start up to but excluding
    contract award, average; Yes tied to annual budget, high
37. Once an appropriation or budget is approved will funds be placed with the executing                             X
    agency or can the executing agency draw them down at will?
    Yes, low. No (additional controls imposed such as cash release system), high.
38. Can an executing agency draw directly from a loan or imprest account or will it spend                           X
    budgeted funds with the borrower claiming reimbursement?
    Draws directly, low; from budgeted funds, high.
39. When an executing agency is implementing a project using funds from the national                       X
    budget has a delay in funding significantly delayed procurement?
    No or not applicable, low; yes, high.
6


D.     Executing Agency’s Procurement Capacity Assessment

7.     The procurement questionnaire as shown in Annex 1 was used to assess Municipality of
Ulaanbaatar (MUB) and Project Management Office (PMO). The PMO was established under MUB
in 2013. The PMO is headed by the project coordinator appointed by the Mayor’s Office of
Ulaanbaatar. Eleven full-time staff, including a full-time deputy coordinator, are assigned to the
PMO in charge of the daily operations. The MUB established the PMO for the project, and will take
the lead for the procurement process for the entire project. The PMO will engage staff and
consultants to assist in procurement for the project. The PMO will coordinate with the consultants
and the master planning agency (MPA) for bidding document preparation, bidding process, bidding
evaluation, prepare and submit bidding evaluation reports to ADB for endorsement. The
procurement capacity is evaluated through interviews and the questionnaire as divided into five
subsections:
       (i)     general resources: staffing and equipment;
       (ii)    procurement processes for goods and works: preparation of bid documents and
               tendering process;
       (iii)   procurement processes for consulting services: consultant selection procedure;
       (iv)    process oversight and control: checks-and-balance and contract administration; and
       (v)     record keeping.

       1.     Assessment of General Resources

8.     The PMO staff has gained experience with procurement for ADB Tranche 1 funded project.
However, there is only one staff dedicated to procurement operations. PMO will utilize the
consultant resources to realize good control of the project progress, cost, and quality. A project
management mechanism has been established, and relevant training has been conducted to
ensure that they could adequately coordinate and guided in the implementation of the procurement
plan.

9.     The capacity constraint due to inadequacy knowledge of procurement staff could result in
delays or mistakes in directing and coordinating engineering design, bidding document preparation,
bidding process, bidding evaluation, etc. during the procurement process. The PMO support
consultant is crucial for successful implementation of the loan project, which should be engaged by
the executing agency to provide additional resources in assisting the executing agency and
implementing agencies in complying with the loan agreement terms as regards procurement,
project management, and other aspects. Even before the engagement of the PMO support
consultant for Tranche 2, additional procurement support especially in bidding document
preparation and recruitment of consultants, will be required to assist the PMO and implementing
agencies for the early stage of the procurement process.

       2.     Assessment of Procurement Processes for Goods and Works

10.     Responses to the questionnaire show a systematic process is not yet fully in place for
preparing bid documents, bids evaluation, and contract award. The PMO is not full of engineering
knowledge. It is understood that the executing agency will hire a detailed design consultant to
prepare the preliminary and construction drawing designs, and engage a support consultant firm to
assist in the preparation of the bidding documents and bidding process. The common practice in the
                                                                                                    7


GOM is that the master planning agency (MPA) and Urban Detailed design consultant will oversight
the detailed design drawings and the bills of quantities as the technical parts of the bidding
documents, while the PMO support consultant firm will prepare the commercial part of the bidding
documents. However, since the bidding documents for the foreign-funded projects require the full
technical specifications and much more detailed bills of quantities, the detailed design consultants
and the PMO staff are usually not able to complete the technical bidding documents to the quality
usually required for the foreign-funded projects. An extensive support from ADB shall be provided to
ensure the implementation of the project. Since both detailed design consultants and the MUB are
usually not familiar with ADB funded projects, it is necessary to include experienced procurement
specialists in both the support consultant team and prior to the engagement of the detailed design
consultants to help the executing agency and implementing agencies prepare bidding documents
and help in bidding process. The “Bid Evaluation Committee’ are composed of the owner’s
representatives and selected experts external to the organization will decide the successful bidder
in accordance with the PPLM. The procedures are in principle satisfactory as long as the additional
procedures specified in the ADB Procurement Guidelines are followed.

11.     There is lack of engineering background capacity in preparing the technical parts of the
bidding documents involved in the project, it is recommended that the capacity building program for
the PMO should include experienced international procurement specialists with adequate input
assisting bidding document preparation and procurement training and supervising the detailed
design and support consulting firms.

12.     During project implementation, the PMO support consultant should provide on-the-job
training on procurement and provide assistance in prepare and review the bid documents and
update using ADB standard bidding documents to ensure compliance with ADB requirements, and
in addressing ADB’s comments during the tendering process.

       3.      Assessment on Procurement Processes for Consulting Services

13.      Based on Tranche 1 discussions and interviews of the PMO management and staff, it is
concluded that they have some experience of procuring a consulting firm for implementation of the
Project. It is suggested that ADB provide guidance to the PMOs during recruiting the consulting firm
process. It is recommended that the consulting firm is recruited as soon as possible, certainly before
the civil works and equipment contracts are awarded.

       4.      Assessment of Process Control and Oversight

14.     Based on interviews and surveys, PMO staff is familiar with domestic procurement process
for recruiting consulting services. There are well-established national and local guidelines and
regulations to engage consultants for the domestic consulting services. The staff attended
procurement trainings provided by ADB and other government agencies and with knowledge for
ADB procurement process for works. Control and oversight will be established at the MUB and
PMO:
        (i)     For approving bid documents, tender recommendations, etc.
        (ii)    The procedures for dealing with invoicing, payment, and nonpayment.
        (iii)   Declaration of conflict of interest in procurement process will be required.
8


15.    However, closely monitoring and detailed instructions to the PMO during the procurement
process are required. Additional controls by ADB through its reviews and approvals of bidding
documents, instructions to the bidding process and contracts serve to ensure fairness, and
openness in procurement and compliance with ADB’s procurement principles.

       5.     Assessment of Record Keeping

16.     From responses received, a reasonable record system is established for safekeeping the
original contracts, copies of bids and bid evaluation, and contract administration documents.
However, the importance of book keeping and clearly defined filing system shall be addressed to
PMO and the filing system shall be enhanced through capacity development and training.

E.     Procurement Capacity of Implementing Agencies

17.     The, Executing Agency – Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB) a Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
(MUB) is responsible for program oversight, administration, and the implementing agency for the
project the Program Management Office (PMO), Responsible for program implementation and
management. The primary role of each agency is to carry out the construction of the Ger Area
projects in the target sub-centers, and they are responsible for project construction management,
supervision, quality control, and approval process. Currently, the procurement unit of MUB is fully
staffed and the PMO has one full-time procurement staff. The PMO staff are familiar with the
procurement process for the domestic construction projects, but do not have experience working
with foreign-funded projects.


18.     Based on the responses from the procurement capacity assessment questionnaires for the
implementing agency and PMO (Annex 1), the procurement capacity of the implementing agency
has been assessed and evaluated in the four aspects and the results are summarized in the
following paragraphs.

       1.     Assessment of General Resources

19.     The staff of the implementing agency has certain experience with the procurement of urban
infrastructure development for domestic funded project, but they do not have experience for
procurement for foreign-funded urban development projects. The staffs are in general lack of
knowledge and experience for ADB procurement procedures, bidding document preparation, and
procurement process. The one full time procurement staff of the PMO is now experienced in
international procurement process.

       2.     Assessment of Procurement Processes for Goods and Works

20.     The staff from implementing agency are familiar with domestic procurement process and
experienced dealing with domestic urban development projects. However, the responses to the
questionnaire show a systematic process is not yet fully in place for preparing bid documents, bids
evaluation and contract award as required by ADB procurement procedures. In particular, the staffs
do not have knowledge of bidding document preparation and ADB procurement procedures. Since
staff are not familiar with ADB funded projects, it is necessary to include experienced procurement
                                                                                                  9


specialists in the support consultant team/s and prior to the engagement of the design and support
consultants’ teams to prepare bidding documents and help in bidding process.

       3.      Assessment on Procurement Processes for Consulting Services

21.     Based on the responses to the questionnaires by the implementing agency, it is concluded
that the management staff have limited experience in recruiting consulting service for international
projects and little experience of international procurement of goods and works. There is sufficient
experience in carrying out national procurement according to the PPLM.
        4.      Assessment of Process Control and Oversight

22.    Based on interviews and surveys, the implementing agency staff is familiar with domestic
procurement process for recruiting consulting services. There are well-established national and
local guidelines and regulations to engage consultants for the domestic consulting services.
Oversight will be established for:

       (i)     Approving bid documents, tender recommendations, etc.
       (ii)    Procedures for dealing with invoicing, payment, and non-payment.
       (iii)   Declaration of conflict of interest in procurement process.

       5.      Assessment of Recordkeeping

23.     Similar to the executing agency the PMO, has a reasonable record system established for
safekeeping the original contracts, copies of bids and bid evaluation, and contract administration
documents. The importance of book keeping and clearly defined filing system shall be addressed to
implementing agencies and the filing system shall be enhanced through capacity development and
training for Tranche 2.

24.     There are two features to procurement capacity in Mongolia. First, the implementing
agencies need to have the organization setup, resources, and technical knowledge to handle the
procurement processes. Second, it is necessary to examine the current national procurement
processes adopted to see how well these are aligned with ADB Procurement Guidelines. The
implementing agency will mainly be concerned with the procurement of contractors in accordance
with the Procurement Plan approved by the ADB and updated regularly thereafter.

25.     The assessment indicates that implementing agencies have some relevant experience, but
they are lack of experience and knowledge for the procurement of goods and works for
internationally financed project. Some implementing agency staff have received training in ADB
procedures during appraisal process.

26.     The implementing agencies follow the procurement processes spelled out in governing
documents, notably the “Public Procurement Law of Mongolia (PPLM)” in accordance with
established administrative procedures. Key processes adopted relating to procurement of
contractors for goods and works are as follows:

       (i)     Detailed design consultants will develop construction drawings, bills of quantities,
               and technical specifications to the required standards.
10


       (ii)     PMO support consultants will draft commercial part of the bidding documents
                following ADB standard bidding documents.
       (iii)    ADB and PMO will approve contract documents.
       (iv)     Procedures are in place for tender notification, submission, and rejection.
       (v)      Tender evaluation by a committee composed of the owner and selected experts.
       (vi)     Need for personnel involved to declare any potential conflict of interest.
       (vii)    Requirement for external approval of major procurement decisions.
       (viii)   Requirement for written chronicle for procurement decisions.
       (ix)     Monitoring of contractual performance and fulfillment of payment obligations.
       (x)      Requirement for safekeeping of original contract and contract correspondence.

27.     The assessment also reveals that there is no dedicated national procurement manual
available to guide detailed operations, and that the implementing agencies have little experience
with ADB funded projects. Therefore, more procurement training is necessary and capacity of
procurement must be enhanced. A procurement manual was developed and translated into
Mongolian language under Tranche 1.

F.     Summary of Assessment and Recommendations

28.     The PMO is responsible for the procurement of the consulting services for the project
implementation, and the PMO is also responsible to provide guidance and coordinate with the MUB
to procure all construction contracts for the sub-centers and provides oversight of contract
management. The PMO will coordinate and manage the preparation of bid documents by the
detailed design consultant (technical part) and the PMO support consultant (commercial part),
organize bid evaluation, coordinate for contract award and signing of contracts. Subsequently the
PMO will coordinate with MUB to provide contract administration and record keeping.

29.     Based on the evaluation of the executing agency and implementing agency and the
responses to the procurement capacity questionnaires, the general findings of the assessment are
as follows:
30.
        (i)   The MUB has an established procurement units/division, and the staffs are
              experienced in procurement for domestic urban infrastructure projects, but they do
              not have much procurement experience for foreign-funded and ADB projects.
        (ii)  The PMO has certain experience in procurement for consulting service contracts for
              domestic projects, and some experience for foreign-funded projects.
        (iii) The implementing agencies have adequate technical resources to handle water
              supply and urban infrastructure components, but they do not have experience in
              procurement, contract management, and construction management for
              foreign-funded projects.
        (iv)  Rules and regulations are in place within the MUB-PMO for handling the various
              stages of procurement from bid document preparation, bid evaluation, contract
              award and administration ensuring fairness and a reasonable degree of
              check-and-balance during the procurement process. Safe record keeping for
              contract documentations will also be provided.
        (v)   The practice for preparing the bidding documents for the urban infrastructure
              construction is that the detailed design consultant and the PMO support consultant
                                                                                                 11


              prepare the bidding documents. For the foreign-funded projects, comprehensive
              technical bidding documents including bills of quantities, specifications and
              construction drawings are required.
       (vi)   The implementing agency have limited ADB projects experience and are unfamiliar
              with ADB procurement requirements and procedures, in particular if special actions
              are required for advance contracting and retrospective financing.

31.    Based on the above assessment for the current procurement capacity for the executing
agency and implementing agencies, the potential risks and other constraints associated with
procurement are summarized as follows:
       (i)   Due to lack of procurement capacity and recent staff turnover, dealing with
             foreign-funded and ADB project is expected to take longer time for the PMO and
             MUB to learn and to get familiar with ADB procurement policies and procedure,
             especially during the early stage of the Tranche 2 project implementation and
             contracts.
       (ii)  As staff have limited professional English skills and international procurement
             experience, it is difficult to ensure high quality English bidding documents for
             international bids.
       (iii) Adoption of the ADB Procurement Guidelines providing standard detail procedures
             will mitigate these risks.
       (iv)  The use of the ADB standard bidding documents for ICB and ADB approved
             drawings for NCB will mitigate the risks in preparing bidding documents meeting
             ADB procurement procedure requirements.

32.     Based on the assessment and previous working experience with the MUB-PMO, the
following recommended measures to mitigate risks and facilitate procurement are proposed:
        (i)    The PMO support consultant to be engaged by the executing agency should include
               building procurement capacity, providing on-the-job training to PMO and
               implementing agencies procurement staff on ADB requirements and procedures,
               and providing technical assistance in terms of review of detail design and bid
               documents, review of bid evaluation report, and addressing ADB’s comments on
               relevant documents.
        (ii)   The training for procurement capacity shall be provided early in the project
               preparation stage to procurement staffs so that they can get familiar with ADB
               procurement policies and procedures to ensure efficient implementation of the
               project.
        (iii)  After the completion of loan agreement and before the mobilization of the PMO
               support consultant, there is a period of time up to six or more months when there are
               no consultants helping the MUB-PMO, and this is also the period that the bidding
               documents for the early contracts need to be prepared. It is recommended that an
               experienced international procurement specialist should be engaged, to help in
               bidding document preparation, bidding process, bid evaluation and other
               procurement related tasks.
        (iv)   The current practice is to hire a PMO support consultant team to handle bidding
               process and safeguards. The PMO support consultant can only assist the MUB-PMO
               in preparing commercial part of the bidding documents and help the owner to carry
               out the bidding process. It is important to PMO to engage early a PMO support
               consultant that have previous foreign-funded and ADB project experience. The
               detailed design consultant should also be experienced in preparing technical
12


               sections of the bidding documents and experienced in both international and national
               regulations.
       (v)     There is a need for assurance of ADB’s Guidelines on procurement. This will be in
               the form of ‘Prior Review’ by ADB in accordance with the agreed Procurement Plan.
               Prior review will be required for all ICB contracts, the first NCB contract for civil works,
               and the first NCB contract for goods for each procurement. Post review will be
               applied to other smaller procurement packages.
       (vi)    Extensive training on procurement will be necessary to reinforce understanding and
               compliance with ADB's Guidelines. Prior to the recruitment of procurement specialist
               and/or consulting firm, the staff from the PMO and implementing agencies should
               seek opportunities to participate ADB or World Bank procurement training and
               workshops. Special training and workshops provided by the PMO support consultant
               and by the ADB procurement specialist/s.

33.    The scope of the procurement law in Mongolia, have the following provisions for externally
funded projects: (i) The Law shall apply to the public procurement of goods, works and services, (ii)
Unless otherwise provided in international agreements to which Mongolia is a party, this Law shall
apply to regulating procurement of goods, works and services funded by foreign grants or loans.
This means that ADB funded projects should be handled through use of ADB Guidelines specified
in the loan agreements. However, common practice is to mix the local and international
requirements, which is a source of delays and disagreements leading to complaints.

34.    Reviews will assess procurement to validate reported procurement capacity and address
gaps that may impede program effectiveness. Relevant provisions of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy
(1998, as amended to date) are included in the investment program’s loan regulations and bidding
documents. The executing agency will disclose how facility proceeds are used to the public and
annually update the program status.

35.     Delay in project implementation: The government will ensure that the PMO is staffed with
experienced professionals. Consulting services for Tranche 2 will be tendered and hired by the
current PMO and PMO support consultants. The MUB will ensure that the approval process of
detailed design and bidding documents will be simplified to ensure a prompt project implementation.

36.     The MUB lacks the capacity to implement large, sophisticated projects, including
procurement. The program allocates funding to cover consulting services support and additional
staff with experience and suitable skills. The program will focus on key sector improvements in
project imprest account management and reporting, project accounting, contract management, and
project performance monitoring and reporting.

37.    When procurement is inefficient. ADB will apply procurement review for effective
implementation during loan reviews to validate reported procurement capacities and address gaps
that may impede program effectiveness.

38.      The program will include two large package for consulting services, and only reputable
companies with sufficient resources will be short-listed. Executing and implementing agencies will
liaise regularly with ADB and the project consultant team to ensure that ADB guidelines are followed.
Interagency coordination will be enhanced at all levels to monitor the performance of the MFF
portfolio.
                                                                                                                        13


                                        ANNEX 1
                               Executing Agency MUB/PMO
                  PROJECT PROCUREMENT RISK ASSESSMENT QUESTIONNAIRE

                                                                                     1                              2
                  QUESTION                                            RESPONSE                               RISK
A.    ORGANIZATIONAL AND STAFF CAPACITY
PROCUREMENT DEPARTMENT/UNIT
 A.1 Does the agency or Government                 The Agency or Government does not have a                     *
      have a Procurement Committee that            Procurement Committee. The Public
      is independent from the head of the          Procurement Law Mongolia (PPLM) requires
      agency?                                      establishing an ad–hoc evaluation committee for
                                                   every single tender process. The Governor of
                                                   the City is in charge of establishment of
                                                   Evaluation Committee for organizing the
                                                   tendering in accordance with procedures of
                                                   applicable laws and regulations.
                                                   Evaluation committee consist of 5 or 7
                                                   members. The composition of an Evaluation
                                                   committee includes 1-2 members from
                                                   Implementing Agency, 2-3 members from
                                                   Executing Agency (Municipality of Ulaanbaatar),
                                                   1 representative from citizen and 1-2 members
                                                   from NGO, professional association in the field,
                                                   for providing transparency of procurement
                                                   activities.
 A.2 Does the agency have a procurement            Agency has a procurement department, which
      department/unit, including a                 performs the role of a secretariat.
      permanent office that performs the           It performs the function of a Secretariat of the
      function of a Secretariat of the             Procurement Committee only for National
      Procurement Committee?                       Procurements but within budget of Ulaanbaatar
                                                   City.
                                                   Please see the attached Organization Chart with
                                                   Attachment 1.
 A.3 If yes, what type of procurement does         The Procurement Unit of the Agency conducts
      it undertake?                                procurement of works, goods and consulting


1 Responses should include a discussion of the e-procurement component if an e-procurement system is in use or if is
  being planned for implementation.
2 Questions indicated with * are associated with potentially ‘High’ or ‘Substantial’ risks due to the impact being ‘High’,
  therefore the strategy for managing those risks should be addressed in the Project Procurement Risk Analysis
  (Appendix 3).
14

                                                                              1                             2
                 QUESTION                                       RESPONSE                             RISK
                                             services funded by the state and Ulaanbaatar
                                             City budget.


A.4 How many years’ experience does          The chief of the agency has 4 years of                    *
     the head of the procurement             experience in the field.
     department/unit have in a direct
     procurement role?
A.5 How many staff in the procurement        The Procurement Department of Ulaanbaatar
     department/unit are:                    City has 16 full time employees.
          i.      full time
          ii.    part time
          iii.   seconded                    Please see the attached Organization Chart with
                                             Attachment 1.


A.6 Do the procurement staff have a high     Not all procurement staff have a high level of            *
     level of English language proficiency   English language proficiency. Most of them have
     (verbal and written)?                   basic English knowledge. Because, the
                                             Department conducts National procurements
                                             mostly.
A.7 Are the number and qualifications of     The Procurement department was established                *
     the staff sufficient to undertake the   on 4 January 2013 with 56 staffs, including 1
     additional procurement that will be     chief, 2 deputy chiefs, 10 staff for Procurement
     required under the proposed project?    division, 7 staff for e-procurement division, 2
                                             staff for legal division, 10 staff for administrative
                                             division and 12 staff for control of drawings and
                                             budget division.


                                             After the restructuring in October 2016, the
                                             department employs 35 staff, including 1 chief, 1
                                             deputy chief, 16 staff for procurement division,
                                             17 staff for legal and Monitoring division and
                                             Administrative and Finance division.


                                             However, the Procurement department informed
                                             that they are capable of undertaking additional
                                             procurement.


A.8 Does the unit have adequate              The Procurement department have adequate
     facilities, such as PCs, internet       facilities to undertake the planned procurement.
     connection, photocopy facilities,
                                                                                                                   15

                                                                                 1                             2
                 QUESTION                                           RESPONSE                            RISK
     printers etc. to undertake the planned
     procurement?
A.9 Does the agency have, or have ready           In accordance with the PPLM, Professional               *
     access to, a procurement training            Government Procurement Agency provides
     program?                                     training to procuring entity and tenderers.


                                                  The Procurement department of Ulaanbaatar
                                                  City have ready access to training programs.


A.10 At what level does the                       The Procurement department has vertical
     department/unit report (to the head of       organizational structure. The division heads
     agency, deputy etc.)?                        reports to the deputy director and deputy reports
                                                  to Chief.
A.11 Do the procurement positions in the          Each staff has job descriptions, which outline
     agency have job descriptions, which          specific roles and minimum professional and
     outline specific roles, minimum              technical requirements.
     technical requirements and career
     routes?
A.12 Is there a procurement process               There is a procurement procedure manual,
     manual for goods and works?                  which was approved by the Minister of Finance
                                                  of Mongolia.
A.13 If there is a manual, is it up to date       The Procurement manual for Works and Goods
     and does it cover foreign-assisted           updated in 2012 and it covers only national
     projects?                                    public procurement.
A.14 Is there a procurement process               There is a procurement process manual for
     manual for consulting services?              consulting services, which was approved in
                                                  2008 by the Minister of Finance.


A.15 If there is a manual, is it up to date       A procurement process manual for consulting
     and does it cover foreign-assisted           services is not up to date. It covers only national
     projects?                                    public procurement.


PROJECT MANAGEMENT UNIT
A.16 Is there a fully (or almost fully) staffed   Yes. There is a fully staffed PMU for this project      *
     PMU for this project currently in            currently in place.
     place?
A.17 Are the number and qualifications of         The PMO itself has only one national specialist.        *
     the staff sufficient to undertake the        The number and qualifications of the staff
     additional procurement that will be          insufficient to undertake the additional and
16

                                                                              1                            2
               QUESTION                                          RESPONSE                           RISK
     required under the proposed project?     complex procurement that will be required under
                                              the proposed project. The PMO are however
                                              assisted by external consultants.


                                              The PMO has limited capacity. All procurement
                                              will be under ADB processes, and the project
                                              management consultant will ensure consistency
                                              in management reporting. Training in ADB
                                              procedures is required during implementation.
                                              Prior review will be applied to all ADB-financed
                                              contracts to be procured through ICB. Annual
                                              financial audits will monitor the integrity of the
                                              financial management systems.


A.18 Does the unit have adequate              PMU have adequate facilities, such as PCs,
     facilities, such as PCs, internet        internet connection, photocopy facilities, printers
     connection, photocopy facilities,        etc. to undertake the planned procurement.
     printers etc. to undertake the planned
     procurement?
A.19 Are there standard documents in use,     The MOF has developed special Rules and                 *
     such as Standard Procurement             Standard bidding documents for ADB-funded
     Documents/Forms, and have they           procurement.
     been approved for use on ADB             For national procurement of goods and works,
     funded projects?                         Sample Tender Documents for procurement of
                                              works, goods funded by the ADB, revised on 24
                                              June 2016 is in use.
                                              For international procurement of goods and
                                              works, ADB Procurement guidelines revised on
                                              April 2015 and User’s guide to Procurement of
                                              Works and Plant revised on December 2015 are
                                              in use.


A.20 Does the agency follow the national      Yes, the Procurement department follows the             *
     procurement law, procurement             national procurement law, procurement
     processes, and guidelines?               processes, and guidelines.
A.21 Do ToRs for consulting services          Yes, ToRs for consulting services follow a
     follow a standard format such as         standard format such as background, tasks,
     background, tasks, inputs, objectives    inputs, objectives and outputs.
     and outputs?
A.22 Who drafts the procurement               For national procurements in accordance with
                                                                                                              17

                                                                             1                            2
                QUESTION                                        RESPONSE                           RISK
      specifications?                         the PPLM, the Evaluation committee drafts the
                                              bidding documents.
                                              For projects financed by ADB, the PMU,
                                              particularly the procurement specialist drafts the
                                              bidding documents with support by the
                                              international and national consultants.


A.23 Who approves the procurement             It approved by the financier (ADB and EIB)
      specifications?
A.24 Who in the PMU has experience in         Procurement specialist of the PMU has                  *
      drafting bidding documents?             experience in drafting bidding documents.


A.25 Are records of the sale of bidding       Records of the sale of bidding documents               *
      documents immediately available?        immediately available.
A.26 Who identifies the need for consulting   PMU, particularly the officer in charge identifies
      services requirements?                  the need for consulting services.
A.27 Who drafts the Terms of Reference        PMU, particularly the officer in charge drafts the
      (ToR)                                   Terms of Reference (ToR).
A.28 Who prepares the request for             PMU, particularly the officer in charge prepares
      proposals (RFPs)                        the request for proposals (RFPs).
B.   INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
B.1 Is there a referencing system for         Yes, there is a referencing system for
      procurement files?                      procurement files in accordance with applicable
                                              law and regulation of Mongolia.
B.2 Are there adequate resources              There are adequate resources allocated to              *
      allocated to record keeping             record keeping infrastructure, which includes
      infrastructure, which includes the      the record keeping system, space, equipment
      record keeping system, space,           and personnel to administer the procurement
      equipment and personnel to              records management functions within the
      administer the procurement records      agency.
      management functions within the
      agency?
B.3 Does the agency adhere to a               We abide by law of Mongolian National Archive.         *
      document retention policy (i.e. for     By archiving all the bidding documents and
      what period are records kept)?          contract awarding companies’ documents to
                                              store them permanently. Expired or
                                              unsuccessful bidders’ documents are stored at
                                              temporary preservation archive.


B.4 Are copies of bids or proposals           Yes. One original copies are retained with
18

                                                                               1                             2
                QUESTION                                         RESPONSE                             RISK
      retained with the evaluation?            evaluation.
B.5 Are copies of the original                 Yes, they are retained with the pre-contract
      advertisements retained with the         papers on files and soft copies.
      pre-contract papers?
B.6 Is there a single contract file with a     Yes. There a single contract file with a copy of
      copy of the contract and all             the contract and all subsequent contractual
      subsequent contractual                   correspondence.
      correspondence?
B.7 Are copies of invoices included with       Copies of invoices are included with the contract
      the contract papers?                     papers. After the contract completion, all
                                               documents retained at Archive.
B.8 Is the agency’s record keeping             Yes, it is supported by IT.
      function supported by IT?
C.   PROCUREMENT PRACTICES
Goods and Works
C.1 Has the agency undertaken                  For the last 4 years, Procurement department of          *
      procurement of goods or works            Ulaanbaatar City has not undertaken
      related to foreign assistance recently   procurement of goods, works and consultancy
      (last 12 months or last 36 months)? If   services related to foreign assistance.
      yes, indicate the names of the
      development partner/s and project/s.
C.2 If the answer is yes, what were the        -                                                        *
      major challenges faced by the
      agency?
C.3 Is there a systematic process to           There is a systematic process to identify
      identify procurement requirements        procurement planning every year in accordance
      (for a period of one year or more)?      with the Article 48 of PPLM and it is associated
                                               with State and City budget.


C.4 Is there a minimum period for the          The procuring entity is obliged to make tender           *
      preparation of bids and if yes, how      documents available prior to the day of
      long?                                    publishing the invitation to tender. There is no
                                               any minimum period for the preparation of bids
C.5 Are all queries from bidders replied to    Yes, all queries from bidders replied to in writing.     *
      in writing?
C.6 Does the bidding document state the        Yes. Bidding document states the date and time           *
      date and time of bid opening?            of bid opening.
C.7 Are bids opened in public?                 Yes. Bids are opened in public.                          *
C.8 Can late bids be accepted?                 Late bids cannot be accepted.                            *
                                                                                                                19

                                                                              1                             2
                 QUESTION                                        RESPONSE                            RISK
C.9 Can bids (except late bids) be             There are no grounds for refusal in any other           *
     rejected at bid opening?                  cases apart from bid delay.
C.10 Are minutes of the bid opening            At the opening of tenders, the procuring entity         *
     taken?                                    announces and makes relevant notes of
                                               tenderers’ names, tendering price, if alternatives
                                               have been permitted, alternative tendering
                                               price, price discounts offered, whether the
                                               tender security was submitted or not, and any
                                               changes to the tender and/or withdrawal request
                                               in accordance with the Article 26.3 of the PPLM.
C.11 Are bidders provided a copy of the        The minutes of bid opening are made available           *
     minutes?                                  to any interested party, in accordance with the
                                               Article 26.5 of PPLM. The read out bid opening
                                               prices are recorded and provided to bidders.
C.12 Are the minutes provided free of          Yes, minutes are provided free of charge.               *
     charge?
C.13 Who undertakes the evaluation of          Ad-hoc Evaluation committee undertakes the
     bids (individual(s), permanent            evaluation of bids.
     committee, ad-hoc committee)?
C.14 What are the qualifications of the        Evaluation committee members are specialized            *
     evaluators with respect to                in procurement, in accordance with Article 47.6
     procurement and the goods and/or          of PPLM.
     works under evaluation?
C.15 Is the decision of the evaluators final   The Evaluation committee examines and                   *
     or is the evaluation subject to           evaluate tenders, prepare an evaluation report,
     additional approvals?                     make recommendations to the procuring entity
                                               on authorization for contracting, in accordance
                                               with Article 47.2.2 of PPLM.
C.16 Using the three ‘worst-case’              Bid evaluation can take a long time. In some            *
     examples in the last year, how long       cases on this project, it took 9 months to finalize
     from the issuance of the invitation for   bid award.
     bids can the contract be awarded?
C.17 Are there processes in place for the      Generally done on case-to-case basis.                   *
     collection and clearance of cargo
     through ports of entry?
C.18 Are there established goods               Generally done on case-to-case basis.                   *
     receiving procedures?
C.19 Are all goods that are received           All goods that are received recorded as assets
     recorded as assets or inventory in a      or inventory in a register.
     register?
20

                                                                              1                           2
               QUESTION                                            RESPONSE                        RISK
C.20 Is the agency/procurement                Procurement department is not familiar with
     department familiar with letters of      letters of credit.
     credit?
C.21 Does the procurement department          The procurement department doesn’t register
     register and track warranty and latent   and track warranty and latent defects liability
     defects liability periods?               periods. The Municipal Investment Agency is in
                                              charge.
Consulting Services
C.22 Has the agency undertaken foreign-       For the last 4 years, Procurement department of        *
     assisted procurement of consulting       Ulaanbaatar City haven’t undertaken
     services recently (last 12 months, or    procurement of goods, works and consultancy
     last 36 months)? (If yes, please         services related to foreign assistance
     indicate the names of the
     development partner/s and the
     Project/s.)
C.23 If the above answer is yes, what were    -                                                      *
     the major challenges?
C.24 Are assignments and invitations for      Yes, assignments and invitations for EOIs are          *
     expressions of interest (EOIs)           advertised through Mongolian daily newspapers
     advertised?                              and www.ub.procurement.mn website.
C.25 Is a consultants’ selection committee    Yes, a consultants’ selection committee is
     formed with appropriate individuals,     formed with appropriate individuals. Its
     and what is its composition (if any)?    composition includes chief, members and
                                              secretary of the committee.
C.26 What criteria are used to evaluate       EOIs are evaluated in accordance with Clause
     EOIs?                                    36.7 of the Public Procurement Law of
                                              Mongolia.
                                              Financial and technical qualification and
                                              expertise of tenderers are examined and
                                              general conditions are assessed, in accordance
                                              with the Article 14-16 of PPLM.
C.27 Historically, what is the most common    The most common method is QCBS to select               *
     method used (QCBS, QBS, etc.) to         consultants.
     select consultants?
C.28 Do firms have to pay for the RFP         Yes, the firms have to pay for the RFP                 *
     document?                                document.
C.29 Does the proposal evaluation criteria    Yes, the proposal evaluation criteria follow a         *
     follow a pre-determined structure and    pre-determined structure and is it detailed in the
     is it detailed in the RFP?               RFP.
C.30 Are pre-proposal visits and meetings     If the pre-proposal meetings are defined in the
                                                                                                           21

                                                                              1                        2
                QUESTION                                         RESPONSE                       RISK
      arranged?                              Bidding Documents or RFP, then it should be
                                             arranged accordingly.
 C.31 Are minutes prepared and circulated    Minutes of pre-proposal meeting is prepared          *
      after pre-proposal meetings?           and circulated after pre-proposal meetings.
 C.32 To whom are the minutes distributed?   Minutes distributed to all bidders who are           *
                                             purchased the bidding document or RFP.
 C.33 Are all queries from consultants       Yes. All queries are answered and addressed in       *
      answered/addressed in writing?         writing.
 C.34 Are the technical and financial        Yes, it is required to be in separate envelopes      *
      proposals required to be in separate   and remain sealed.
      envelopes and remain sealed until
      the technical evaluation is
      completed?
 C.35 Are proposal securities required?      Proposal securities are required for consultancy     *
                                             services at a cost above 100 million MNT.
 C.36 Are technical proposals opened in      Yes. Technical proposals not opened in public,       *
      public?                                but in presence of participating consultants.
 C.37 Are minutes of the technical opening   Record of proposal received are distributed to       *
      distributed?                           consultants present at the technical proposal
                                             opening.
C.38 -                                       -
 C.39 Who determines the final technical     Each member of evaluation committee                  *
      ranking and how?                       determines the technical ranking and final
                                             decision is agreed by the majority of committee
                                             members.
 C.40 Are the technical scores sent to all   Technical scores are sent to all firms. The          *
      firms?                                 selected tenderer and other tender participants
                                             are informed about this decision along with the
                                             reason of non-selection/rejection simultaneously
                                             in writing.
 C.41 Are the financial proposal opened in   Yes. Financial proposals are opened in public.       *
      public?
 C.42 Are minutes of the financial opening   After the evaluation upon the request of the         *
      distributed?                           bidder, the minutes, only covered an evaluation
                                             of the bidder, are disclosed.
 C.43 How is the financial evaluation        Financial evaluation may be assess the               *
      completed?                             following documents submitted by the bidder.
                                             These are:
                                                       statements by a correspondent bank;
                                                       tenderer’s self-confirmed financial
22

                                                                              1                           2
                QUESTION                                          RESPONSE                         RISK
                                                      statements, if required, along with an
                                                      audit opinion;
                                                     table of consulting staff, remuneration,
                                                      and other cost estimations;
                                                     Reports on tenderer’s annual sales of
                                                      services similar to a given contract
                                                      executed in up to last five years.
                                              The procuring entity selects the bidder who has
                                              scored the highest combined technical and
                                              financial score of the bidders who have passed
                                              the technical proposal criteria.
C.44 Are face to face contract negotiations   Yes. Face to face, contract negotiations are held      *
      held?                                   with consultants.
C.45 How long after financial evaluation is   Negotiation will be held with the selected firm
      negotiation held with the selected      within the bid validity date.
      firm?
C.46 What is the usual basis for              Joint meeting of the Employer and the
      negotiation?                            Consultant with view to reach agreement and
                                              contract signing.
C.47 Are minutes of negotiation taken and     Yes. Minutes of negotiation taken and signed by        *
      signed?                                 both parties.
C.48 How long after negotiation is the        On average, it is 5 working days.
      contract signed, on average?
C.49 Is there an evaluation system for        It is generally defined by the Client on
      measuring the outputs of                case-to-case basis.
      consultants?
Payments
C.50 Are advance payments made?               The procuring entity may make an advance
                                              payment to the contractor for making work
                                              preparations.
C.51 What is the standard period for          Payment are made against deliverables and
      payment included in contracts?          work performed usually within 45 days.
C.52 On average, how long is it between       Payment generally made within 28 days after
      receiving a firm’s invoice and making   receiving each invoice.
      payment?
C.53 When late payment is made, are the       Beneficiaries are paid interest after 15 days from
      beneficiaries paid interest?            the actual payment date.


D.   EFFECTIVENESS
D.1 Is contractual performance                Contractual performance is systematically
                                                                                                               23

                                                                             1                             2
                  QUESTION                                     RESPONSE                             RISK
      systematically monitored and           monitored by the Employer.
      reported?
D.2 Does the agency monitor and track        Contractual payment obligations monitored and
      its contractual payment obligations?   tracked by the Employer.
D.3 Is a complaints resolution mechanism     Complaints resolution mechanism is as
      described in national procurement      described in Article 54 and 55 of PPLM.
      documents?
D.4 Is there a formal non-judicial           The state administrative body in charge of
      mechanism for dealing with             budget matters (Ministry of Finance) and the
      complaints?                            Department for Fair Competition and
                                             Consumers Protection considers only those
                                             complaints submitted prior to signing a contract
                                             and issue a ruling in 14 days after receiving the
                                             complaint.
D.5 Are procurement decisions and            Procurement decisions and disputes are                   *
      disputes supported by written          supported by written narratives such as minutes
      narratives such as minutes of          of evaluation, minutes of negotiation, notices of
      evaluation, minutes of negotiation,    default/withheld payment.
      notices of default/withheld payment?


E.   ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES
E.1 Is there a standard statement of         The bidders follow the instructions of the               *
      ethics and are those involved in       procurements law and regulations.
      procurement required to formally
      commit to it?
E.2 Are those involved with procurement      Yes. They are required to issue a declaration            *
      required to declare any potential      whether they have any conflict of interest after
      conflict of interest and remove        they are involved in the procurement process
      themselves from the procurement        and remove themselves from the procurement
      process?                               process if they have potential conflict of interest.


E.3 Is the commencement of                   The commencement of procurement is
      procurement dependent on external      dependent on external approvals that are
      approvals (formal or de-facto) that    outside of the budgeting process.
      are outside of the budgeting
      process?
E.4 Who approves procurement                 The general budget governor and professional             *
      transactions, and do they have         purchasing body approves consolidated plan
      procurement experience and             within 10 working days after budget approval
      qualifications?                        and submit it to the state central administrative
24

                                                                               1                         2
                QUESTION                                          RESPONSE                        RISK
                                                body in charge of budget matters (Ministry of
                                                Finance).
E.5 Which of the following actions require
     approvals outside the procurement
     unit or the evaluation committee, as
     the case may be, and who grants the
     approval?
     a)Bidding document, invitation to          Evaluation Committee grants the approval.
         pre-qualify or RFP
     b)Advertisement of an invitation for       Evaluation Committee grants the approval.
         bids, pre-qualification or call for
         EOIs
     c) Evaluation reports                      Evaluation Committee grants the approval.           *
     d)Notice of award                          Employer grants the approval.                       *
     e)Invitation to consultants to             Employer grants the approval
         negotiate
     f) Contracts                               Employer grants the approval                        *
E.6 Is the same official responsible for: (i)   In general, the head of the procuring entity is     *
     authorizing procurement                    responsible for procurement decisions.
     transactions, procurement invitations,
     documents, evaluations and
     contracts; (ii) authorizing payments;
     (iii) recording procurement
     transactions and events; and (iv) the
     custody of assets?
E.7 Is there a written auditable trail of       The procuring entity has to maintain a              *
     procurement decisions attributable to      procurement file and record for auditing
     individuals and committees?                purposes.
                                                                                                   25


                               PROJECT PROCUREMENT RISK ANALYSIS

   SL No.                  RISK                  IMPACT          LIKELIHOOD             STRATEGY
A6, A7, A9,    Procurement Department             Low     ‘Unlikely’ PMU is already      Monitor
A16, A17,      and/or PMU have                            established, and the
A23, C1, C2,   insufficient qualified staff to            Procurement Dept. and
C14, C22,      efficiently undertake the                  PMU have adequate
C23            procurements required to                   qualified staff and access
               implement the project.                     to a public procurement
                                                          capacity development or
                                                          professionalization
                                                          program


A19 – A20      The Agency uses practices          Low     ‘Unlikely’ the agency          Monitor
               inconsistent with national                 follows the national
               procurement law or bidding                 procurement law,
               documents unsuitable for                   procurement processes,
               ADB funded procurement.                    guidelines, bidding
                                                          documents
B2 –B3         Record keeping is                  Low     ‘Unlikely’ the Agency has      Monitor
               inadequate to enable                       adequate recordkeeping
               internal or external audit of              infrastructure and robust
               procurement processes.                     document retention policy.


A25, C4 -      Agency does not promote            Low     ‘Unlikely’ the Agency uses     Monitor
C12,           nondiscriminatory                          non-discriminatory,
C24C44,        participation, transparent                 transparent tender
C47, D5, E7    tender processes (including                processes.
               advertisement, tender
               documentation, tender
               evaluation, complaints
               mechanism).
C15, E1 –      The Agency has                     Low     ‘Unlikely’ if integrity        Monitor
E.6            inadequate ethics and                      guidelines require
               anticorruption measures in                 self-declarations, if
               place.                                     approvals are appropriate
                                                          and given by qualified, and
                                                          sufficiently independent
                                                          officers.
26


                                            ANNEX 2

                                  PROCUREMENT CAPACITY
                        (For Reference: Adopted from FAM November 2013)


1.      The Public Procurement Law (PPL), 2005, sets out the key policies, responsibilities and
standards for procurement in the public sector. The sample documents in this prescribe the
evaluation, contracting, payment, warranty liability period, among others. Arbitration is not
allowed for procurement dispute settlement.                   Regulations allow for black
listing—disbarment—of firms and individuals and if they violate the regulations and agreements.

2.      The law requires public notice for all procurement activities above MNT 30 million for
goods and consultancy services and above MNT 50 million for works. The Law further
differentiates between processes for consulting services and goods and works. There is
preference given for locally-produced goods and locally-provided services. The primary method
for procurement activities is open competition. Prequalification is required for complex contracts.
The procurement laws and regulations also contain provisions for dealing with misconduct—such
as fraud and corrupt practices. The Investigation Department and Anticorruption Department are
the lead enforcement institutions.

3.     The Ministry of Finance (MOF) plays a lead role in guiding procurement policy in the
country. The Ministry has developed various procurement-related Manuals and Rules since
2005. More specifically it:
       (i)    Drafts proposals to enhance procurement legislation.
       (ii)   Provides professional and practical advice to the procuring entity on procurement
              matters.
       (iii)  Drafts and adopts, if the law provides for, policies and procedures, guidelines,
              instructions, manuals and standard documents pertaining to procurement.
       (iv)   Annually reports to the government on implementation of procurement legislation.
       (v)    Oversees and assesses the procuring entity’s procurement procedures.
       (vi)   Consolidates procuring agencies’ reports, creates and maintains a national
              database of procurement and issues consolidated reports and data.
       (vii)  Provides recommendations and opinions on particular issues pertaining to the
              implementation of the law upon request from legal and supervision authorities.
       (viii) Defines the level, quality, and standards for procurement related training jointly
              with the state administrative body for education issues, provide support and
              assistance in organizing the training.
       (ix)   Maintains a website for disclosing information on procurement, tender
              announcements and results, and determines the manner of posting the invitation
              to tender and other information.
                                                                                                 27


       (x)      Cooperates with international organizations and other foreign organizations on
                procurement matters, and plans and coordinates technical assistance.
       (xi)     Keeps, oversees, and discloses the register of bodies whose rights to participate in
                tendering were restricted as specified in the PPL.
       (xii)    Defines the conditions and procedures of introducing information technology and
                electronic devices in procurement activities.
       (xiii)   Takes control on procurement activity through its procurement inspectors who are
                licensed.

4.     The MOF has developed special Rules for ADB-funded procurement. There are
standard bidding documents that have been approved for use on ADB funded projects. The MOF
has adopted several Rules and Regulations on implementation of the PPL, all the documents are
acceptable to ADB, and pass the standards of international procurement practices. For national
procurement of goods and works, the above PPL and Regulations will be followed. In summary
the MOF has developed:
       (i)     Rules for procurement funded by IBRD and IDA, 07/01/2013
       (ii)    Sample Tender Documents for procurement of goods funded by the ADB,
               07/01/2013
       (iii)   Sample Tender Documents for procurement of works funded by the ADB,
               07/01/2013

5.      The National Procurement Agency was established by the Resolution #6 of the
Government on 27th August 2012. The Agency is supervised by the Deputy Prime Minster,
reports to the Cabinet, and has the mandate to:
 Provide with professional supervision for procurement units.
        (i)     Unify implementation process practices of PPL and submit its recommendation to
                the MOF.
        (ii)    Keep the website on procurement information, tender selection, invitation, etc.
        (iii)   Provide professional training and methodology on procurement for participants
                and procuring entities.
        (iv)    Set up and implement a unified policy to upgrade capacity, technology and
                software for procuring entities.
        (v)     Be responsible for general procurement contracting (long term, three year
                contracts).

6.      The agency is authorized to establish Procurement Units within the aimags, the capital
city, and the district governor offices. The Heads of Procurement Units of aimags and the capital
city are appointed by the Governors, in consultation with the National Procurement Agency Head.
The District Procurement Unit Head is appointed by District Governor in consultation with the
Capital City Governor. The Head of the Procurement Unit should have no criminal record, at
28


least 10 years of work experience in the civil service, and have at least 3 years experience of work
on procurement.

7.       MUB has its own Procurement Unit, which was established on 4th January 2013 under
Government Resolution #190, 2013, and MUB Governor’s Order A/90 to undertake procurement
activities on civil works, goods and consultancy services for MUB. The Procurement Unit reports
directly to the MUB Governor. Since its establishment it has undertaken only local procurement.
At the start of 2013, MUB prepared a Procurement Plan which was approved by Ulaanbaatar
Citizen Representative Khural. The Department of Investment of MUB drafts and approves the
specifications. Currently, the Procurement Unit has 56 staff, including 31 engineers,
6-professions of business administration, 5 accountants and 8 lawyers.

8.      The MUB Procurement Unit is developing manuals for evaluation; for opening tenders;
and for anticorruption measures. It has approved and issued a number of internal
documents—Internal Labor Rules, Rules for Board Meetings, Rules for Documentation and
Internal Control, Rules for Resolution of Citizens’ Complaints, Internal Financial Rules, Rules for
Office Hours Control, and Rules for Documentation and Archiving.

9.      The Ulaanbaatar Governor, through the Department for Investment, identifies the need for
consulting services requirements. An Evaluation Committee drafts the ToR based on an MUB
Order. The methods and criteria for evaluation of EOIs are specified in the Articles 38-40 of the
Law. The evaluation method for selecting consultants is based on qualifications, quality or both,
and is pre-defined prior to release of the RFP. Qualification evaluation method is used for
selecting an individual consultant. The qualification evaluation is based on the consultant’s
knowledge, expertise, professional level, and other professional skills. In selecting a consulting
firm either the quality evaluation method or combined evaluation method is used. Where a
contract involving simultaneous execution of a number of services requiring comprehensive
qualification expertise and technical qualification or having interdependence, a consulting firm is
selected using the quality evaluation method. Financial proposals of the consultants whose
tenders were scored at the minimum, or higher, are opened publicly at the fixed time. Scores for
technical and financial proposals are added in the proportion set out in the RFP to obtain a total
score of quality and price evaluation. The procuring entity negotiates with the highest-rated
consultant. During negotiations some requirements to a given service such as required work
duration (person-months) for the consultant to work at the field or office, and office supplies may
be modified.

10.    The Law requires establishing an ad–hoc evaluation committee for every single tender
process. Evaluation decision of the committee is final, but approval is required from the procuring
agency. The normal length of time between the issuance of the invitation for bids and contact
commencement has been less than two months.
                                                                                                                                29


     11.   The assessment of MUB Procurement Agency has identified the following strengths and
     weakness:
           (i)   Strengths: Existence of a functioning Procurement Unit with adequate and
                 qualified human resources and independence. The capacity assessment also
                 shows that the MUB Procurement Agency has a record keeping system for
                 procurement activities, and will maintain records for 15 years—in accordance to
                 the Archive Law—for audit purposes and institutional memory.
           (ii)  Weaknesses: Because of its limited period of existence (just 4 months), the
                 Agency has not yet acquired significant practice in procurement procedures.
                 Capacity to undertake international procurement is rated weak. There is no system
                 of reporting on negotiations.

     12.         Table 1 summarizes the recommendations.

                                  Table 1: Recommendations to Improve Procurement
     Capacity Constraints                            Recommended action                        Responsibility and Comment
     Specific Recommendations, Project Implementation
1. Although the MUB                    Consultants familiar with PPL—but not with all the   The MUB procurement agency,
     procurement agency has             regulations issued by the Ministry of Finance,        with financial assistance from
     adequate human resources           regulations, and international practices—will be      ADB, should recruit a consultant
     for their internal regular         recruited to assist MUB Procurement Agency.           to provide technical support in
     procurement process; there                                                              procurement process since initial
     is capacity gap for additional    After setting up the PMO at the MUB, a training       stage of program implementation.
     adequate and trained human         program is required for the procurement of goods,
     resources for the PCO.             works, and services under ADB financed projects.     The PMO, in coordination with the
2.                                                                                           MUB and ADB, needs to organize
3. In general, the MUB                 There is a need for training on the development of    a training program on
     procurement staff is not           technical requirements of the bidding documents.      procurement works in the PMO.
     properly trained on general                                                             The PPL obligates the MOF to
     procurement processes nor         There is a need to assist in drafting contents of     maintain a register of black listed
     ADB procurement pro-               bidding documents, particularly technical             companies, but in practice this
     cedures.                           specifications.                                       seldom happens.
4. There is a need to make          
     amendments to the PPL             There is a need to set up evaluation system for
     taking control on issues of        selection of consultancy services.
     auditing and the black listing
     register.                         There is a need to enhance capacity of the MUB
                                        procurement agency.
                                    
                                       There is a need to assist in setting up system of
                                        monitoring the implementation of service
   30


   Capacity Constraints                               Recommended action                          Responsibility and Comment
                                       contracts.
   General Recommendations, Executing Agency Capacity
1. The number of staff working        Provide procurement training to the PMO staff to         The MUB procurement agency
   on MUB procurement                  carry out procurement works and accounting                has to hire experienced staff
   agency is sufficient to carry       according to ADB guidelines.                              involved in procurement works
   out procurement works for                                                                    and should hire a consultant to
   additional projects but the        Hire a procurement consultant to provide                  provide technical support
   municipal staff are not             necessary support, especially in the beginning of         especially in the beginning of the
   trained to carry out                the program.                                              program.
   procurement according to 
   the ADB Guidelines.                Heads of the Divisions should be trained and
                                       certified by specialized training institutions: ISO
                                       9001, ISO 9002, ISO 9003, ISO 10845.
   General Recommendations, Procurement Environment
1. Absence of procurement             Prepare a national procurement operation                 The MUB procurement agency is
   accreditation program               manual.                                                   responsible to develop and
                                                                                                facilitate the implementation this
                                      Provide procurement training, professional                manual.
                                       support, and develop procurement capacity by          
                                       establishing a procurement accreditation                 The Government of
                                       program.                                                  Mongolia/MUB should initiate a
                                                                                                 procurement accreditation
                                                                                                 program.
                                                                               Appendix 5      1



                    CONTRIBUTION TO THE ADB RESULTS FRAMEWORK

        Level 2 Results Framework Indicators
No.        (Key Outputs and Beneficiaries)            Targets   Methods / Comments
1     Water supply pipes installed or                  30.2     Water supply network is
      upgraded (length of network in kilometers)                installed in two subcenters.

2     Households with new or improved water            7,000    Based on the development of
      supply (number)                                           the targeted areas.

3     Households with new or improved sanitation       7,000    Based on the development of
      (number)                                                  the targeted areas.

4     Roads built or upgraded—provincial, district,    7.08     Road network is built and/or
      and rural roads (kilometers)                              improved in the targeted areas.

Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.
                                                                                             Appendix 6       1


                            ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT FOR PROJECT 2

1.      The economic analysis of subprojects was conducted in accordance with the Asian
Development Bank's (ADB) Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects, Framework for
the Economic and Financial Appraisal of Urban Development Sector Projects, and Handbook
for Integrating Risk Analysis in the Economic Analysis of Projects. The economic analysis for
Tranche 2 subprojects basically follows the methodology adopted in Tranche 1 (or Project 1) of
the Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program 1 for the
roads, water supply and sewerage, and heating subprojects.

2.      The estimated costs and benefits of the subprojects were valued at their economic
prices using domestic price numeraire which adjusts border prices to the equivalent domestic
values using the shadow exchange rate factor of 1.01. There is considerable underemployment
in Ulaanbaatar for unskilled labor, hence the conversion factor of 0.8 and 1.0 were applied to
unskilled and skilled labor, respectively. 2

3.       Capital and recurrent operation and maintenance (O&M) costs, inclusive of physical
contingencies, in constant 2016 prices, were also converted into economic costs by subtracting
all transfer payments, including taxes and duties, and applying the appropriate conversion
factors. Capital costs were estimated based on the concept designs prepared during the
feasibility studies. Annual costs and benefits were evaluated over a 20-year period (2016–
2036), allowing for a 4-year construction period starting in 2019, followed by a benefit period of
16 years.

4.       Urban roads improvements. The proposed road improvements in Denjiin subcenter
will involve the construction of a 2.09 kilometer (km) paved road (width of 11.6 meters [m]) with
a 10.6 m bridge (width of 11.6 m), and a 1.3 km ring road (width of 20.0 m) with a 30 m bridge
(width of 20.0 m). For Dambadarjaa subcenter, a 2.75 km paved road (width of 11.6 m), a
0.94 km paved road (width of 6.0 m), and an 80.0 m bridge (width of 11.6 m) will be constructed.

5.      The benefits from the roads and other related urban improvements, such as street
lighting and green space, were estimated using the annualized rental benefits from the use of
the land surrounding the improved roads. Anticipated economic benefits were mainly quantified
by determining the incremental increase in the potential annualized rental benefits from the use
of the land surrounding the improved roads. For each subcenter, leasable spaces were
estimated by taking 25% of the areas of economic and commercial influence of the proposed
urban roads improvement. These areas were assumed to be 50% of the land within a 20-meter
radius of the planned urban roads. An average lease price of $3.8 per square meter (m2) per
month was subsequently used to determine the annualized rental benefits, which were assumed
to increase by 5% each year in accordance with the planned development in the areas. 3 In

1
  ADB. 2013. Feasibility Study Report on the Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment
  Program. Consultant's report. Manila (TA 7970-MON).
2
  These conversion factors are consistent with similar projects of the same nature in Mongolia. For example, see
  ADB. 2016. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Mongolia
  for the Regional Improvement of Border Services Project. Manila., which estimated and used a shadow exchange
  rate factor of 1.01 following the methodology recommended by A. Lagman-Martin. 2004. Shadow Exchange Rates
  for Project Economic Analysis: Towards Improving Practice at the Asian Development Bank. Economic Relations
  Division Technical Note, No. 11: Asian Development Bank.
3
  As of September 2016, the average rent for a one-bedroom apartment outside the Ulaanbaatar city center is
  $383.71 (www.numbeo.com). For a 40 m2 apartment, this translates to $9.6/m2 per month. For a conservative
                                                    2
  estimate, only 40% of this lease price (or $3.8/m per month) was used in the calculation. Under Tranche 1, an
                               2
  average lease price of $7/m per month and an assumed 5% annual increase were used in the calculation.
2         Appendix 6



addition, the vehicle operating cost (VOC) savings were calculated by assuming that 30% of the
projected subcenter population owned cars and that savings amounting to $124/year, 4
increasing at an annual rate of 5%, will be generated with the improved road conditions.

6.     The results of the economic evaluation (Table A6.1) indicate that the base case
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 28.23% and 25.43% for Denjiin and Dambadarjaa,
respectively, are both higher than ADB’s economic opportunity cost of capital (EOCC) of 12%,
which show that both road subprojects can be considered economically viable.

7.      Sensitivity analysis was also undertaken to further test the economic viability of the road
subprojects. The results indicate that the EIRRs are most vulnerable to the delay in the
realization of the benefits from the subprojects but the EIRRs are still higher than the 12%
hurdle rate (EIRRs of 23.89% and 21.55% for Denjiin and Dambadarjaa, respectively). Capital
costs will have to increase by 97% in Denjiin and 84% in Dambadarjaa, while benefits will
require reduction of 81% in Denjiin and 70% in Dambadarjaa, for the EIRRs to drop to the
EOCC (12% hurdle rate).

                 Table A6.1: Economic Evaluation of Urban Roads Improvements
                                                                          Denjiin       Dambadarjaa
              Base Case/Sensitivity Scenario                           Urban Roads      Urban Roads
              Base Case EIRR (%)                                            28.23%          25.43%
              Sensitivity Tests
              Case 1: Capital cost +10%
                  EIRR                                                      26.55%          23.83%
                  Switching value                                           96.59           83.91
                  Sensitivity indicator                                      1.04            1.19
              Case 2: O&M cost +10%
                  EIRR                                                      28.13%          25.32%
                  Switching value                                        1,570.00        1,180.00
                  Sensitivity indicator                                      0.06            0.08
              Case 3: Benefits -10%
                  EIRR                                                      26.23%          23.50%
                  Switching value                                           81.02           69.65
                  Sensitivity indicator                                      1.23            1.44
              Case 4: Capital and O&M costs +10%; Benefits -10%
                  EIRR                                                      24.49%          21.82%
              Case 5: Benefits delayed by 1 year
                  EIRR                                                      23.89%          21.55%
              EIRR = economic internal rate of return, O&M = operation and maintenance.
              Source: Asian Development Bank.

8.       Water supply and sewerage improvements. The proposed water supply and
sewerage improvements in Denjiin subcenter will involve the construction of 5.6 km piped water
distribution network and 5.2 km sewerage network. Meanwhile, the improvements in
Dambadarjaa will involve the construction of 3.5 km piped water distribution network and 4.6 km
sewerage network. The construction of new piped water distribution network and sewerage
network in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa subcenters aims to (i) enhance the quality of life of the
people living in the areas; (ii) decrease the incidence of diseases related to scarce water supply
and sanitation infrastructure; (iii) encourage local business and economic development; and
(iv) attract new settlers and real estate investors.
4
    The VOC savings are based on the assumptions used in Tranche 1. Interviews and focus group discussions
    conducted by Tranche 1 consultants indicated that a monthly VOC savings of $175/car could be potentially
    generated by improving the road network in these ger areas. The VOC savings was updated to reflect the current
    exchange rate of $1:MNT2,000 (while the 2013 exchange rate was $1:MNT1,420). The updated VOC saving is
    $124/car using the current exchange rate.
                                                                                           Appendix 6      3


9.      For the water supply improvement subprojects, the benefits were derived from two major
sources: (i) the benefits from incremental water sales calculated according to the willingness-to-
pay (WTP) of the consumers, existing water demand, and water demand projections; and (ii)
non-incremental water sales benefits equivalent to the resource savings and income saved by
the water consumers by obtaining water from alternative sources. The socioeconomic and WTP
survey conducted showed that households were willing to pay MNT15,568 and MNT17,000 per
month for improved water services in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa, respectively. This WTP amount
was used in calculating the benefits from incremental water sales. In addition, the resource cost
savings estimated at MNT17,675 were based on the socioeconomic survey results which
indicated that households took about 30 minutes three to four times a week to access water
from kiosks, delivery trucks, and other private sources. The resource cost savings were used in
the calculation of non-incremental water sales benefits.

10.      For sewerage improvements, benefits were quantified through (i) reduced health risks
and water-related diseases from savings in the Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY), and
(ii) savings in medical expenses of households who are exposed to soil pollution through
untreated groundwater. A DALY is an indicator of life expectancy combining mortality and
morbidity into one summary measure of population health to account for the number of years
lived in less than optimum health. One DALY is equal to 1 year of healthy life lost. In calculating
the annual economic value of a DALY, the approach of the World Health Organization (WHO),
which equates the DALY to a country’s gross national income (GNI) per capita, has been
adopted. Mongolia’s GNI per capita in 2015 is $3,830. 5 Based on the global burden of disease
approach of WHO, the estimated burden of diarrhea in Mongolia in terms of DALYs is
equivalent to 18 days per 1,000 capita per year for all ages. 6 For a conservative estimate, only
20% of the DALYs (or 3.6 days per 1,000 capita per year) was adopted in the calculation. The
calculated saving in DALY was attributed to the proposed sewerage services. For the savings of
households, 10% of their monthly medical expenses were attributed to waterborne diseases.
Based on the socioeconomic survey results, the average household annual medical expenses
amounted to MNT375,922.

11.     The resulting base case EIRRs for the water supply and sewerage subprojects in Denjiin
and Dambadarjaa subcenters are higher than the 12% hurdle rate, with EIRRs of 28.83% and
26.97% for water supply, and 27.13% and 17.26% for sewerage (Table A6.2). Meanwhile, the
sensitivity analysis indicates that for the water supply subprojects in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa,
the EIRRs are most sensitive to 10% increase in both the capital and O&M costs with 10%
reduction in benefits, with EIRRs of 26.34% and 24.55%, respectively. For the sewerage
subproject in Denjiin, the EIRR is most sensitive to the delay in the realization of benefits by
1 year with EIRRs of 23.0%. For the sewerage subproject in Dambadarjaa, the EIRR is most
sensitive to 10% increase in capital and O&M costs with 10% reduction in benefits, with an
EIRR of 14.20%.

       Table A6.2: Economic Evaluation of Water Supply and Sewerage Improvements
                                               Denjiin         Dambadarjaa        Denjiin      Dambadarjaa
Base Case/Sensitivity Scenario               Water Supply      Water Supply      Sewerage       Sewerage
Base Case EIRR (%)                               28.83%            26.97%          27.13%         17.26%
Sensitivity Tests
Case 1: Capital cost +10%



5
    GNI per capita in current US dollars based on World Bank data. http://data.worldbank.org/country/mongolia
6
    Based on WHO (2014) Estimated DALYs by Cause, Sex, and WHO Member State (1), 2012 at http://
    www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/en/
4      Appendix 6


                                                 Denjiin        Dambadarjaa     Denjiin   Dambadarjaa
Base Case/Sensitivity Scenario                Water Supply      Water Supply   Sewerage    Sewerage
   EIRR                                            27.72%            25.96%      25.63%      16.10%
   Switching value                                151.50            147.50      100.49       45.49
   Sensitivity indicator                            0.66              0.68        1.00        2.20
Case 2: O&M cost +10%
   EIRR                                            28.74%            26.81%      26.91%      16.92%
   Switching value                              1,961.70            954.30      669.39      158.98
   Sensitivity indicator                            0.05              0.10        0.15        0.63
Case 3: Benefits -10%
   EIRR                                            27.51%            25.69%      25.23%      15.63%
   Switching value                                127.90            116.60       79.77       32.39
   Sensitivity indicator                            0.78              0.86        1.25        3.09
Case 4: Capital and O&M costs +10%;
    Benefits -10%
   EIRR                                            26.34%            24.55%      23.58%      14.20%
Case 5: Benefits delayed by one year
   EIRR                                            27.04%            25.03%      23.00%      14.43%
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, O&M = operation and maintenance.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

12.     Heating services expansion. For heating services, the major benefits considered
include (i) reduced health risks from pollution measured through savings in the DALY; and
(ii) medical savings of households from improved air quality in the ger areas. In a 2012 World
Bank study, it was concluded that individual household coal-fired heating appliances, such as
stoves and small furnaces used in the ger areas, contributed as much as 65% of the air
pollution in Ulaanbaatar. Hence, based on the global burden of disease approach of WHO, the
estimated burden of respiratory infections in Mongolia in terms of DALYs is equivalent to
49.8 days per 1,000 capita per year for all ages. For a conservative estimate, only 30% of the
DALYs (or 14.94 days per 1,000 capita per year) was adopted in the calculation. The calculated
saving in DALYs was attributed to the proposed heating services, which would allow households
to switch to more environment-friendly and less air polluting heating technology. For the savings
of households, 20%–30% of their monthly medical expenses were attributed to outdoor
pollution. Using the socioeconomic survey results, the average household annual medical
expenses amounted to MNT375,922.

13.     The resulting base case EIRRs for the heating subprojects in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa
are higher than the 12% EOCC (19.04% and 21.53% EIRR for Denjiin and Dambadarjaa,
respectively), indicating that the subprojects are economically viable (Table A6.3). The
sensitivity analysis results indicate that the EIRRs are most sensitive to the increase in capital
and O&M costs with 10% reduction in benefits for Denjiin (EIRR of 15.77%) and to the delay in
the realization of benefits by 1 year for Dambadarjaa (EIRR of 18.16%).

14.    Economic evaluation was also undertaken for the heating subprojects in Selbe and
Bayankhoshuu. While both subcenters were part of Tranche 1, additional heating plants will be
constructed in Selbe and Bayankhoshuu under Tranche 2—a 48 megawatt (MW) heating plant
in Selbe that will supply to North Selbe (30 MW) and Dambadarjaa (18 MW); and a 32.5 MW
heating plant in Bayankhoshuu.

15.    The economic analysis for the heating services in Selbe and Bayankhoshuu done under
Tranche 1 were updated such that the costs of the new or additional heating plants were added
in the analysis. Meanwhile, the cost estimates used under Tranche 1 for the piping network,
heating service connections, and detailed engineering, which were in 2013 prices, were
converted to 2016 prices by applying inflation factors.
                                                                                      Appendix 6     5



16.     The resulting base case EIRRs for the heating services in Selbe and Bayankhoshuu are
higher than the 12% EOCC (20.07% and 15.22% for Selbe and Bayankhoshuu, respectively).
The sensitivity analysis results indicate that the EIRRs are most sensitive to the delay in the
realization of benefits by 1 year for Selbe (EIRR of 16.96%) and to the increase in capital and
O&M costs with 10% reduction in benefits for Bayankhoshuu (EIRR of 12.33%).

              Table A6.3: Economic Evaluation of Heating Services Expansion
                                               Denjiin       Dambadarjaa     Selbe     Bayankhoshuu
Base Case/Sensitivity Scenario                 Heating          Heating     Heating       Heating
Base Case EIRR (%)                             19.04%            21.53%      20.07%        15.22%
Sensitivity Tests
Case 1: Capital cost +10%
    EIRR                                       17.81%            20.36%     18.91%          14.21%
    Switching value                            57.21             80.98      69.82           32.00
    Sensitivity indicator                       1.75               1.23      1.43            3.13
Case 2: O&M cost +10%
    EIRR                                       18.69%            21.26%      19.77%         14.84%
    Switching value                           202.98            343.75      267.66          82.25
    Sensitivity indicator                       0.49               0.29       0.37           1.17
Case 3: Benefits -10%
    EIRR                                       17.31%            19.94%     18.47%          13.70%
    Switching value                            40.72             59.83      50.52           21.24
    Sensitivity indicator                       2.46               1.67      1.98            4.71
Case 4: Capital and O&M costs +10%;
    Benefits -10%
  EIRR                                         15.77%            18.53%     17.04%          12.33%
Case 5: Benefits delayed by 1 year
  EIRR                                         15.83%            18.16%     16.96%          12.52%
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, O&M = operation and maintenance.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

17.     Socioeconomic facilities. The proposed socioeconomic facilities in Denjiin consist of (i)
a 3,000 m2 community development service center (CDSC), including a 1,000 m2 transition
house and a 500 m2 open area with solar panel system; (ii) a 1,200 m2 kindergarten with open
space and solar panel system that can accommodate 100 students; and (iii) a 3,770 m2 urban
park with green area and a public toilet. In Dambadarjaa, the proposed socioeconomic facilities
comprise the following: (i) a 2,000 m2 CDSC, including a 500 m2 open area with solar panel
system; (ii) a 1,200 m2 kindergarten with open space and solar panel system that can
accommodate 100 students; and (iii) an 800 m2 sports complex with 6,000 m2 of open space.
The proposed socioeconomic facilities in Bayankhoshuu consist of: (i) a 1,200 m2 kindergarten
with open space and solar panel system that can accommodate 100 students; (ii) a 20,000 m2
ravine park; and (iii) a 3,200 m2 sports complex with 2,000 m2 of open space. Meanwhile, in
Selbe, the proposed socioeconomic facility is a 1,200 m2 kindergarten with open space and
solar panel system that can also accommodate 100 students. The economic benefits that can
be attributed to the proposed socioeconomic facilities are discussed below.

18.    Increased employment opportunities. The proposed socioeconomic facilities will
create employment opportunities for the residents of these subcenters as well as for people
from nearby communities. It is estimated that the CDSCs in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa would be
able to train at least 100 persons each year through market-oriented training, business
incubator programs, and business development training, which would translate to gainful
employment for these trained individuals. Meanwhile, the kindergartens in Denjiin,
Dambadarjaa, Bayankhoshuu, and Selbe will employ at least five teachers (1 teacher per
20 pupils). At least two maintenance personnel will also be employed to clean up and maintain
6         Appendix 6



the CDSC facilities, as well as the urban parks in Bayankhoshuu and Denjiin. During the
stakeholder consultations, it was also found out that the lack of kindergartens is a major reason
that keeps women out of the labor force. Therefore, with the kindergarten, mothers can leave
their children in the schools, go to their workplace, and boost their household income. At least
50% of the mothers (50 out of 100 mothers) are assumed to be able to attend to their work
because of the kindergartens.

19.     Increased property values. Studies have shown that parks have a positive impact on
nearby residential property values. Other things being equal, most people are willing to pay
more for a home close to a nice park. Economists call this phenomenon "hedonic value." One of
the factors affecting hedonic value is the distance of the property from the park. While proximate
value can be measured up to 2,000 feet from a large park, most of the value is within 500 feet
from the park. Excellent parks tend to add 15% to the value of a proximate dwelling but 5% can
be used as an average. 7 As applied to the proposed urban park in Denjiin, the positive impact of
the park in terms of property values is assumed to be felt up to a distance of 152 m (500 feet)
from the park (which is almost triangular in shape). This covers an estimated area of 39,709 m2
around the park consisting of residential areas on two sides and the market area on one side
with an approximate total property value of $6.45 million. Thus, the 5% increase in property
value would be $323,000. There is also an additional amount of $26,000 from the annual
property tax capture due to the park. The estimated annual benefit from increased property
value due to the Denjiin urban park is, therefore, $348,000. For Bayankhoshuu, the 5% increase
in property value due to the ravine park amounts to $701,000 while the additional property tax
capture due to the park is $56,000 annually. The same concept of increased property values is
applied to the proposed sports complex in Dambadarjaa, which covers an area of about 50,282
m2 and an estimated annual benefit of $441,000. Meanwhile, the proposed sports complex in
Bayankhoshuu will have an estimated annual benefit of $1.14 million from increased property
values.

20.     Direct use value. The proposed sports complex with open space in Bayankhoshuu and
Dambadarjaa will accommodate basketball and badminton courts, a skating rink, an open
market/bazaar area, and a community event venue. Some of the direct uses of the sports
complex can be free of charge but the direct use value can still be calculated for purposes of
quantifying the economic benefits. The direct use value will come from the use of the venues
during sports events, the regular use of sports facilities such as the basketball and badminton
courts and skating rink, and the use of open market/bazaar and community event areas.

21.     Health benefits. Studies have shown the economic burden of physical inactivity. Lack of
exercise is shown to contribute to obesity and its many effects. Research also suggests that
access to parks can help people increase their level of physical activity (footnote 7). The
proposed urban parks in Bayankhoshuu and Denjiin could provide the green open space for
physical activities and relaxation. It is assumed that at least 25% of the residents will use the
park although people from nearby communities and even tourists may come to visit the urban
park. The health benefits will come from savings in medical costs due to improved health or the
difference in average medical costs between active and inactive persons. Health benefits can
also be attributed to the establishment of sports complexes in Bayankhoshuu and Dambadarjaa
wherein at least 25% of the residents are assumed to use the sports complex.



7
    Harnik and Welle. 2009. Measuring the Economic Value of a City Park System. http://cloud.tpl.org/pubs/ccpe-
    econvalueparks-rpt.pdf
                                                                                                Appendix 6       7


22.     Savings to the education system. A kindergarten is the only socioeconomic facility to
be put up in Selbe under Tranche 2. To quantify the economic benefits of the project, the results
of a study in Wisconsin was adopted, which shows that for every dollar invested in the school,
68 cents would be returned in savings to the education system. 8 The education system benefits
since children progress more efficiently through their schooling as a result of early-childhood
programs. Specific fiscal benefits include (i) lower grade retention, (ii) lower special education
placement, (iii) higher job satisfaction for teachers, (iv) more teachers retained by the public
schools, (v) fewer substitute teachers, (vi) reduced spending on school safety, and (vi) reduced
pressure on student-aid services. For a conservative analysis, only 17 cents (25% of savings to
the education system cited in the study) was used as savings.

23.     The resulting base case EIRRs for the socioeconomic facilities in Denjiin, Dambadarjaa,
Bayankhoshuu, and Selbe (15.43%–24.25% EIRR) are higher than the 12% EOCC indicating
that the subprojects are economically viable (Table A6.4). The sensitivity analysis results
indicate that the EIRRs are most sensitive to the increase in capital and O&M costs plus 10%
reduction in benefits with EIRRs of 18.25%, 13.73%, and 12.01% for Denjiin, Dambadarjaa
Selbe, respectively. Meanwhile, the EIRR in Bayankhoshuu is most sensitive to delay in the
realization of benefits by 1 year.

                    Table A6.4: Economic Evaluation of Socioeconomic Facilities
                                                      Denjiin       Dambadarjaa      Bayankhoshuu        Selbe
                                                      Socio-          Socio-            Socio-          Socio-
                                                    economic         economic          economic        economic
    Base Case/Sensitivity Scenario                    Facility        Facility          Facility        Facility
    Base Case EIRR (%)                               21.46%            16.74%            24.25%           15.43%
    Sensitivity Tests
    Case 1: Capital cost +10%
        EIRR                                          20.06%             15.46%          22.55%           14.00%
        Switching value                               67.42              37.20           72.08             23.94
        Sensitivity indicator                          1.48               2.69            1.39              4.18
    Case 2: O&M cost +10%
        EIRR                                          21.34%             16.59%          24.13%           15.25%
        Switching value                              800.00             328.00        1,000.00            192.00
        Sensitivity indicator                          0.13               0.31            0.10              0.52
    Case 3: Benefits -10%
        EIRR                                          19.75%             15.14%          22.20%           13.61%
        Switching value                               55.23              29.59           59.77             18.83
        Sensitivity indicator                          1.81               3.38            1.67              5.31
    Case 4: Capital and O&M costs +10%;
        Benefits -10%
        EIRR                                          18.25%             13.73%          20.42%           12.01%
    Case 5: Benefits delayed by 1 year
        EIRR                                          18.30%             14.19%          20.40%           12.94%
    EIRR = economic internal rate of return, O&M = operation and maintenance.
    Source: Asian Development Bank.




8
     Belfied et al. 2005. An Economic Analysis of Four-Year-Old Kindergarten in Wisconsin: Returns to the Education
     System. https://dpi.wi.gov/sites/default/files/imce/early-childhood/pdf/PEW%20economic%20report%202005.pdf
                                                                                              Appendix 7       1


                            FINANCIAL ASSESSMENT FOR PROJECT 2

1.      The financial due diligence was undertaken according to Asian Development Bank’s
(ADB) Guidelines on the Financial Management and Analysis of Projects. The financial analysis
covers revenue-generating subprojects, including water supply and sewerage, and heating
systems. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) was calculated and compared with the
weighted average cost of capital (WACC). Meanwhile, financial viability analysis was
undertaken for non-revenue generating subprojects, including road improvements and
socioeconomic facilities to determine if the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB) has the capability
to finance the capital investment cost, as well as the operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of
the subprojects.

2.       Revenue-generating components. The financial evaluation of the revenue-generating
components involves the determination of the capital and O&M costs of the subprojects. The
projected tariff during the life of the project and the expected revenue streams using the project
tariff were also determined. Financial indicators, such FIRR and financial net present value, will
determine the financial viability of the subprojects. Sensitivity analysis was also undertaken to
determine the robustness of the subprojects given the increase or decrease of project costs and
benefits.

3.        Financial analysis of water supply and sewerage subprojects. The total cost of
water supply and sewerage subprojects in Denjiin is $3.11 million, consisting of $2.02 million for
the water supply component (including water connection cost) and $1.09 million for sewerage
component (including secondary pipeline connection cost). Meanwhile, the assumed combined
tariff for water and sewerage is $0.32 per cubic meter (m3). This assumed tariff is based on the
prevailing tariff for water of MNT420/m3 ($0.21/m3) and for sewage disposal of MNT220/m3
($0.11/m3)—or a combined tariff of $0.32/m3. The $0.32/m3 combined tariff is assumed to
increase by 5% every 5 years. 1 In the financial analysis, it is assumed that only 50% of the tariff
can be attributed to proposed water supply and sewerage subprojects, which consist mainly of
water supply and sewerage pipelines and connections. The other 50% of the tariff is assumed to
be attributed to other components, such as water supply source, water treatment plant, and
wastewater treatment plant. 2

4.     The resulting FIRR confirms the marginal financial viability of the water supply and
sewerage subprojects in Denjiin (Table A7.1), with a base case FIRR of 2.90%, which is higher
than the WACC of 2.17%. Sensitivity analysis results also indicate that the FIRR is sensitive in
four cases: (i) 10% increase in O&M costs (FIRR of 1.85%); (ii) 10% decrease in benefits (FIRR
of 1.32%); (iii) 10% increase in capital and O&M costs with 10% decrease in benefits (FIRR of
0.28%); and (iv) delay in the realization of project benefits by 1 year (FIRR of –1.76%). In all
four cases, the FIRR is lower than the 2.17% WACC.




1
  The 2016 tariff for water (MNT420/m3) is 47% higher than the 2013 tariff (MNT286/m3), while the 2016 tariff for
                        3                                           3
  sewerage (MNT220/m ) is 50% higher than the 2013 tariff (MNT147/m ). Hence, the assumed 5% increase in tariff
  every 5 years can be considered conservative.
2
  The proportion of costs attributed to project components is based on the data from other water supply and
  sewerage projects.
2      Appendix 7



 Table A7.1: Financial Evaluation of Water Supply and Sewerage Improvements (Denjiin)
        Item                                                                                 FIRR
        Base Case Scenario                                                                   2.90%
        Case 1: 10% increase in capital cost                                                 2.46%
        Case 2: 10% increase in O&M cost                                                     1.85%
        Case 3: 10 % decrease in benefits                                                    1.32%
        Case 4: 10 % increase in capital + O&M costs; 10% decrease in benefits               0.28%
        Case 5: Delay in project benefits by 1 year                                         –1.76%
        Weighted average cost of capital                                                     2.17%
        Proposed initial tariff rate (water and sewerage)                                   $0.32/m3
        Current rate of water per m3 in ger area kiosks                                     $0.45/m3
        Current rate of metered apartment                                                   $0.32/m3
        Willingness-to-pay for monthly consumption                                          $7.78/month
        FIRR = financial internal rate of return, m3 = cubic meter, O&M = operation and maintenance.
        Source: Asian Development Bank.

5.      For Dambadarjaa, the total cost of water supply and sewerage subprojects is
$2.08 million, consisting of $1.10 million for the water supply component (including water
connection cost) and $0.98 million for the sewerage component (including secondary pipeline
connection cost). The assumed combined tariff for water and sewerage is $0.32/m3, which will
increase by 5% every 5 years. In the financial analysis, it is assumed that only 50% of the tariff
can be attributed to proposed water supply and sewerage subprojects, which consist mainly of
water supply and sewerage pipelines and connections. The other 50% of the tariff is assumed to
be attributed to other components, such as water supply source, water treatment plant, and
wastewater treatment plant.

6.      The results of the financial evaluation indicate a base case FIRR of 4.40%, which is
higher than the WACC of 2.17% (Table A7.2). This confirms that the water supply and
subprojects in Dambadarjaa can be considered financially viable. The sensitivity analysis
indicates that the FIRR is most sensitive to (i) 10% increase in capital and O&M costs with 10%
decrease in benefits (FIRR of 1.62%), and (ii) delay in the realization of project benefits by 1
year (FIRR of –0.68%). In both cases, the FIRR is lower than the 2.17% WACC.

      Table A7.2: Financial Evaluation of Water Supply and Sewerage Improvements
                                      (Dambadarjaa)
        Item                                                                                 FIRR
        Base Case Scenario                                                                   4.40%
        Case 1: 10% increase in capital cost                                                 4.01%
        Case 2: 10% increase in O&M cost                                                     3.17%
        Case 3: 10 % decrease in benefits                                                    2.68%
        Case 4: 10 % increase in capital + O&M costs; 10% decrease in benefits               1.62%
        Case 5: Delay in project benefits by 1 year                                         –0.68%
        Weighted average cost of capital                                                     2.17%
        Proposed initial tariff rate (water and sewerage)                                   $0.32/m3
        Current rate of water per m3 in ger area kiosks                                     $0.45/m3
        Current rate of metered apartment                                                   $0.32/m3
        Willingness-to-pay for monthly consumption                                          $8.50/month
        FIRR = financial internal rate of return, m3 = cubic meter, O&M = operation and maintenance.
        Source: Asian Development Bank.

7.      Financial analysis of heating subprojects. The financial evaluation was combined for
the Denjiin and Dambadarjaa heating services subprojects. The combined cost for the Denjiin
and Dambadarjaa heating services subprojects is $23.61 million—consisting of $13.84 million
for heating supply network, a heating plant, and substations in Denjiin; and $4.21 million heating
                                                                                                 Appendix 7       3


supply network and substations in Dambadarjaa (plus $5.56 million as part of the cost of the
heating plant in Selbe that will supply heat to Dambadarjaa). The assumed tariffs are $5.60 per
megawatt (MW) for households and $11.21 per MW for institutions. The tariff is assumed to
increase by 30% every 5 years. 3

8.       The results of the financial evaluation indicate that the subprojects are financially viable
with an FIRR of 5.01%, which is higher than the WACC of 2.17%. The sensitivity analysis
indicates that the FIRR is most sensitive to a 1 year delay in the realization of project revenues
that will result in an FIRR of 2.38%.

           Table A7.3: Financial Evaluation of Heating Services (Denjiin and Dambadarjaa)
             Item                                                                              FIRR
             Base Case Scenario                                                                5.01%
             Case 1: 10% increase in capital cost                                              4.49%
             Case 2: 10% increase in O&M cost                                                  4.48%
             Case 3: 10 % decrease in benefits                                                 3.89%
             Case 4: 10 % increase in capital + O&M costs; 10% decrease in benefits            2.87%
             Case 5: Delay in project benefits by 1 year                                       2.38%
             FIRR = financial internal rate of return, O&M = operation and maintenance.
             Source: Asian Development Bank.

9.       Non-revenue generating components. A financial viability and sustainability analysis
was conducted for nonrevenue-generating projects, like urban roads and socioeconomic
facilities. The objective is to evaluate the financial impacts of these projects on the cash flow of
MUB to determine whether the executing agency or project proponent can provide the capital
investment and recurrent budgetary requirements.

           Table A7.4: Fiscal Projections for the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (2016–2020)
    Item                                Actual (MNT billion)                    Projection (MNT billion)
                                      2013     2014       2015       2016      2017      2018      2019     2020
  Recurrent/operating
                                     330.1    385.1    429.6       490.2    559.4      638.3     728.3     831.0
     expenditure
  Total operating revenues           433.0    459.7    466.3       532.1    607.1      692.7     790.5     902.0
  Surplus                            102.9     74.6     36.7        41.8     47.7        54.5     62.2      70.9
  Government fund required for
                                                                              0.6         1.8       2.4       1.2
     urban roads subprojectsa
  Government fund required for
                                                                              –           –         –         –
     socioeconomic facilitiesb
  Project government fund/
                                                                            0.11%       0.28%     0.33%     0.14%
     operating expenditure
a
   Figures shown for 2017–2020 are the capital investment share of the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB) for Denjiin
   and Dambadarjaa subprojects (40% of capital investments). Loan repayments from MUB for the Asian
   Development Bank (ADB) ordinary capital resources loan will be from 2022 until 2041 (MNT4.44 billion per year).
   Operating and maintenance costs will be MNT0.45 billion per year (2021–2036).
b
   Socioeconomic facilities will be 100% funded by ADB concessional ordinary capital resources. Loan repayments
   from MUB will be from year 2022 until 2041 (MNT3.58 billion per year).
Source: ADB estimates.

10.   As shown in Table A7.4, the urban roads and socioeconomic facilities subprojects to be
implemented in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa will have minimal impact on MUB’s budget. The
budgetary requirements for the subprojects are about 0.11% to 0.33% of the annual operating
expenditure requirements of MUB. The additional budgetary requirement for loan repayments

3
    Based on the data provided by the Energy Regulatory Commission, the heating tariff increased by 33% in 2015
    compared to the 2013 tariff.
4      Appendix 7



from MUB for the ADB loans (from ordinary capital resources and concessional ordinary capital
resources) from 2022 to 2041, and for O&M costs for roads from 2021 to 2036 would represent
about 0.89% (at the maximum) of the total annual operating expenditure (MNT4.9 billion per
year for urban roads and MNT3.6 billion per year for socioeconomic facilities) from 2021 to
2041. Hence, the fiscal impact analysis indicates that the MUB has adequate counterpart
funding during implementation and debt servicing and O&M capacity during operation period.

11.    Affordability and willingness-to-pay analysis. Willingness-to-pay (WTP) surveys were
conducted in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa in April 2016. An affordability analysis was also
undertaken based on the survey results. The proposed combined tariff for water and sewerage
services of $0.32/m3 is deemed affordable and would cover 1.3%–1.9% of the monthly income
of the two lowest income groups in Denjiin and Dambadarjaa. For heating services, the
proposed tariff of $5.6 per megawatt-hour (MWh) is also deemed affordable and would
comprise 2.0%–2.8% of the monthly income of the two lowest income groups. Therefore, the
combined tariffs for water and sewerage, and heating services comprise from 3.28% to 4.69%
of the monthly income of the two lowest income groups. This is still affordable from the point of
view of low income households since the rule of the thumb is that expenses for utilities should
not go beyond 5% of the monthly income of the lowest income households.

12.    Assuming that the average water consumption will increase to 10.8 m3 per household
per month (from less than 3 m3 per household per month) due to the availability of piped water
supply in both Denjiin and Dambadarjaa, the amount that the households are willing to pay for
improved water and sewerage services ($7.78 and $8.50) would translate to $0.72/m3 and
$0.79/m3 of water consumed. The proposed combined tariff for water and sewerage services of
$0.32/m3 of water consumed is, therefore, within the limit set by residents for their water and
sewerage expenses.

13.     For improved heating services, households are willing to pay $12.89 and $11.12 per
month for Denjiin and Dambadarjaa, respectively. Assuming that the average consumption per
month per household is 0.94 MWh and the proposed tariff is $5.6 per MWh, the monthly
expenses per household for heating services is $5.26. This is deemed to be acceptable since
this is lower than the limit set by households for heating services of $12.89 and $11.12 per
month for Denjiin and Dambadarjaa, respectively.

14.     Converting to piped water supply from the current water supply from kiosks, delivery
trucks, and other private sources would constitute savings for households in ger areas. The
WTP survey indicates that households pay on the average $4.73 and $5.66 per month in Denjiin
and Dambadarjaa, respectively, for water supply from current sources. With the proposed piped
water supply, household expenses would go down to $3.46 per month and this would cover not
only the cost of water supply but also of sewerage services.

15.     Connection to metered heating services would also mean savings for households. The
WTP survey shows that households spend $129 and $102 per month in Denjiin and
Dambadarjaa, respectively, for the use of coal-fired stove. With the shift to metered heating,
households would spend only about $5.26 per month or less than 10% of what they are
currently paying for the coal-fired stove.
                                                                                                  Appendix 8        1


            UPDATED SUMMARY POVERTY REDUCTION AND SOCIAL STRATEGY

Country:                                                Project Title:   Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas
                      Mongolia
                                                                         Development Investment Program: Project 2

Lending/Financing                                       Department/      East Asia Department/Urban and Social
                      Multitranche Financing Facility
Modality:                                               Division:        Sectors Division

                               I.       POVERTY AND SOCIAL ANALYSIS AND STRATEGY
Targeting classification: Targeted Intervention—SDG11
A. Links to the National Poverty Reduction and Inclusive Growth Strategy and Country Partnership Strategy
The program will improve the living conditions in Ulaanbaatar by establishing a network of livable, competitive, and
                                                     a
inclusive subcenters in Ulaanbaatar’s ger areas. Project 2 is located in two of the smaller, central-north districts of
Chingeltei and Sukhbaatar. Both have their roots in the older inner city, but extend well beyond the current built-up
limits to include significant portions of undeveloped countryside.
The program will support the implementation of the Ulaanbaatar City Master Plan (2030) by upgrading priority ger area
                                                          b
subcenters from 2013 to 2023 through three projects. The investment program is in line with the Asian Development
Bank's (ADB) interim country partnership strategy for Mongolia, 2014–2016, country operations business plan for
                                                                                                                    c
Mongolia, 2014–2016, ADB’s Strategy 2020, Poverty Reduction Strategy, and Urban Operational Plan 2012–2020. It
is also fully integrated and is compatible with the global Sustainable Development Goals and the original Mongolia
Policy Paper on Poverty Reduction, which directly supports the eight millennium development goals and 18 related
objectives. It is in line with the millennium development goal-based Comprehensive National Development Strategy of
Mongolia 2007 and its City-Wide Pro-Poor Ger Area Upgrading Strategy and Investment Plan.
B. Results from the Poverty and Social Analysis during PPTA or Due Diligence
1. Key poverty and social issues. In 2014, 21.6% of the Mongolian population lived below the national poverty line.
The poverty level was much higher in rural areas (27%) than in the urban areas (18%). However, poverty reduction
was slower in urban areas, especially in Ulaanbaatar (16.4%) where poverty declined by 3% during 2012–2014
compared to 11% between 2010 and 2012. Therefore, the urban areas continued to have the largest share of the poor
in Mongolia. Gross domestic product has fallen from 17.5% in 2012 to 2.3% in 2015 driving up unemployment to
11.6% (unofficial rate is higher as only 60% of the economically active were formally engaged and measured). Rural–
urban migration accounts for 58% of Ulaanbaatar’s annual growth, which adds to the ger area challenges.
Ulaanbaatar has an estimated population of 1,445,000 by the end of 2016 based on a 2015 population of 1,396,500;
growing at a rate of approximately 3.5%. This is more than twice the national growth rate of 1.5% and higher than the
overall urbanization rate of 2.8%. Ulaanbaatar has a long history of informally settled ger areas developing around its
more formal center. About 60% (840,000) of Ulaanbaatar’s population live in unplanned and underserviced informal
settlements without water or sewerage connections and highly polluted environment with limited access to social
facilities, and limited employment opportunities.
2. Beneficiaries. The project will benefit about 200,000 persons with improved access to water supply and sewerage,
roads, heating services, kindergarten facilities, transitional housing, business incubator components, parks, and sport
complexes. This includes 32,000 residents living in the four subcenters targeted by Tranche 1 and 2 investments.
Elderly and disabled people will also directly benefit from targeted improvements to inclusiveness and access to all
project facilities. Indirect beneficiaries are the population of Ulaanbaatar City because of the overall impact of the
project on the city pollution and urban development.
3. Impact channels. The direct impact of the project will be (i) improved access to basic municipal services;
(ii) improved access to expanded social facilities and support programs; (iii) increased employment and job
opportunities with skills training; and (iv) strengthened community awareness, participation, and voice in decision-
making. The indirect impact of the project will be improved economic and social opportunities in the revitalized urban
ger areas.
4. Other social and poverty issues. Programs in improved civil registration, land registration, skills training, and
social welfare benefits are being implemented by the government to help ensure social inclusiveness.
5. Design features. The project design responds to issues raised by the poverty and social analysis (PSA). Key
design features include (i) creating job opportunities for the poor and women during project construction and
operation; (ii) providing skills improvement and business development opportunities through construction of community
and business incubator centers; (iii) ensuring a comprehensive information, education, and communication campaign,
along with other activities set out in the program’s consultation, participation, and communication strategies; and
(iv) providing a transitional housing for children and women victims of domestic violence. The actions in the community
action plan (CAP), consultation and participation plan (CPP), gender action plan (GAP), and social development action
plan (SDAP) will mitigate adverse impacts and increase positive impacts of the project.
C. Poverty Impact Analysis for Policy-Based Lending (Not applicable)
2        Appendix 8


                               II.       PARTICIPATION AND EMPOWERING THE POOR
1. Participatory approaches and project activities. During the project preparation, the PSA was conducted with
direct and indirect beneficiaries through focus group discussions and key informant interviews. In addition, extensive
consultations were held with all relevant stakeholders through workshops, group, and individual meetings. The CAP,
CPP, and SDAP were prepared to support participation of beneficiaries and stakeholders throughout detailed design
and implementation.
2. Community development councils have been established throughout the project area to lead civil society
participation. Several nongovernment organizations will eventually be directly involved in project component
management, i.e., kindergartens, shelters, incubator services, and support programs based in the project’s community
development service centers. The action plans detail the special measures prepared under the project.
3. Civil society organizations. Through the efforts of United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat),
community development councils have been established and will continue to be supported.
4. The following forms of civil society organization participation are envisaged during project implementation, rated as
high (H), medium (M), low (L), or not applicable (NA)
      Information gathering and sharing (H)        Consultation (H)    Collaboration (H)      Partnership (H)
5. Participation plan.      Yes.       No.
The CAP and CPP for the project have been prepared and aim to ensure inclusion of views from a range of interested
parties in developing and reviewing respective designs, plans, and activities and help in the resolution of complex
issues, gain consensus, and support from stakeholders, reduce problems in implementation, improve project design
and increase impacts. The cost for the plans’ implementation will be included in the project management cost.
                                          III.    GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT
Gender mainstreaming category: Effective gender mainstreaming
A. Key issues. According to the PSA findings, low-income women have a high proportion of non-paid domestic work
partly due to poor infrastructure requiring the majority of households to hand carry water from kiosks on unpaved, poor
condition, and unsafe (muddy, icy, steep, unlit) roads. About 95% of households utilize open pit latrines, which impact
both family and community health, especially the children, women, and elderly. Indoor cooking with coal remains the
dominant heating and cooking fuel endangering women’s health in particular, and contributing to city pollution.
Shortage of kindergartens, along with expressed need for business incubator centers and training opportunities,
impedes women’s ability to seek paid employment and economic independence. According to various studies, 33% of
women suffer from domestic violence and there is a significant unmet demand for more women shelters and
transitional housing. Also, subcenters lack open public green spaces for socializing; and public safety is threatened
due to lack of provision for pedestrians, unsafe public transport stops, and unlit streets.
B. Key actions. The GAP (i) incorporates gender mainstreaming actions in the design and implementation of road
network, water supply and sanitation, heating system extension, and communication improvements, as well as
development of social facilities including women’s transitional and shelter housing, multipurpose community
development service centers, kindergartens, and public open green spaces; (ii) ensures work place equity, health,
safety, and harassment awareness/prevention programs, (iii) ensures development of, and participation in, programs
promoting economic independence, including business incubators and related training; and (iv) strengthens roles of
women in all levels of decision making bodies.
        Gender action plan           Other actions or measures          No action or measure
                                   IV.     ADDRESSING SOCIAL SAFEGUARD ISSUES
A. Involuntary Resettlement                             Safeguard Category:        A      B      C       FI
1. Key impacts. An estimated 263 khasaas with 642 entities (residential and commercial) and 3,210 persons are
expected to experience subproject related impacts under Project 1. Most affected entities will move back their fences
from the edge of their property to accommodate the widening of local roads; others may experience temporary
construction impacts to their fences, which will be removed and subsequently replaced following the installation of
subterranean infrastructure. Latrines will also be affected, as these are usually situated near property boundaries.
There is also the potential to disrupt businesses that households run from their khasaas. For Project 2, there are about
555 entities (residential and commercial) and 2,156 persons who are expected to be affected by the four subcenters.
Impacts are similar to those in Project 1.
2. Strategy to address the impacts. For Project 1, land acquisition and resettlement plans (LARPs) have been
updated for Selbe and Bayankhoshuu subcenters and implementation is ongoing. For Project 2, one LARP was
prepared covering the four subcenters based on feasibility study report. It will be updated by subproject once detailed
design is available. All LARPs and updates were prepared based on applicable laws of Mongolia and ADB's
Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). Affected persons have been and will continue to be provided with clear
understanding of potential risks and benefits. A grievance redress mechanism has been established for Project 1 and
will be adopted for Project 2. Information, consultation, and participation of affected persons are ongoing and will need
to continue through individual, cluster, and public meetings throughout LARP preparation, updating, and
implementation process. The resettlement framework for all subprojects under the program has been reviewed and
updated. It now reflects the MUB’s recent regulation, a more harmonized grievance handling system based on existing
practice, new institutional arrangements, and other provisions derived from the updated LARPs from Project 1.
                                                                                                   Appendix 8         3


3. Plan or other Actions.                                  Combined resettlement and indigenous peoples plan
     Resettlement plan                                     Combined resettlement framework and indigenous peoples
     Resettlement framework                                 planning framework
     Environmental and social management                   Social impact matrix
system arrangement
     No action
B. Indigenous Peoples                                  Safeguard Category:        A       B      C      FI
1. Key impacts. The project components are all focused on mid-ger urban areas of Ulaanbaatar. These areas have
been in existence for some time and are very heterogeneous in terms of residents’ socioeconomic status. The project
investments will benefit all residents. No specific communities of ethnic minorities have been identified during the
project preparation.
Is broad community support triggered?          Yes                  No
2. Strategy to address the impacts. Not applicable.
3. Plan or other actions.
     Indigenous peoples plan                                          Combined resettlement plan and indigenous
     Indigenous peoples planning framework                       peoples plan
     Environmental and social management system                       Combined resettlement framework and indigenous
arrangement                                                      peoples planning framework
     Social impact matrix                                             Indigenous peoples plan elements integrated in
     No action                                                   project with a summary
                                      V.      ADDRESSING OTHER SOCIAL RISKS
A. Risks in the Labor Market
1. Relevance of the project for the country’s or region’s or sector’s labor market, indicated as high (H),
medium (M), and low or not significant (L).
    unemployment (L)        underemployment (L)        retrenchment        core labor standards (M)
2. Labor market impact. Construction activities under the project will employ local labor for skilled and unskilled jobs
during construction and operation. The project will provide both long-term and short-term employment. The project
includes business incubators for long-term labor market improvement and promotes employment generation in
subcenters. The project will provide employment opportunities to women as well.
B. Affordability. The proposed tariffs for water supply, sewage, and heating services are considered affordable as
they are within the limit that low income households are willing to pay.
C. Communicable Diseases and Other Social Risks
1. The impact of the following risks are rated as high (H), medium (M), low (L), or not applicable (NA):
     Communicable diseases (M)               Human trafficking (L)
     Others (please specify) ______________
2. Risks to people in project area. An SDAP with specific measures on information, education, and communications
campaign related to risks on HIV/AIDS/sexually transmitted infections, among other topics, was prepared and will be
incorporated in the updated facility administration manual (FAM) and in the project agreement.
                                         VI.   MONITORING AND EVALUATION
1. Targets and indicators: The design and monitoring framework includes targets and indicators for community
participation, participation by women, employment recruitment, and subcenters’ inclusive design features.
2. Required human resources: Extensive human resources to address gender, social development, and social
safeguards will be provided by the consultant services and program management office (PMO) staff. Community
engagement and a component for development of small- and medium-sized enterprises will require 6 person-months
of international and 82 person-months of national consultants. PMO support will require 27 person-months of
international and 39 person-months of national consultants. In addition, the PMO will have a staff member engaged
for 20 person-months to supervise and implement the social actions under the project.
3. Information in FAM: Social and gender indicators and targets are included in the project’s design and monitoring
framework and in the updated FAM.
4. Monitoring tools: Project performance management system on social and gender action plans is incorporated in
the updated FAM.
a
   Ger is the Mongolian dwelling fit for nomadic way of life and is easily assembled and disassembled.
b
   State Great Hural (Parliament) of Mongolia. February 2013. Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban
   Development Master Plan 2020 and Development Directions 2030. Ulaanbaatar.
c
   ADB. 2014. Country Partnership Strategy: Mongolia, 2014–2016. Manila; ADB. 2014. Country Operations Business
   Plan: Mongolia, 2014–2016. Manila; ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian
   Development Bank, 2008–2020. Manila. The investment program also addresses ADB’s strategic objectives in the
   urban sector. Under Strategy 2020, cities are a key focus—in terms of promoting livable cities that are competitive,
   socially inclusive, environmentally attractive, resilient, and responsive; ADB. 2004. Poverty Reduction Strategy of
   the Asian Development Bank. Manila; ADB. 2013. Urban Operational Plan, 2012–2020. Manila.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                             Appendix 9



 UPDATED ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT AND REVIEW FRAMEWORK


The updated environmental assessment and review framework is available at:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-document/219316/45007-005-earf-01.pdf
                                                                                 Appendix 10



         INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION FOR PROJECT 2


The initial and updated initial environmental examinations for Project 2 are available at:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-document/219321/45007-005-iee-01.pdf
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-documents/45007/45007-005-iee-02.pdf
                                                                             Appendix 11



   UPDATED LAND ACQUISITION AND RESETTLEMENT FRAMEWORK


The updated land acquisition and resettlement framework is available at:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-document/217211/45007-005-rf-01.pdf
                                                                            Appendix 12



    LAND ACQUISITION AND RESETTLEMENT PLAN FOR PROJECT 2


The land acquisition and resettlement plan for Project 2 is available at:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-document/217021/45007-005-rp-01.pdf
                                                            Gender Action Plan for Project 2
                                                                                                                                                         Indicative
Activities                                                      Targets/Indicators                               Responsible Entity         Timeline      Budget
Output 1: Roads and urban services expanded
1. Integrate gender-responsive design   1.1 Number and type of gender-responsive design features               MUB, PMO,                     2017–     Included in
   measures into road infrastructure to 1.2 Lighting installed along the improved roads of 2.48                district, kheseg, khoroo,a     2020     project costs
   ensure access and safety and             kilometers in Denjin and 3.25 kilometers in Dambadarjaa            and school officials
   security mobility
2. Conduct road safety awareness           2.   At least 50% of participants are women
   education program for residents and
   schoolchildren in target areas
3. Ensure safety of girls and women in     3.1 Around 25 cameras installed and operating in streets of         MUB, PMO, and school          2017–     Included in
   public places                               Denjiin and Dambadarjaa subcenters                              officials                      2020     project costs

                                           3.2 At least four peer educators (female and male) trained for
                                               each school in the subcenters

                                      3.3 At least two trainings conducted on Violence Against Women
                                            and Girls for adolescent girls of 3 schools in each subcenter
                                            (Baseline: 0)
4. Sensitize construction workers on  4 At least two workplace trainings conducted on gender equity MUB, PMO, and                            2017–     Included in
   gender equity in labor relations         in labor relations including labor exploitation (sex-         construction contractors            2020     project costs
                                            disaggregated) (Baseline: 0)
Output 2: Economic and public services in targeted areas improved
5. Establish one multipurpose              5.1 At least 50% of training participants are women (Baseline: 0)   MUB, associated agency,       2017–     Included in
   community development services                                                                              and PMO                        2020     project costs
   center in the subcenter                 5.2 Sex-disaggregated data collected on community development
                                               services center clients
6. Construct four kindergarten             6.1 Four new kindergarten classrooms with capacity of 100           MUB and PMO                   2017–     Included in
   classrooms in the subcenters                children each is operational by 2019 (sex-disaggregated)                                       2020     project costs

                                           6.2 Rapid qualitative assessment conducted among mothers
                                               whose children were enrolled in new kindergartens
7. Pilot a transitional housing for        7.1 One transitional house with capacity of 20 women and           MUB, PMO,                      2018–     Included in



                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 13
   domestic violence survivor women in         children is constructed                                        district, kheseg and            2020     project costs
   Denjiin subcenter                                                                                          khoroo officials including
                                           7.2 Women in transitional house benefitted from skills-building or social workers
                                               business development programs in business incubators
8. Train multidisciplinary teams in target 8   At least 80% of multidisciplinary teams in target khoroos are MUB, PMO,                       2017–     Included in
   khoroos on prevention and response          trained on prevention and response to domestic violence        district, kheseg and            2020     project costs
   to domestic violence, and public            against women and children, and public space safety for girls khoroo officials including
   space safety for girls and women            and women (Baseline to be determined in 2017)                  multidisciplinary teams                                  1
                                                                                                                                                         Indicative    2
 Activities                                                        Targets/Indicators                             Responsible Entity        Timeline       Budget
 9. Raise awareness among adolescent 9         At least one behavior change communications campaign            MUB, PMO, and school          2017–     Included in
    girls and boys on public and private       held in all schools of each subcenter (Baseline: 0)             officials including social     2020     project costs



                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 13
    space safety                                                                                               workers
 Output 3: Institutional capacity for program management and urban development strengthened
10. Ensure that subcenter plan and        10.1 Dambadarjaa and Denjiin plans and redevelopment                 MUB and PMO                   2017–     Included in
    redevelopment process are prepared         processes are prepared and endorsed by all the                                                 2019     project costs
    and endorsed by all stakeholders           stakeholders, through community consultation, including at
    through community consultations            least 50% of women participants (2015 baseline: 0)

                                       10.2 CDCs and SDCs in Dambadarjaa and Denjiin fully
                                            functioning, with at least 40% of women participating actively
                                            (2015 baseline: 0)
11. Institutional capacity for program 11 PMO is fully functioning with fully trained staff, at least 50% of
    management and urban development        whom are women (2015 baseline: 14 persons)
    are strengthened

12. Train relevant officials of different   12.1 A training module on prevention and response to public and    MUB, PMO,                     2017–     Included in
    administrative levels on prevention          private space safety including gender-based violence is       district, kheseg and           2020     project costs
    and response to public and private           developed (Baseline: 0)                                       khoroo officials, and non-
    space safety                                                                                               government
                                             12.2 At least one training for relevant officials of different    organization(s)
                                                  administrative levels is conducted (sex-disaggregated)
                                                  (Baseline: 0)
13. Sex-disaggregated data will be           13 Sex-disaggregated project performance and management         MUB and PMO            2017– Included in
     collected by the project performance         system operational (2015 baseline: 0)                                              2020 project costs
     management system to ensure
     monitoring, evaluation, and reporting
     of the gender action plan and social
     development action plan
14. Ensure semiannual monitoring and         14 Gender action plan progress monitoring matrix is updated     MUB and PMO            2017– Included in
     reporting of the gender action plan          semiannually                                                                       2020 project costs
     implementation
 15. Provide recommendations and draft 15 Regulatory framework including standards for establishment Ministry of Justice and        2017– Included in
     regulatory framework including               of the transitional house is drafted and submitted to line Home Affairs, and       2020 project costs
     standards for establishment of the           Ministries (baseline 0)                                    Ministry of Labor and
     transitional house.                                                                                     Social Protection MUB,
                                                                                                             and PMO.
CDCs = community development councils, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, PMO = program management office, SDCs = small- and medium-sized enterprise
development council.
a
  A khoroo is an administrative subdivision in Ulaanbaatar.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                              Appendix 14       1


               UPDATED RISK ASSESSMENT AND RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN

Risk Description          Rating                   Mitigation Measures                         Responsibility
Public Financial Management
Urban infrastructure         M     ADB will meet regularly with the MCUD, MOF, MUB,           ADB, MCUD,
investments are                    and other agencies involved to explain the concept         MOF, and MUB
constrained by fiscal and          and implications of the MFF.
political factors.                                                                            ADB, MCUD,
                                   The program has a provision to strengthen local and        MOF, and MUB
                                   city master planning to ensure consistency and
                                   alignment of the planning process and orientation.
                                   ADB will maintain a continuous dialogue and
                                   strengthen awareness with the MCUD, MOF, and
                                   MUB. The program is indicated in the priority action
                                   plans of the MUB and the Government.

Allotted program resources     M   A loan condition requires allocation of necessary          MOF and MUB
are inadequate to support          counterpart funds.
the policy and institutional
reforms.

The MUB fails to provide       M   Appropriate covenants will be included in the ADB          ADB and MUB
adequate subsidies to              loan document for the MUB to mitigate these risks.
augment shortfalls of
revenues.

The tariff set for water       M   Conduct consultation with all stakeholders to make         Agency for Fair
supply, sewerage, and              tariff for utility cost reasonable.                        Competition and
heating services is not                                                                       Consumer Rights,
affordable for low income                                                                     Energy Regulatory
communities.                                                                                  Commission MUB,
                                                                                              and USUG

Procurement
The MUB lacks the              M   The program allocates funding to cover consulting          ADB and MUB
capacity to implement              services support and additional staff with experience
large and sophisticated            and suitable skills. The program will focus on key
projects, including                sector improvements in project imprest account
procurement.                       management and reporting, project accounting,
                                   contract management, and project performance
                                   monitoring and reporting.

The PMO has limited            M   ADB will conduct procurement review during loan            ADB and MUB
procurement capacity.              review missions to validate reported procurement
                                   capacities and address gaps that may impede
                                   program effectiveness.

The MUB fails to engage        L   The program will include one large package for             ADB and MUB
and retain consultants             consulting services, and only reputable companies
who are well-qualified             with sufficient resources will be shortlisted. Executing
and experienced.                   and implementing agencies will liaise regularly with
                                   ADB and the project consultant team to ensure that
                                   ADB guidelines are followed. Interagency coordination
                                   will be enhanced at all levels to closely monitor the
                                   performance of the MFF portfolio.

Others
Delays in project              M   The government will ensure that the PMO is staffed         MUB
implementation                     with experienced professionals. Consulting services
                                   for Tranche 2 will be tendered and hired by the
                                   current PMO and PMO support consultants. The MUB
2       Appendix 14


 Risk Description             Rating                    Mitigation Measures                        Responsibility
                                       will ensure that the approval process of detailed
                                       design and bidding documents will be simplified to
                                       ensure prompt project implementation.

 Insufficient resources        M       The Government and the MUB will ensure that the           MUB and line
 are allocated to the                  facilities financed by Project 2 (community               ministries
 operation and                         development       centers,   transitional   house,
 maintenance of                        kindergartens, sports complexes, and public parks)
 socioeconomic facilities.             have enough resources and human capacity to be
                                       properly operated and maintained by relevant
                                       departments and agencies.

 Policy reforms are            M       The program will support the development and              MUB and line
 delayed or prevented by               implementation of a reform road map. It will              ministries
 political interference.               strengthen awareness of the program stakeholders
                                       through a combination of high-level advocacy and
                                       publicity campaigns.

 Community and private         M       ADB will provide continuous support during                ADB and MUB
 sector involvement in                 implementation for community engagement and
 subcenter development                 private sector involvement. The MUB, supported by
 is lacking.                           the program, will facilitate, supervise, and coordinate
                                       the redevelopment process of subcenters and guide a
                                       fair land redevelopment process. The program will
                                       provide    support     to    community     engagement
                                       throughout implementation.

 There are delays that         M       Requirements for resettlement have been minimized         MUB
 might result from the                 during the project design and extensive community
 negotiated settlements                consultations have been undertaken to reach a
 that are necessary in                 consensus on the project scope and resettlement
 the absence of a legal                plans. The community engagement consulting
 framework for land                    services will also support the PMO and the
 acquisition and                       resettlement specialists to facilitate and guide the
 resettlement.                         consultations with affected people to ensure smooth
                                       land acquisition and resettlement negotiations.

                                       Baselines for land compensation for affected people       MUB
                                       will be agreed with the MUB.

                                       MUB will make compensation funds for affected             MUB
                                       persons available early and will strictly comply with
                                       the resettlement plan.

 Women are not                 M       Program counterpart funds on gender mainstreaming         MUB
 effectively                           activities are included in the annual budget of the
 mainstreamed into the                 implementing agencies. A gender action plan was
 program.                              prepared, which outlined the main strategies to
                                       address the key gender concerns on access and
                                       affordability of households headed by poor women,
                                       protection of the land tenure and property rights of
                                       women, and equal participation by women in the
                                       decision-making activities of the khesegs and
                                                                             a
                                       khoroos under the investment program.
  Overall                        M
ADB = Asian Development Bank, L = low, M = moderate, MCUD = Ministry of Construction and Urban Development,
MFF = multitranche financing facility, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, MOF = Ministry of Finance, PMO = program
management office, USUG = Ulaanbaatar Water Supply and Sewerage Authority.
a
   A khoroo is an administrative subdivision of Ulaanbaatar, the capital of Mongolia. The term is often translated as
  subdistrict or microdistrict.
Source: Asian Development Bank
                                                                               Appendix 15



       CLIENT FEASIBILITY STUDIES AND ENGINEERING DESIGNS


The client feasibility studies and engineering designs are available upon request from
the project officer.
