                              2


      will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per
      annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on
      which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
      commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed
      Spread that will be applied to new Loans.

              (b)    Following any announcement by ADB that its
      Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
      Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
      ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the
      Borrower. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
      multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
      percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
      on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
      commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
      Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall apply the
      amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the
      Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
      the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
      calculated.

(c)   Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

               Surcharge. (a)         Following any announcement by
      ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
      increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a
      lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge.
      The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by
      multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will
      be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to
      the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum),
      by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which
      the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
      commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed
      Spread that will be applied to new Loans.

              (b)    Following any announcement by ADB that its
      Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
      Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
      ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a
      Surcharge. The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined
      by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
      percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
      on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
      commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
      Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall add the
      amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the
      Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
      the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
      calculated.
                                              3


              Section 1.02.    Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several terms
defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan
Agreement have the following meanings:

            (a)    “BKM” means Badan Keswadayaan Masyarakat,                     which   is   a
Community implementation organization in a Participating Neighborhood;

               (b)    “block grant” means the grant that the Borrower shall transfer to a
selected Community to finance the construction of basic infrastructure facilities in
Participating Neighborhoods under Output 2 of the Project;

              (c)     “BPS” means the National Bureau of Statistics of the Borrower or any
successor thereto;

               (d)    “CDD” means the community-driven development approach in which
communities are active participants that prioritize their development needs and compete for
resources by preparing proposals, while funds are directly channeled to the communities to
carry out the proposed activities;

             (e)      “Community” means a group of residents in the Participating
Neighborhood;

                 (f)    “Consolidated Investment Plan” means, for any Participating
City/District, the consolidated investment plan for basic infrastructure upgrading under Output
2 of the Project, which aggregates and is based on the NUAPs of the Participating
Neighborhoods in such Participating City/District;

              (g)    “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to
time);

              (h)    “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

            (i)    “DGHS” means Directorate General of Human Settlements under
MPW or any successor thereto;

              (j)    “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF”
means the environmental assessment and review framework prepared for the Project in
accordance with the Safeguard Policy Statement;

              (k)    "Environmental Impact Assessment" or "EIA" means each of the
environmental impact assessments for Subprojects, including any update thereto, prepared
and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EARF and
cleared by ADB;

               (l)    "Environmental Management Plan" or "EMP" means each of the
environmental management plans for Subprojects, including any update thereto,
incorporated in the EIAs or IEEs;
                                              4


                (m)    “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

                (n)    “Gender Action Plan” or “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared
for the Project and set out in one of the web-linked documents of the RRP;

                (o)   “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, insurance,
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting
Services;

              (p)    “Housing and Settlements Steering Committee” means the Project
oversight body and as further described in the PAM;

               (q)    “Initial Environmental Examination" or "IEE" means each of the initial
environmental examinations for the Subprojects, including any update thereto, prepared and
submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by
ADB and DGHS;

                 (r)   “LCO” means the local coordinating office in each Participating
City/District;

            (s)     “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement
Handbook (2012, as amended from time to time);

              (t)      “MPW” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Public Works or any
successor thereto;

               (u)      “NSD” means the New Site Development in locations within the
Participating Cities/Districts under Output 3;

               (v)   “NUAP” means a Neighborhood Upgrading Action Plan prepared by a
Participating Neighborhood to reflect the infrastructure upgrading priorities identified in a
needs assessment and to describe the type and mix of works, including technical designs,
cost estimates and initial O&M plans, in the form finally approved in the Consolidated
Investment Plan;

                 (w)   “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

              (x)    “Outputs” means outputs of the Project as described in Schedule 1 to
this Loan Agreement;

              (y)     “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated
30 January 2014 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time
in accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

                (z)     “Participating Cities/Districts” means those 20 cities/districts of the
Borrower selected to participate in the Project and listed in the PAM on the basis of the
Cities/Districts Selection Criteria set out in paragraph 7 of Schedule 5 to this Loan
Agreement, from which neighborhoods may be nominated to participate in the Project based
on satisfaction of the Neighborhood Selection Criteria;
                                                5


               (aa) “Participating Neighborhoods” means those neighborhoods of the
Participating Cities/Districts that shall have met the neighborhood selection criteria set out in
paragraph 10 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement;

             (bb) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines
(2013, as amended from time to time);

             (cc)   “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated
30 January 2014 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time
in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other
arrangements agreed with ADB;

              (dd) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the
meaning of, the Loan Regulations, means DGHS or any successor thereto acceptable to
ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

              (ee)     “Project facilities” means the facilities to be provided or constructed
under the Project;

               (ff) “Resettlement Framework” or “RF” means the land acquisition and
resettlement framework developed for the Project in accordance with the Safeguard Policy
Statement;

              (gg) “RP” means each of the resettlement plans for the Subprojects,
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the RF and cleared by ADB and DGHS;

             (hh) “RRP” means the Report and Recommendation of the President of
ADB to the Board of Directors for the Project;

               (ii)    “RTRW” means for any particular area, a spatial plan;

             (jj)      “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy
Statement (2009);

              (kk)   “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with implementation of and
compliance with the EARF, RF, EMPs and RPs, including any corrective and preventative
actions;

               (ll)     “SIAP” means the city-wide slum improvement action plan in a
Participating City/District;

             (mm) “SPPIP” means for any particular city/district, a strategy for the
development of urban settlement and infrastructure;

               (nn) “Subproject” means a specific development project in (i) a Participating
Neighborhood with respect to upgrading or construction of basic infrastructure facilities, or (ii)
a Participating City/District with respect to a New Site Development, in each case approved
by a local government, which is to be financed in whole or in part by the Loan proceeds and
                                               6


which satisfies the criteria set out or referred to in paragraphs 14 or 21 respectively of
Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement;

                 (oo) “Subproject Contract” means a contract between the BKM for a
Participating Neighborhood and the corresponding Participating City/District pertaining to the
implementation of a particular Subproject for upgrading or construction of basic infrastructure
under Output 2 of the Project, based upon the Works specified in the Participating
City/District’s Consolidated Investment Plan; and

               (pp) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, and project related
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding
Consulting Services.



                                         ARTICLE II

                                          The Loan


               Section 2.01.    (a)     ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of seventy-four million four hundred thousand dollars
($74,400,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

               (b)     The Loan has a principal repayment period of 12 years, and a grace
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

               (c)     The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

               Section 2.02.  The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest
Period equal to the sum of:

               (a)    LIBOR; and

               (b)    0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
                      credit of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

                Section 2.03.   The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% per
annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

              Section 2.04.    Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable
semiannually on 1 March and 1 September in each year.
                                               7


              Section 2.05.  The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the Loan
withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this
Loan Agreement.

             Section 2.06.   (a)   The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt
management:

                      (i)     a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the
                              principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and
                              outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

                      (ii)    a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any
                              portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
                              outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa;
                              and

                      (iii)   the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any
                              portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
                              outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or
                              Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

              (b)   Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.



                                         ARTICLE III

                               Use of Proceeds of the Loan


               Section 3.01.     The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan be
applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions of
this Loan Agreement and the Project.

              Section 3.02.     The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and withdrawn
in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such Schedule
may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

               Section 3.03.     Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement. ADB
may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has not been procured under
procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or
where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB.
                                               8


                Section 3.04.       Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall
cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project.

             Section 3.05.      The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 of
the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2018 or such other date as may from time to time be
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.



                                         ARTICLE IV

                                    Particular Covenants


                Section 4.01.    (a)    The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried
out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable technical,
financial, business, and development practices.

               (b)    In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities,
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5
to this Loan Agreement.

                 Section 4.02.     The Borrower shall make available, or cause to be made
available, promptly as needed, and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the funds,
facilities, services, land and other resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds of the
Loan, for the carrying out of the Project.

             Section 4.03.      (a)   In the carrying out of the Project, the Borrower shall
cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, acceptable to ADB, to be
employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.

               (b)    The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall cause the
Project to be carried out in accordance with plans, design standards, specifications, work
schedules and construction methods acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable.
The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation,
such plans, design standards, specifications and work schedules, and any material
modifications subsequently made therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.

                 Section 4.04.   The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative
policies and procedures.

               Section 4.05.     The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall
enable ADB's representatives to review the Project, inspect the Goods and Works, and
obtain any relevant records and documents.
                                                 9


                Section 4.06.       (a)     The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency
shall (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial
statements for the Project in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB; (iii)
have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with
international standards for auditing or the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part
of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion
on the financial statements, use of the Loan proceeds and compliance with the financial
covenants of this Loan Agreement as well as on the use of the procedures for imprest
fund(s) and statement of expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out the
deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit,
if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal
year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in
the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

                 (b)    ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 30 days of the date
of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s website.

                (c)     The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall enable ADB,
upon ADB's request, to discuss the financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's
financial affairs where they relate to the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to
subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative of such
auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such
discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Project
Executing Agency, unless the Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall
otherwise agree.

                Section 4.07.      The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to the
Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices.



                                           ARTICLE V

                                          Effectiveness


              Section 5.01.     A date ninety (90) days after the date of this Loan
Agreement is specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of
Section 10.04 of the Loan Regulations.
                                            10


                                       ARTICLE VI

                                      Miscellaneous


               Section 6.01.     The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

              Section 6.02.     The following addresses are specified for the purposes of
Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

              For the Borrower

                     Ministry of Finance
                     Directorate General of Debt Management
                     Frans Seda Building
                     Jln. Dr. Wahidin Raya No. 1
                     Jakarta 10710, Indonesia

                     For Correspondence
                     Attn: Directorate of Loans and Grants

                                 Facsimile Number:

                                           (62-21) 381 2859.

                     For Disbursement
                     Attn: Directorate of Evaluation, Accounting and Settlement

                                 Facsimile Number:

                                           (62-21) 384 3712.

              For ADB

                     Indonesia Resident Mission
                     Gedung BRI II, 7th Floor
                     Jl. Jend. Sudirman Kav. 44-46
                     Jakarta 10210, Indonesia

                                 Facsimile Number:

                                           (62-21) 251 2749.
                                            12


                                      SCHEDULE 1

                               Description of the Project

1.           The objective of the Project is to improve living conditions in urban areas
through improved infrastructure and access to service delivery in selected poor urban
neighborhoods in the Participating Cities/Districts.

2.           The Project shall comprise three Outputs:

             (a)    Output 1: Institutional capacities for managing pro-poor urban
                    development are strengthened – Under this Output, the Project shall
                    provide capacity building, including training programs, for each
                    Participating City/District, in respect of: (i) community-driven settlement
                    upgrading and new sites development; (ii) awareness building for
                    Community members on sanitation and hygiene; (iii) Project
                    management (including implementation arrangements, procurement of
                    contractors and community procurement); (iv) public private
                    partnerships for NSD (with special focus on the poor); and (v)
                    operation and maintenance of upgraded facilities and NSD areas
                    through Community-based efforts.

             (b)    Output      2:    Upgrading      infrastructure     in    Participating
                    Neighborhoods – Under this Output, the Project shall provide (i)
                    block grants to the Participating Neighborhood to upgrade basic
                    infrastructure; and (ii) funding to the Participating Cities/Districts to
                    construct and upgrade infrastructure.

             (c)    Output 3: New settlements for poor families are established –
                    Under this Output, the Project shall establish, for each NSD, a model
                    of a partnership between central government, local administrations,
                    developers, and financial institutions to provide housing for poor
                    people, in which for the qualifying Subprojects (i) local governments
                    will provide land from their own resources and issue land titles for
                    potential new house owners, which are required as collaterals to
                    receive loans from financial institutions; (ii) MPW will provide the basic
                    infrastructure financed by the Loan proceeds; (iii) private developers
                    will pre-finance the house construction, and coordinate connections to
                    the main networks of service providers (water and electricity); (iv)
                    financial institutions will provide loans to poor families to buy (or
                    construct) new houses; and (v) NGOs, in close cooperation with the
                    local administration, will organize socialization campaigns to explain
                    the scheme among poor families, develop transparent criteria to select
                    poor beneficiary families to be eligible to apply under the new site
                    development scheme, and facilitate the selection process.

3.           Consulting Services shall be provided under all Outputs.

4.           The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2017.
                                              13


                                        SCHEDULE 2

                                   Amortization Schedule

                 (Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Project – Phase 2)


1.             The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b)
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

           Payment Due                                      Installment Share
                                                           (Expressed as a %)

        1 September 2020                                           3.091282
        1 March 2021                                               3.168564
        1 September 2021                                           3.247778
        1 March 2022                                               3.328973
        1 September 2022                                           3.412197
        1 March 2023                                               3.497502
        1 September 2023                                           3.584939
        1 March 2024                                               3.674563
        1 September 2024                                           3.766427
        1 March 2025                                               3.860588
        1 September 2025                                           3.957102
        1 March 2026                                               4.056030
        1 September 2026                                           4.157431
        1 March 2027                                               4.261366
        1 September 2027                                           4.367901
        1 March 2028                                               4.477098
        1 September 2028                                           4.589026
        1 March 2029                                               4.703751
        1 September 2029                                           4.821345
        1 March 2030                                               4.941879
        1 September 2030                                           5.065426
        1 March 2031                                               5.192061
        1 September 2031                                           5.321863
        1 March 2032                                               5.454908

         Total                                                  100.000000
                                              14

                                                                                    Schedule 2


2.            If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

                (a)     To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

              (b)     Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

3.             Withdrawals made within two calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of
withdrawal.

4.             Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5.             If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.
                                              15


                                        SCHEDULE 3

                       Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds


General

1.            The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a
Category or Subcategory of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in
the Table.

Reallocation

3.           Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

                  (a)   if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation with
the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

               (b)   if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation with the Borrower,
reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.
                                                    16
                                                                             Attachment to Schedule 3
                                                TABLE


                    ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
                    (Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Project – Phase 2)
                                           Total Amount Allocated
Number                Item                   for ADB Financing       Basis for Withdrawal from the
                                                     ($)                     Loan Account
                                                  Category
  1      Works                                           65,000,000 100% of total expenditure
                                                                    claimed*
  2      Training and Workshops                           1,900,000 100% of total expenditure
                                                                    claimed*
  3      Consulting Services                              7,500,000 100% of total expenditure
                                                                    claimed*
         Total                                           74,400,000

  *Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
                                            17


                                      SCHEDULE 4

                Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services


General

1.            The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject
to and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines,
respectively.

2.            All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

3.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall only be
procured on the basis of the methods of procurement set forth below:

              (a)    National Competitive Bidding; and
              (b)    Community Participation in Procurement.

4.            The methods of procurement are subject to, among other things, the detailed
arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. The Borrower may
only modify the methods of procurement or threshold values with the prior agreement of
ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates to the Procurement Plan.

National Competitive Bidding

5.               The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Community Participation in Procurement

6.              The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for Works
contracts relating to Output 2 basic infrastructure upgrading in accordance with the agreed
procedures set out in the Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

7.             The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until:

              (a)    the final approval of the IEE from the Ministry of Environment has been
                     obtained; and

              (b)    the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works contract have
                     been incorporated.
                                              18
                                                                                    Schedule 4


8.            The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until the Project Executing Agency through the
corresponding Participating City/District has prepared and submitted to ADB the EMP and
has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works contract for such
Subproject.

9.             The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves involuntary resettlement impacts until the Project Executing Agency through the
corresponding Participating City/District has prepared and submitted to ADB the final RP for
such Subproject based on the relevant detailed design and obtained ADB's clearance of
such RP.

10.              The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts financed under the Loan
unless the Works are based on an approved Subproject and a Subproject Contract has been
signed between the relevant BKM and the Project Executing Agency based on the format
acceptable to ADB, including (i) a requirement to show evidence of Community facilitation;
(ii) details of the design of Project facilities to be constructed under the Subproject; (iii) a
Community O&M plan for the Project facilities; and (iv) respective obligations of the parties
for undertaking Project activities.

Consulting Services

11.           Except as ADB may otherwise agree, and except as set forth in the paragraph
below, the Borrower shall apply quality- and cost-based selection for selecting and engaging
Consulting Services.

12.          The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants for safeguards and
gender monitoring in accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

13.             (a)     The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

              (b)     The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate,
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

14.            The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.
                                          19
                                                                            Schedule 4


ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

15.          Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures,
national competitive bidding, community participation in procurement, and contracts for
Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise agreed
between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.
                                              20


                                        SCHEDULE 5

                          Execution of Project; Financial Matters


Implementation Arrangements

1.             The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower through the Project
Executing Agency and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Provision of Counterpart Funding

2.            The Borrower shall provide counterpart funding for the Project in a timely
manner, and shall provide any additional counterpart funding to cover any shortfall of funds
or cost overruns. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that
adequate funding for operation and maintenance of the Project facilities is fully funded from
the government budget.

Fund Flow

3.              The Borrower shall ensure that, no later than 30 days following final selection
of the Participating Neighborhoods, the proceeds of the Loan and the counterpart funding for
the Project described in the foregoing paragraph, are allocated and made available in a
timely manner throughout the Project implementation period, including through ensuring that
budgetary allocation requests are submitted in a timely manner.

4.               The Borrower shall ensure that each Participating Neighborhood shall
establish a separate bank account, in the name of the BKM for such Participating
Neighborhood, to fund the neighborhood-level activities to be funded under the Project. The
Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall further ensure that the amount to be
transferred to the bank account shall be in three tranches with such payment modalities to be
reflected in each Subproject Contract. The first tranche shall be 30% of the approved
amount, the second tranche shall be 40% of the approved amount, and the last tranche shall
be 30% of the approved amount. The release of each tranche shall be made upon
verification of actual implementation progress against the agreed planning documentation by
the LCO of the Participating City/District in which the corresponding Participating
Neighborhood is located.

Slum Improvement Action Plans (SIAP)

5.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that each
Participating City/District shall prepare SIAP, which is a document that provides the
strategies to address poverty reduction beyond infrastructure needs.
                                               21

                                                                                       Schedule 5


Basic Infrastructure Upgrading Through Block Grants (Output 2)

Allocation of Infrastructure Upgrading Amounts to the Participating Cities/Districts

6.           No later than 7 days after the Effective Date, the Borrower through the Project
Executing Agency shall allocate, and notify ADB of such allocation, a specified amount of the
Loan proceeds to the Participating Cities/Districts for basic infrastructure upgrading under
Output 2.

City/District Selection Criteria

7.             In order to be selected for participation in the Project, the Borrower through
the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the Participating Cities/Districts shall satisfy
the following criteria, and shall continue to comply with the criteria in subparagraphs (a), (d)
and (e) throughout the Project:

                (a)     The city/district has in place an RTRW (spatial plan) and SPPIP
                        (development strategy) which identify and provide policy guidance and
                        planning regarding slum neighborhoods;

                (b)     The city/district has at least 5,000 households living in slum
                        neighborhoods;

                (c)     At least 5% of the households living in slum neighborhoods are
                        classified as falling in the category of the ‘extreme poor’;

                (d)     The city/district gives its commitment that households not holding legal
                        title to the land that they occupy shall not be excluded from
                        participating in the Project for this reason; and

                (e)     The city/district shall have supplied to the Project Executing Agency
                        and ADB within the time period specified in the immediately following
                        paragraph its written commitment to the Project.

8.              No later than 3 months following the Effective Date, the Borrower through the
Project Executing Agency shall have submitted to ADB, in respect of each Participating
City/District, the signed memorandum of understanding between that Participating
City/District and the Project Executing Agency in which the Participating City/District
confirms:

                (a)     its commitment to adopt and follow the CDD approach through which
                        the Participating Neighborhoods are empowered to determine the type
                        and mix of infrastructure upgrading Subprojects to be carried out,
                        based on needs assessments conducted in the Participating
                        Neighborhoods and reflected in the NUAPs;

                (b)     its commitment to adopt and follow the city/district-wide consultation
                        mechanism through which the Participating Neighborhoods engage in
                        discussion with the LCO of the Participating City/District to reach a
                                               22

                                                                                       Schedule 5


                      multi-party consensus supporting the Consolidated Investment Plan
                      which shall (i) include the NUAPs, and (ii) reflect the allocation to each
                      Participating Neighborhood of a share in the Participating City/District’s
                      portion of the Output 2 Loan proceeds for the agreed Subprojects set
                      out in the NUAPs; and

              (c)     the list of specific actions and contributions it will take or provide to
                      support the specific Subprojects in its territory, including but not limited
                      to:

                      (i)     establishment of the LCO with committed and experienced
                              staff;

                      (ii)    provision of additional resources, whether in cash or in kind, to
                              support complementary infrastructure upgrading and to
                              improve public services in slum neighborhoods; and

                      (iii)   agreement to modify, if and when needed, the RTRW and
                              SPPIP so that they may reflect and take into account
                              information drawn from consultations with the Participating
                              Neighborhoods.

Neighborhood Selection Criteria

9.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall carry out extensive
consultations with the administrations of the Participating Cities/Districts to receive and
review proposals from Participating Cities/Districts for neighborhoods to participate in the
Project. Participating Cities/Districts with more than 100 slum locations shall nominate
between 20 and 35 neighborhoods; Participating Cities/Districts with 50 to 100 slum locations
shall nominate between 15 and 20 neighborhoods; and Project Cities/Districts with fewer
than 50 slum locations shall nominate up to 15 neighborhoods for participation in the Project.

10.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
Participating Neighborhoods shall be selected in a manner satisfactory to ADB in accordance
with the following Neighborhood Selection Criteria:

              (a)     The Participating Neighborhood must be located in a Participating
                      City/District;

              (b)     The Participating Neighborhood must be listed or characterized as a
                      slum neighborhood in the applicable city development plan in force for
                      the corresponding Participating City/District based on application of the
                      BPS criteria for a slum neighborhood;

              (c)     The head of the BKM must have provided to the Project Executing
                      Agency and ADB its official confirmation in writing of:

                      (i)     its interest in and willingness to participate in the Project;
                                                23

                                                                                      Schedule 5


                       (ii)    the specific contributions it will make to the planning and
                               implementation of upgrading activities; and

                       (iii)   its willingness to establish or fund, as the case may be, the
                               required O&M arrangements (if any) for the upgraded
                               infrastructure facilities, including introduction of and payment of
                               user fees; and

11.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that, no later
than 3 months following the Effective Date, upon completion of such consultation process the
Project Executing Agency shall submit to ADB for endorsement the proposed final selection
of the Participating Neighborhoods, endorsed by decree of the Mayor (Bupati) of each
Participating City/District, and chosen in conformity with the Neighborhood Selection Criteria
set out in the foregoing paragraph.

Community Implementing Organizations or BKMs

12.            The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that each
Participating Neighborhood shall, no later than 30 days following designation as a
Participating Neighborhood, engage a BKM to support the Project in the relevant Community.
The BKM may be shall facilitate members of the Community, acting individually or in task
force groups to (a) assess basic infrastructure needs in the Community, (b) evaluate
Community implementation capacity, (c) establish efficient planning and decision-making
processes for the Community, (d) formulate Subproject investment plans, (e) prepare simple
technical designs, (f) organize Works to be carried out by Community members, and (g)
formulate O&M plans in respect of completed Project facilities in the corresponding
Participating Neighborhood.

Procedures for the Use of Block Grants for Basic Infrastructure Upgrading

13.            Guidelines. No later than 3 months following the Effective Date, the Borrower
through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that detailed guidance relating to eligibility
criteria and procedures for use of block grant funds under Output 2 will be articulated in
guidelines (JUKLAK) and implementation manuals (JUKNIS) to be developed under the
Project.

14.             Subproject Features. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency
shall ensure that the block grant for basic infrastructure shall be utilized to finance an activity
or activities falling into either or both of these categories: (a) the construction and
rehabilitation of basic infrastructure such as small roads, bridges, clean water supply
systems and public sanitation; and (b) the rehabilitation of basic social infrastructure such as
water supply and sanitation facilities at schools and health clinics. The Borrower through the
Project Executing Agency shall further ensure that the block grant for basic infrastructure
shall not be utilized for activities that may be harmful to the environment or located in
environmentally-sensitive areas. Each Subproject shall satisfy transparent and objective
criteria developed under the Project and endorsed by the Project Executing Agency and ADB
as further described in the PAM, including compliance with the EARF and RF.
                                                 24

                                                                                         Schedule 5


15.             Community-Driven Development. The Borrower through the Project
Executing Agency shall ensure that each investment to be made under the block grant for
basic infrastructure shall be based on local needs as so identified by the Community within
the Participating Neighborhood. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall
ensure that the Community in each Participating Neighborhood takes the lead in developing
investment plans with assistance from the LCOs.

16.             NUAPs and Consolidated Plans. The Borrower through the Project
Executing Agency shall ensure that during the first 12 months following the Effective Date,
(a) the Participating Neighborhoods shall carry out the needs assessments and prepare the
NUAPs, to be endorsed by the BKM, and (b) the Participating Cities/Districts shall carry out
the consultation mechanism to bring together the Participating Neighborhoods to discuss and
reach consensus on the final Consolidated Investment Plan. In the event that consensus is
not reached by the end of the 12 month period in any particular Participating City/District, the
Project Executing Agency shall facilitate reaching of a group-wide decision based upon the
approval of at least 75% of the Participating Neighborhoods in such Participating City/District.

17.           Fund Allocations. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall
ensure that the allocation of funds to Participating Neighborhoods for Subprojects shall be
based on the Consolidated Investment Plans which integrate the NUAPs.

18.          Approvals. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure
that each Consolidated Investment Plan shall be submitted to, reviewed and approved by
ADB and the Project Executing Agency, together with at least 2 NUAPs per plan.

19.             Subproject Contract. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency
shall ensure that a contract for the relevant Subproject(s) is concluded between the BKM and
the Participating City/District, and a copy provided to the Project Executing Agency, in a form
satisfactory to the Project Executing Agency and ADB. The agreed form for such Subproject
Contracts will specify payment modalities relating to the conduct of such Subproject(s) in the
3 tranches described in paragraph 4 of this Schedule 5 above. The Project Executing Agency
shall provide to ADB copies of 2 sample Subproject Contracts for confirmation, following
which any modifications requested shall serve as a model for the remaining Subproject
Contracts.

20.             Release of Funds. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall
ensure that no release of funds or withdrawal from the Project imprest account shall be made
in respect of expenditures related to Works for a Subproject under Output 2 until (i) a BKM
for the corresponding Participating Neighborhood shall have been established or engaged in
the Project, (ii) a separate bank account shall have been opened by the BKM for the
corresponding Participating Neighborhood in accordance with paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 of
this Loan Agreement; (iii) the Participating Neighborhood shall have prepared the NUAP and
submitted it to the LCO of the Participating City/District; (iv) the Participating City/District shall
have prepared the Consolidated Investment Plan integrating the NUAPs of such town’s
Participating Neighborhoods; (v) the Project Executing Agency and ADB shall have endorsed
the Consolidated Investment Plan as compliant with the selection criteria for Subprojects in
accordance with paragraph 17 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement; and (vi) a Subproject
Contract or Subproject Contracts for the relevant Subproject(s) shall have been signed
between the Participating City/District and Participating Neighborhood based upon the final
                                               25

                                                                                    Schedule 5


NUAP and Consolidated Investment Plan for such Participating Neighborhood and
Participating City/District, respectively.

New Site Development; Beneficiary Criteria; Partnership in Principle (Output 3)

21.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall select the NSD
locations in a manner satisfactory to ADB in accordance with the following selection criteria:

              (a)     the site is located in a Participating City/District;

              (b)     the land proposed for the site is available, unencumbered by
                      competing claims or conflicting uses;

              (c)     the site does not involve any resettlement or environmental risks
                      including exposure to flooding or informal waste disposal; and

              (d)     the legal title to the land for the site is held by and in the name of the
                      Participating City/District.

22.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall carry out extensive
consultations with the administrations of the Participating Cities/Districts to receive and
review proposals from Participating Cities/Districts for sites to be included in the NSD under
Output 3 of the Project. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure
that, no later than 6 months following the Effective Date, upon completion of such
consultation process the Project Executing Agency submits to ADB for endorsement the
proposed final selection of NSD locations chosen in conformity with the NSD Selection
Criteria set out in the foregoing paragraph.

23.              The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that for the
continuation of the Project implementation period and subsequently (a) legal title of the land
underlying the NSD sites remains with and in the name of the corresponding Participating
Cities/Districts; and (b) the NSD sites do not involve any resettlement or environmental
issues or risks including flooding or informal disposal of waste.

24.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall design investment
plans for each NSD location which involve (a) proposed beneficiary households that are able
to undertake and repay the proposed loans from financial institutions to acquire the
affordable cost housing to be constructed, and (b) feasible and bankable conditions under
which local financial institutions may provide housing finance for the NSD.

25.            The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that housing
constructed under the NSD Output of the Project shall not be sold or resold for a period of 10
years following completion of the corresponding Subprojects.

26.              The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall establish, support
and facilitate dialogue among the multiple stakeholders, including consultations among
Participating Cities/Districts, local governments, housing developers, NGOs and financial
institutions, for the NSD Output including through conduct of socialization campaigns for
targeted communities. The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall develop the
                                              26

                                                                                     Schedule 5


interest of potential financial institutions and housing developers and shall ensure the
participation at the socialization campaign meetings of one or more financial institutions
which are committed to supporting the corresponding NSD location.

27.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
NSD scheme shall integrate transparent and objective criteria for selecting poor beneficiary
families of the Participating City/District who may apply.

28.            No later than 18 months following the Effective Date, the Borrower through the
Project Executing Agency shall ensure that each interested Participating City/District shall
submit to the Project Executing Agency and ADB a full NSD proposal setting out or attaching
as the case may be:

               (a)    satisfactory evidence of ownership of the land underlying the proposed
                      site;

               (b)    detailed technical design with cost estimates for infrastructure to be
                      financed by proceeds of the Loan;

               (c)    the basis used for selection of the proposed housing developer;

               (d)    proposed housing loan schemes offered by one or more financial
                      institutions, including details of the loan terms, the extent of collateral
                      required, and the protection of the rights of the individual borrowers;

               (e)    transparent selection process for identification of slum residents who
                      may be eligible to apply for and able to repay the proposed housing
                      loans;

               (f)    evidence of in-principle commitment by each of the key stakeholders in
                      the scheme, including financial institutions, housing developer, MPW,
                      LCO of the Participating City/District and corresponding BKM and
                      NGOs, if any;

               (g)    the IEE prepared for the NSD subproject in accordance with the EARF;
                      and

               (h)    any necessary endorsement required under the laws and regulations
                      of the Borrower.

Safeguards

Environment

29.            The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause the Project Executing Agency to
ensure that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and
decommissioning of the Project, each Subproject, and all Project facilities comply with (a) all
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety;
(b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set
                                               27

                                                                                      Schedule 5


forth in (i) the respective IEE and EMP and (ii) any corrective or preventative actions (A) set
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report or (B) which are subsequently agreed between ADB
and the Borrower.

30.            The Borrower shall ensure that no construction work of any kind under the
Project or any Subproject shall be commenced until all applicable environmental clearances
have been obtained.

31.             The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the BKMs are responsible for conducting
environmental screening and identifying necessary mitigation measures with relevant
assistance of a technical nature, including preparing IEEs and EMPs under the EARF; (b)
designated experts are responsible for managing the Project's environmental aspects; and
(c) guidelines and implementation manuals for community-based civil Works (JUKLAK and
JUKNIS) are adhered to as they relate to environmental screening, subject to the
requirements of the EARF. The Borrower shall further ensure that the Works and Project
facilities are monitored for safeguards implementation in accordance with the EARF.

32.           The Borrower shall ensure that each NSD proposal shall include an IEE
prepared therefor. No NSD proposal shall be endorsed in the absence of the IEE.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

33.              The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause the Project Executing Agency to
ensure that all land and all rights-of-way for the Project, each Subproject and all Project
facilities are made available to the Works contractors in accordance with the schedule
agreed under the related Works contract and all land use, donation or acquisition and
resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and
regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the
Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set
forth in (i) the respective RP, and (ii) any corrective or preventative actions (A) set forth in a
Safeguards Monitoring Report or (B) which are subsequently agreed between ADB and the
Borrower. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project shall not finance any Subproject
requiring resettlement. In the event that a potential need for land is identified, it shall be
noted in the corresponding NUAP and addressed in accordance with the RF.

34.           Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the RF, the Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that no physical or
economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project or any Subproject until:

               (a)     compensation and other entitlements have been provided to the
                       displaced persons under the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards as
                       described in and in accordance with the RF or relevant RP (if any); and

               (b)     a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been
                       established in accordance with the RF or relevant RP (if any).
                                             28

                                                                                   Schedule 5


Indigenous Peoples

35.             The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the Project
(including all Subprojects) shall not have adverse impacts on indigenous peoples as
determined under the Safeguard Policy Statement and that all Outputs shall be implemented
in a culturally appropriate and participatory manner to meet the needs of various peoples of
the country. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that Subproject
proposals are reviewed and assessed for their impacts on indigenous peoples and that
mitigating measures, if applicable, are incorporated into the corresponding NUAP and
Consolidated Investment Plan.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

36.            The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall make available
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EARF, RF and any EMP
or RP later prepared thereunder.

Safeguards – Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

37.         The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

              (a)    comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the
                     EARF, the RF and any EMP or RP later developed thereunder (to the
                     extent they concern impacts on the respective affected people under
                     the Environmental Safeguards, the Involuntary Resettlement
                     Safeguards and the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards during
                     construction), and any corrective or preventative actions (i) set forth in
                     a Safeguards Monitoring Report or (ii) subsequently agreed between
                     ADB and the Borrower;

              (b)    make available a budget for all such environmental and social
                     measures;

              (c)    provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated
                     environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts
                     that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the
                     Project or any Subproject that were not considered in the EARF, RF,
                     EMP or RP;

              (d)    adequately record the condition of roads and other infrastructure prior
                     to starting to transport materials and construction; and

              (e)    reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure to at least their pre-
                     project condition as early as possible and no later than the completion
                     of construction.
                                            29

                                                                                Schedule 5


Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

38.            The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall:

               (a)    submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports

                      (i)    in respect of implementation of and compliance with
                             Environmental Safeguards, EARF and any EMPs thereunder,
                             semi-annually during construction and the implementation of
                             the Project, EARF and the EMPs thereunder, and thereafter
                             annually during operation (as part of the quarterly progress
                             reports specified in the PAM), until the issuance of ADB’s
                             Project completion report unless a longer period is agreed in
                             the environmental management plans; and

                      (ii)   in respect of implementation of and compliance with Involuntary
                             Resettlement Safeguards and of the RF and any RPs
                             developed       thereunder,     semi-annually    during     the
                             implementation of the Project, the RF and such RPs (as part of
                             the quarterly progress reports specified in the PAM) until the
                             issuance of ADB’s Project completion report unless a longer
                             period is agreed in such RPs (if any) to ADB and disclose
                             relevant information from such reports to the respective
                             affected people under the Environmental Safeguards and the
                             Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, as applicable, promptly
                             upon submission;

               (b)    if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts
                      arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project
                      that were not considered in the EARF, the RF or any EMP or RP
                      prepared thereunder, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such
                      risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and proposed
                      corrective action plan; and

               (c)    report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures
                      and requirements set forth in any such EMP or RP promptly after
                      becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

39.           The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the Prohibited Activities
List.

Health Risks

40.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure, that: (a)
training for construction workers and local communities on HIV/AIDS prevention and control
methods is carried out; (b) the Works contractors disseminate information and conduct
                                               30

                                                                                      Schedule 5


awareness training on the risks and prevention measures of HIV/AIDS and other
communicable diseases to their employees, temporary laborers and family members, and
subcontractors during Project implementation; (c) measures to prevent other communicable
diseases are implemented, within the construction sites, as specified in the EMP; and (d) the
requirements of subclauses (b) and (c) are included in the Works contracts, monitored and
reported quarterly to ADB.

Labor Standards

41.             The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
construction contractors: (a) provide timely payment of wages and safe working conditions to
all workers; (b) pay equal wages to the female and male employees for equivalent labor; (c)
not employ child labor as required by the relevant laws and regulations of the Borrower; (d)
the contractors involved in the Project implementation maximize the employment of local
people, particularly women and ethnic minorities, who meet the job and efficiency
requirements for Project construction, operation and maintenance; and (e) such workers are
provided with adequate on-the-job training and safety training.

Gender and Development

42.              The Borrower through the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
GAP as agreed between ADB and the Borrower is fully implemented and resourced, and that
all activities are designed and implemented in accordance with ADB’s Policy on Gender and
Development (1998) including, but not limited to ensuring that: (i) SIAP are developed based
on the needs of women and men related to public facilities; (ii) 40% of the participants in the
decision-making activities are women; (iii) 20% of BKM members, in aggregate, are women;
(iv) gender audits are undertaken of all Community investment plans; (v) 20% of the paid
work created by the project is provided to women; (vi) 30% of trainees in all Project capacity
development activities are women; (vii) 30% of user group members are women; (viii)
selection criteria for the potential beneficiaries to access credit for affordable housing under
Output 3 are developed and applied with prioritization for female headed households such
that applications from female headed households are satisfied in first order of priority over
other applications; (ix) gender training is provided to all key stakeholders of the Project; and
(x) gender indicators to track GAP implementation and project outcomes for women are
developed and used. The Borrower shall further ensure that the Project Executing Agency
shall submit periodic reports on the implementation of the Gender Action Plan to ADB and
the Housing and Settlements Steering Committee.

Governance and Anticorruption

43.              The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to (a) undertake
necessary measures to create and sustain a corruption-free environment for activities under
the Project; (b) institute, maintain and ensure compliance with internal procedures and
controls for activities under the Project, following international best practice standards for the
purpose of preventing corruption, money laundering activities, and the financing of terrorists,
and shall require all relevant ministries and agencies to refrain from engaging in any such
activities; (c) comply with requirements of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to
date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its
agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project;
                                             31

                                                                                 Schedule 5


and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

44.             The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records
and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers,
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.

45.            The Borrower acknowledges that in accordance with ADB's Anticorruption
Policy and Integrity Principles and Guidelines, ADB will assess allegations of any alleged
corrupt, fraudulent, collusive and coercive practices relating to the Project, and where
appropriate, recommend administrative action for ADB to take to address such allegations.
The Borrower shall facilitate ADB's request to conduct any such investigation and shall
undertake the investigation with ADB, in accordance with procedures to be agreed between
the Borrower and ADB.

Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)

46.           The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that a GRM
acceptable to ADB is established in accordance with the provisions of the EARF and RF to
consider safeguards complaints.

47.            The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall further ensure that
within 60 days following the Effective Date, a GRM acceptable to ADB is established for non-
safeguards complaints in accordance with the PAM. In each case, such GRM shall function
to (a) review and document eligible complaints of Project stakeholders; (b) proactively
address grievances; (c) provide the complainants with notice of the chosen mechanism
and/or action; and (d) prepare and make available to ADB upon request periodic reports to
summarize (i) the number of complaints received and resolved, (ii) chosen actions, and (iii)
final outcomes of the grievances and make these reports available to ADB upon request.
Eligible non-safeguards complaints include those related to the Project, the Subprojects, any
of the service providers, any person responsible for carrying out the Project or Subprojects,
complaints on misuse of funds and other irregularities as well as gender issues.

Project Website

48.            Within 3 months after the Effective Date, the Borrower through the Project
Executing Agency shall establish and maintain a Project website to disclose information
about Project activities, including procurement, and shall include information on the list of
participating bidders, name of the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures
adopted, amount of contract awarded, and the list of goods and services procured.
