Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




27WkrefeldSri Lanka




Project Number: 46094-001
March 2014



Proposed Loan
Republic of Indonesia: Neighborhood Upgrading and
Shelter Project (Phase 2)
                                    CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                                       (as of 13 Feb 2014)
                                 Currency unit      –       rupiah (Rp)
                                      Rp1.00        =       $ .0000827472
                                        $1.00       =       Rp12,085

                                          ABBREVIATIONS

              ADB          –     Asian Development Bank
              BKM          –     community implementation organization
              CDD          –     community-driven development
              DGHS         –     Directorate General of Human Settlements
              LCO          –     local coordination office
              MDG          –     Millennium Development Goal
              MPW          –     Ministry of Public Works
              NSD          –     new site development
              NUAP         –     neighborhood upgrading action plan
              O&M          –     operation and maintenance
              PNPM         –     Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (National
                                 Program for Community Empowerment)
              RPJMN        –     Rencana Pembangunan Jangka Menengah Nasional
                                 (National Medium-Term Development Plan)
              RTRW         –     Rencana Tata Ruang Wilayah (Spatial Plan)
              SPPIP        –     Strategi Pengembangan Permukiman dan Infrastruktur
                                 Perkotaan (Strategy for the Development of Urban
                                 Settlements and Infrastructure)

                                                 NOTES

       (i)      The fiscal year of the government and its agencies ends on 31 December.

       (ii)     In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.

 Vice-President          S. Groff, Operations 2
 Director General        J. Nugent, Southeast Asia Department (SERD)
 Country Director        A. Ruthenberg, Indonesia Resident Mission (IRM), SERD

 Team leader             W. Kubitzki, Principal Portfolio Management Specialist, IRM, SERD
 Team members            F.P.A. Arifin, Associate Project Analyst, IRM, SERD
                         A. Gill, Senior Country Specialist, IRM, SERD
                         S. Hasanah, Senior Project Officer, IRM, SERD
                         N. Mardiniah, Safeguards Officer, IRM, SERD
                         Suzana, Senior Operations Assistant, IRM, SERD
                         S. Zaidansyah, Senior Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
 Peer reviewers          T. Gallego-Lizon, Principal Urban Development Specialist, South Asia
                         Department, SARD
                         F. Steinberg, Senior Urban Development Specialist, SERD

In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the
Asian Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status
of any territory or area.
                                      CONTENTS

                                                 Page
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                 1
II.    THE PROJECT                                  1
       A.   Rationale                               1
       B.   Impact and Outcome                      3
       C.   Outputs                                 3
       D.   Investment and Financing Plans          6
       E.   Implementation Arrangements             7
III.   DUE DILIGENCE                                8
       A.    Economic and Financial                 8
       B.    Governance                             8
       C.    Poverty and Social                     8
       D.    Safeguards                             9
       E.    Risks and Mitigating Measures         10
IV.    ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS                   10
V.     RECOMMENDATION                              10
APPENDIXES
1.   Design and Monitoring Framework               11
2.   List of Linked Documents                      14
                                                PROJECT AT A GLANCE

1. Project Name: Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Project -               2. Project Number: 46094-001
Phase 2
                                       4.
3. Country: Indonesia                                                       Southeast Asia Department/Indonesia Resident Mission
                                       Department/Division:
5. Sector Classification:
                                      Sectors                                          Primary    Subsectors
                                       Multisector                                     √          Water supply and sanitation
                                                                                                  Road transport
                                                                                                  Urban sector development
6. Thematic Classification:
                                               Themes                               Primary       Subthemes
                                               Environmental sustainability         √             Urban environmental improvement
                                               Private sector development                         Promotion of private sector
                                                                                                  investment
                                               Capacity development                               Institutional development
6a. Climate Change Impact                                                      6b. Gender Mainstreaming
                No climate change indicator available.                          Gender equity theme (GEN)

                                                                                Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)         √

                                                                                Some gender elements (SGE)

                                                                                No gender elements (NGE)

7. Targeting Classification:                                                   8. Location Impact:
                                Targeted Intervention                              Urban                            High
  General           Geographic                               Income
                                        Millennium
Intervention       dimensions of                            poverty at
                                       development
                     inclusive                              household
                                           goals
                      growth                                   level
                                            √
                                           MDG7
9. Project Risk Categorization: Low
10. Safeguards Categorization:
                                                            Environment                                            B
                                                            Involuntary resettlement                               B
                                                            Indigenous peoples                                     C
11. ADB Financing:
                           Sovereign/Nonsovereign              Modality                 Source                 Amount ($ Million)
                          Sovereign                          Project loan     Ordinary capital resources            74.4
                          Total                                                                                     74.4

12. Cofinancing:
                                                     No Cofinancing available.
13. Counterpart Financing:
                               Source                                                                        Amount ($ Million)
                               Beneficiaries                                                                6.0
                               Government                                                                  21.6
                                                    Total                                                  27.6
14. Aid Effectiveness:
                               Parallel project implementation unit                         No
                               Program-based approach                                       No
                                           I.      THE PROPOSAL

1.     I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan to
the Republic of Indonesia for the Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Project (Phase 2).

2.      The project will adopt a community-driven development (CDD) approach and provide direct
support to slum communities in 20 cities to upgrade basic infrastructure and establish new housing
sites. About 670,000 low-income families will benefit from improved access to social services and
essential infrastructure.1

                                            II.      THE PROJECT

A.      Rationale

3.      Indonesia is one of the fastest urbanizing countries in Asia. Currently, about half of the
population (51%) lives in cities; this is projected to increase to 68% by 2025. Many of the growing
cities are having difficulty coping with the rapid increase of in-migrants seeking new economic
opportunities. They are forced to settle in disadvantaged neighborhoods due to limited financial
resources, lack of affordable adequate housing, and/or failure to find well-paid jobs.2 In 2011, about
12.5% of the urban population was forced to live in slum areas.3 The project will demonstrate an
integrated approach to upgrade slum neighborhoods by (i) providing resources directly to
disadvantaged communities to improve their living conditions; (ii) establishing new settlements for
poor families; and (iii) as part of the capacity development component, assisting local
administrations in managing pro-poor urban development including the development of multisector
strategies to address urban poverty issues beyond infrastructure upgrading.

4.     Better public infrastructure is considered vital to sustain inclusive economic growth and
stimulate economic opportunities for the growing urban population. Yet infrastructure
improvements have not kept up with the rapid urbanization; infrastructure investment has lagged
economic development. Most infrastructure and public services in poor neighborhoods do not meet
the needs of the increasing number of inhabitants. Environmental and social problems related to
accessibility to adequate services for people’s daily needs are increasing due to widespread
constraints in the provision of clean water; insufficient sanitation facilities; deteriorating roads,
pathways, and drainage; ineffective flood control; lack of constant power supply; and poor solid
waste management. Only about 40% of the urban population has access to safe water; about 28%
does not have access to improved sanitation facilities. About 35% of urban areas lack proper
drainage systems. To meet local needs the project will provide grants to slum communities for
upgrading basic infrastructure including improving sanitation facilities and access to safe water.

5.     Problems are aggravated by the absence of sound land use planning and land
management regulations that are contributing to increased congestion and haphazard informal
development. A multifaceted approach is required to address these challenges, including
strengthening the capacity of city administrations to manage urban development in an
environmentally and socially sustainable manner; modernizing land policies and permit regulations;
expanding access to, and targeting of, housing finance and subsidies; increasing community
involvement in spatial planning; and engaging the private sector in development planning. Rapid




1
  The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
2
  Overall poverty incidence in Indonesia fell to 12% in 2012; the national urban poverty rate was estimated at 9.1%.
3
  The official government publication, Report on the Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in Indonesia
  2011, states that 12.57% of the urban population was living in slums.
2

urbanization has triggered growing demand for housing; the availability of affordable housing in
cities for low-income groups appears to be declining.4

6.     The National Medium-Term Development Plan, 2010–2015 (RPJMN) identifies insufficient
investment in infrastructure as one cause of poverty. Thus improving basic infrastructure is
considered an effective catalyst to reduce poverty and close gaps in income inequality in
disadvantaged urban neighborhoods. While Indonesia has generally made good progress in
accelerating achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the MDG targets for
achieving significant improvement in the lives of slum dwellers (MDG target 7D) and halving the
proportion of urban households without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic
sanitation (MDG target 7C) need special attention. 5 The project, which aims to upgrade basic
public infrastructure in slums, will contribute to meeting both MDG targets. To address issues of the
rapid urbanization, the government launched the Cities without Slums Program6 and issued Law
No. 1, 2011, Housing and Settlement Areas.7 To contribute to the Cities without Slums Program,
the government requested the Asian Development Bank (ADB) to prepare and partly finance the
Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Project (Phase 2) to help 20 cities improve basic
infrastructure and living conditions in selected slums.8

7.    The project builds on lessons from the government's foremost poverty reduction program, the
National Program for Community Empowerment (PNPM Mandiri), which adopts a CDD approach
and provides nationwide assistance for improving essential social services and basic infrastructure
by providing block grants to poor communities.9 Addressing poverty issues and basic infrastructure
needs through CDD is considered more effective, sustainable, and equitable than use of
centralized arrangements, as communities become active partners in development. The CDD
approach adopted under the PNPM gives communities control over planning decisions and
investment resources, and focuses on community empowerment to improve basic infrastructure
and service delivery. Community participatory planning and design of specific investments is a key
feature. The community controls resources; hence funds are transferred directly to community-
managed bank accounts. The community also manages project implementation supported by
consultants and facilitators when required. The CDD process is designed to systematically mobilize
the capacity of communities to prioritize their development needs, design activities, seek technical
assistance, manage resources, and implement and sustain development actions. 10 Building on


4
   According to World Bank estimates published in the Indonesia Economic Quarterly Report (March 2013), 600,000–
   900,000 housing units are required per year. The number increases as urbanization continues: 700,000–1,000,000
   housing units are estimated to be needed per year during 2014–2021.
5
   The 2015 MDG target for the proportion of the urban population living in slums is 6%; in 2011, 12.6% of the urban
   population lived in slums. The 2015 MDG target for the proportion of households with sustainable access to an
   improved water source is 75.5%; in 2011, 40.5% of urban households had access to an improved water source, 72.5%
   had access to basic sanitation. The proportion of households with access to safe water and basic sanitation in slum
   areas is assumed to be much lower.
6
   The Cities without Slums Program is incorporated in the National Long-Term Development Plan, 2005–2025. It aims to
   reduce slum areas in cities by 2025 by promoting concerted initiatives by the central and local governments, private
   sector, and civil society.
7
   The law specifies the roles and responsibilities of central and local governments for providing housing and settlements,
   including housing for the poor, and upgrading slum areas.
8
   Relevance of the project is discussed in the Sector Assessment (Summary): Urban Infrastructure (accessible from the
   list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
9
   PNPM Mandiri was launched in 2007. The RPJM, 2010–2014 includes PNPM Mandiri as a development tool to
   accelerate poverty alleviation with an indicative budget allocation of $6,754 million over 5 years.
10
   Encouraged by the success of the PNPM scheme, three ADB-financed infrastructure improvement projects were
   aligned with the PNPM using the project loan modality and adopting a CDD approach: (i) ADB. 2008. Report and
   Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the Republic of Indonesia for the Rural
   Infrastructure Support to the PNPM Mandiri Project. Manila; (ii) ADB. 2009. Report and Recommendation of the
   President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the Republic of Indonesia for the Rural Infrastructure Support to
   the PNPM Mandiri Project II. Manila; and (iii) ADB. 2011. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of
   Directors: Proposed Loan and Administration of Technical Assistance Grant to the Republic of Indonesia for the Urban
   Sanitation and Rural Infrastructure Support to the PNPM Mandiri Project. Manila.
                                                                                                                       3

lessons of the overall PNPM program and the latest ADB-financed CDD projects, the proposed
ADB project will follow a similar CDD approach.11

8.       The project builds on lessons from (i) the first Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Sector
Project;12 (ii) the first and second Rural Infrastructure Support to the PNPM Mandiri Projects, and
(iii) the ongoing Urban Sanitation and Rural Infrastructure Support to the PNPM Mandiri Project
(footnote 10). The Ministry of Public Works (MPW) has been implementing the projects. Lessons
incorporated into the project design include (i) involve beneficiaries in the planning and
implementation of neighborhood upgrading, (ii) support development of strong political commitment
to support pro-poor urban development, (iii) promote integrated development approaches and link
upgrading investments of individual communities with overall city development planning, (iv)
reduce the number of project cities and neighborhoods to lessen transaction costs in project
management, (v) increase the investment amount per neighborhood to boost means for improving
living conditions in slums, (vi) provide transparent fund flow and implementation mechanisms, and
promote community control of decision-making over resources and investment choices; (vii)
develop strong accountability procedures, such as public disclosure of budgets and contracts; and
(viii) establish effective mechanisms for operation and maintenance (O&M) of infrastructure.13 The
project is included in ADB’s country operations business plan, 2013–2014 for Indonesia and will
contribute to achievement of the targets of the results framework of ADB’s country partnership
strategy, 2012–2014 for Indonesia and ADB’s Strategy 2020.14 The country partnership strategy
includes support for government efforts to achieve more inclusive growth by improving basic
infrastructure for poor communities in selected cities. The project is aligned with ADB's Urban
Operational Plan, 2012–2020 as it (i) provides support to urban shelter sector programs; (ii)
contributes to upgrading of local infrastructure in the four core areas of water supply, sanitation,
water management, and urban transport; and (iii) improves community services, employment
opportunities, and livelihood development.15

B.       Impact and Outcome

9.     The impact of the project will be improved living conditions in urban areas. The outcome will
be improved infrastructure and access to service delivery in slum neighborhoods in 20 cities.

C.       Outputs

10.    The project will have three outputs: (i) institutional capacity for managing pro-poor urban
development strengthened; (ii) infrastructure in slum neighborhoods upgraded; and (iii) new
settlements for poor families established.

11
   The project loan modality was applied as the project is limited to providing targeted support to improve basic
   infrastructure in slum neighborhoods of 20 cities, adopts a CDD approach, and does not address overall policy issues
   or legal and regulatory frameworks, which would require involving other line ministries and government agencies.
12
   ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans to the Republic
   of Indonesia for the Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Sector Project. Manila. The project closed in December
   2010 and is rated successful. ADB. 2011. Completion Report: Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Sector Project in
   Indonesia. Manila.
13
   In addition to ADB, other development partners have had a long-standing engagement with Indonesia in infrastructure
   development. In 1999, the WB started the financing of the Urban Poverty Project, which aimed at reducing urban
   poverty by increasing income of the urban poor, empower urban communities and improve local government capacity
   to assist the urban poor. The UPP has created momentum for addressing poverty issues and basic infrastructure
   needs through CDD, which was further developed under the Government’s PNPM scheme. An overview on the
   development cooperation related to urban infrastructure is accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 6.
14
   ADB. 2012. Country Operations Business Plan: Indonesia 2013-2014. Manila; ADB. 2012. Country Partnership
   Strategy. Indonesia, 2012-2014. Manila; ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian
   Development Bank, 2008–2020. Manila.
15
   The project will contribute to inclusive development, planning, and governance through capacity building support
   provided under output 1 and adoption of a CDD approach.
4

11.     Institutional capacity for managing pro-poor urban development strengthened. The
project will provide capacity building assistance to local administrations in the project cities for
(i) community-driven settlement upgrading and new site development (NSD); (ii) building
community member awareness on sanitation and hygiene; (iii) project management; (iv) public–
private partnerships for NSD, with special focus on the poor; and (v) O&M of upgraded facilities
and NSD through community-based efforts. Within the first year of project implementation and with
the help of consultants, each participating city will conduct a capacity assessment identifying
challenges and capacity building needs to strengthen spatial planning and pro-poor urban
development. Based on the results of the assessments, city administrations will prepare capacity
building and training proposals, which will be consolidated by MPW’s Directorate General of
Human Settlements (DGHS), the executing agency. DGHS will facilitate joint training and study
programs, and other capacity building assistance for selected staff from the 20 local
administrations. To address poverty issues beyond infrastructure upgrading, the project will
support the preparation of multisector slum improvement action plans. The plans will represent an
attempt to combine physical environmental improvements with other support mechanisms that will
require collective efforts from entities beyond MPW.

12.     Infrastructure in slum neighborhoods upgraded. About $60 million of the loan proceeds
will be allocated for upgrading basic infrastructure in slum neighborhoods in 20 cities. Participating
cities have been preliminarily selected based on the following criteria: (i) local governments have
approved spatial plans (RTRWs) and development strategies (SPPIPs) that identify slum areas
and provide guidance to improve slums; (ii) at least 5,000 households live in slum areas; (iii) at
least 5% of households located in slum neighborhoods fall in the category of extreme poor;16 (iv)
formal confirmation of the local government to participate in the project; and (v) confirmation that
households without legal title to the land (informal dwellers) in the selected slum neighborhoods
would be allowed to participate in and benefit from the project.17

13.     To be selected to participate in the project, local governments of the project cities will sign a
memorandum of agreement with DGHS validating their readiness and contributions, including (i)
establishing a local coordination office (LCO) with experienced and committed staff; (ii) providing
additional resources to finance complementary infrastructure works and to improve public services
in slum areas; (iii) ensuring compliance to adopt a CDD approach to identify the specific type and
mix of interventions to be financed by the project based on needs assessments carried out by the
communities; and (iv) adjusting and/or revising spatial plans and development strategies based on
feedback received during the consultation process with slum communities.

14.     Project funds will be allocated for each city based on the number of slums: (i) cities with
more than 100 slums will receive up to $4.5 million; (ii) cities with 50–100 slums will receive up to
$3.5 million; and (iii) cities with less than 50 slums will receive up to $2.4 million. Funding for
infrastructure upgrading investments provided to each slum will vary and depend on the actual
situation and needs of the communities.

15.     City administrations will identify the specific slum neighborhoods to be supported by the
project based on a close consultation process with slum communities and agreed selection criteria.
The final list of project slum neighborhoods will be confirmed by a bupati (mayor) decree and

16
     Households living on a monthly income of less than Rp2.2 million are considered extreme poor.
17
     During project preparation, 50 cities were considered eligible to participate in the project based on the precondition
     criteria. During a thorough consultation process between DGHS and the candidate cities, which included field visits to
     explain the project scope and CDD approach to the city administrations and community groups, 20 cities confirmed
     their commitment to participate in the project. Based on lessons from earlier CDD infrastructure projects executed by
     MPW, the formal commitment of the city administration to participate in and contribute to project implementation and
     specify resources is considered crucial. The preliminary list of project cities includes Ambon, Batam, Bandar Lampung,
     Banjarmasin, Bengkulu, Bima, Bone, Kapuas, Kendari, Makassar, Palangkaraya, Palembang, Palopo, Pasuruan,
     Pekalongan, Semarang, Serang, Sukabumi, Tanjung Jabung Barat, Tanjung Balai.
                                                                                                                             5

submitted to ADB by DGHS for endorsement within 3 months after loan effectiveness. The process
of engaging with slum communities will start with road shows in each project city to inform potential
slum communities of the project scope and approach, and the selection criteria to be eligible for
participation in the project. Selection criteria are based on socioeconomic indicators, and the
readiness and commitment to participate in the project.18 Overall information on the project and the
selection process will be publicly disclosed in each project city. Cities with more than 100 slum
locations will nominate at least 20 slum neighborhoods, but not more than 35; cities with 50 to 100
slum locations will nominate at least 15 slum neighborhoods, but not more than 20; and cities with
less than 50 slum locations will nominate up to 15.

16.    Each selected neighborhood will work through a community implementation organization
(BKM). Supported by consultant teams, BKMs will facilitate infrastructure assessments for the slum
neighborhoods, to be carried out by the community members, to assess basic infrastructure needs
in the community; evaluate community implementation capacity; establish efficient planning and
decision-making processes; formulate neighborhood upgrading plans (NUAPs) and specific
subproject investment plans; prepare simple technical designs; organize works to be carried out by
the community members; and formulate O&M plans of completed project facilities.

17.      To achieve a wider development impact for cities and address infrastructure issues beyond
the boundaries of individual slum neighborhoods, LCOs with the help of consultants will establish a
consultation mechanism for project BKMs, and the city administration to formulate a consolidated
infrastructure upgrading investment plan, which will integrate the individual NUAPs. In the process
of preparing the overall infrastructure upgrading investment plan, BKMs, and the city administration
will jointly evaluate NUAPs from each slum neighborhood, agree on collaboration to link upgrading
activities between neighborhoods, concur on fund allocations per neighborhood within the overall
investment amount for the respective project city, and revise individual NUAPs to be aligned with
the agreed consolidated infrastructure upgrading investment plan for the project city. The
consolidated city investment plans will be approved by DGHS and ADB and include the revised
NUAPs with agreed investment amounts for each project slum neighborhood. The project will
ensure that the consultation process is conducted in a transparent and fair manner. During this
consultation process, BKMs, and city administrations will assess whether individual NUAPs are
aligned with spatial plans and development strategies at the city level and agree on any necessary
adjustments.

18.    Based on the complexity of infrastructure upgrading plans, civil works will be carried out by
the communities or by firms to be engaged by DGHS. Following the PNPM approach, funds for
works implemented by communities will be based on contracts between the BKM, and city
administration19 and transferred through block grants directly from the project imprest account to
community bank account managed by the BKMs.20 Detailed guidance related to eligibility criteria
and procedures to use grant funds will be explained in the guidelines (JUKLAK) and


18
   Selection criteria for the project neighborhoods include: (i) the neighborhood must be located in a participating city; (ii)
   formal confirmation of the head of the neighborhood or BKM verifying (a) interest and willingness to participate in the
   project, (b) contribution to the planning and implementation of upgrading activities, (c) willingness to establish required
   O&M arrangements for facilities constructed by the project; and (iii) the neighborhood must be listed as a slum
   neighborhood in the applicable city development plan.
19
   Contracts will specify payment modalities. Detailed information on the fund flow mechanism and implementation of
   neighborhood upgrading plans is in the Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in
   Appendix 2).
20
   No withdrawal from the imprest account will be made for civil works for output 2 until, among other things: (i) the
   separate bank account for the BKM of the corresponding slum neighborhood has been opened, (ii) the consolidated
   investment plan of the corresponding participating town, integrating the NUAPs of project slum neighborhoods has
   been approved by ADB and DGHS, and (iii) a contract for the relevant subproject has been concluded between the
   BKM for the relevant slum neighborhood and the city administration.
6

implementation manuals (JUKNIS) to be developed with the help of consultants and approved by
DGHS at the beginning of the project.

19.     New settlements for poor families established. A model of partnership for each NSD
between the central government, local administrations, developers, and financial institutions to
provide housing for poor people will be developed. The project will take a catalytic role to develop
examples for replication and promote public–private alliances in five cities 21 whereby: (i) local
governments will provide land from their own resources and issue land titles for potential new house
owners (titles are required as collateral to receive loans from financial institutions); (ii) MPW will
provide the basic infrastructure (roads, water and electricity supply, and sanitation facilities) financed
by loan proceeds; (iii) private developers will prefinance the house construction, and coordinate
connections to the main networks of service providers (water and electricity); (iv) financial institutions
will provide loans to poor families to buy (or construct) new houses; (v) NGOs, in close cooperation
with the local administration, will organize socialization campaigns to explain the NSD scheme to
poor families living in slum neighborhoods of the project city, develop transparent criteria to select
poor beneficiary families to be eligible to apply under the NSD scheme, and facilitate the selection
process. To establish the basic infrastructure for new settlements, the project will provide about $5.0
million to finance civil works. The legal title to the land of the NSD sites must be held in the name of
the participating cities. Within 18 months after loan effectiveness, the project cities will present a full
NSD proposal, which is endorsed by the bupati (mayor), to ADB and DGHS for review and approval.
The proposal will include (i) proof of land ownership; (ii) detailed technical designs with cost
estimates for infrastructure to be financed by the loan proceeds; (iii) basis for the selection of a local
developer; (iv) proposed loan schemes, including commitments from financial institutions to provide
loans to poor families under the NSD scheme; and (v) a transparent selection process to identify
slum dwellers prepared to buy houses at the NSD site. DGHS will ensure that the houses
constructed under the project will not be sold or resold within 10 years after completion. The
proposed NSD sites will be vacant and ready for infrastructure development, and will not be subject
to environmental threats.

D.          Investment and Financing Plans

20.         The project is estimated to cost $102.0 million (Table 1).

                                            Table 1: Project Investment Plan
                                                             ($ million)
                                                                                                 a
 Item                                                                                  Amount
 A.          Base Cost
                  Output 1: Institutional capacity strengthened                            5.0
                  Output 2: Slum neighborhoods upgraded                                   76.4
                  Output 3: New settlements developed                                     16.2
                    Subtotal (A)                                                          97.6
 B.          Contingencies                                                                 0.4
                                                            a
 C.          Financing Charges During Implementation                                       4.0
                             Total (A+B+C)                                               102.0
 a
  Includes interest and commitment charges. Interest during construction for the ADB loan has been computed at the
 5-year forward London interbank offered rate plus a spread of 0.3%. Commitment charges for the ADB loan are
 0.15% per year to be charged on the undisbursed loan amount. Cost includes $1.56 for taxes and duties financed
 by the government.
 Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

21.    The government has requested a loan of $74.4 million from ADB’s ordinary capital
resources to help finance the project. The loan will have an 18-year term, including a grace period

21
     The NSD cities will be part of the 20 project cities.
                                                                                                                   7

of 6 years; an interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s London interbank offered rate
(LIBOR)-based lending facility; a commitment charge of 0.15% per annum on any undisbursed
amount of the loan; and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan agreement. The
financing plan is in Table 2.
                                    Table 2: Financing Plan
 Source                                                            Amount ($ million)        Share of Total (%)
 Asian Development Bank (ordinary capital resources)                    74.4                        72.9
 Government                                                             21.6                        21.2
 Beneficiaries                                                            6.0                        5.9
         Total                                                         102.0                       100.0
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

E.      Implementation Arrangements

22.     The implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in the
project administration manual (PAM). DGHS will be the executing agency. The project will be
implemented from July 2014 to December 2017. In each project city, a local project management
unit will be established with experienced and qualified staff to facilitate project implementation.
Their tasks are described in detail in the PAM. All procurement financed under the ADB loan will be
in accordance with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2013, as amended from time to time).
Consultant services will be recruited in accordance with ADB’s Guidelines on the Use of
Consultants (2013, as amended from time to time).

                                 Table 3: Implementation Arrangements
 Aspects                             Arrangements
 Implementation period               July 2014–December 2017
 Estimated project completion date   31 December 2017
 Project management
   (i) Oversight body                 Housing and Settlements Steering Committee
                                      Members include BAPPENAS, MOF, MOHA, MPW, MPH, BPN, MOH
   (ii) Executing agency              DGHS within MPW
   (iii) Key implementing agencies DGHS and administrations of 20 city districts
   (iv) Project implementation unit Project management unit, DGHS, MPW, 5 staff
                                      City and district project management units in 20 participating cities and/or
                                      districts, 3–5 staff in each unit
 Block grants for basic               Community                    1,000 contracts                    $41.0 million
 infrastructure upgrading             procurement
 Complex infrastructure upgrading     Procurement through          70 contracts                        $24.0 million
                                      DGHS
 Consulting services                  2,297 person-months of national consultants                     $9.4 million
 Retroactive financing and/or         Four management consultant packages will be procured using advance
 advance contracting                  contracting, including the national project management consultant team
                                      (estimated contract amount $6,623,000). The contract will be signed after the
                                      loan is declared effective.
 Disbursement                         ADB loan proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with ADB's Loan
                                      Disbursement Handbook (2012, as amended from time to time) and detailed
                                      arrangements agreed between the government and ADB.
 ADB = Asian Development Bank, BAPPENAS = Badan Perencanaan dan Pembangunan Nasional (National
 Development Planning Agency), BPN = Badan Pertanahan Nasional (National Land Agency), DGHS = Directorate
 General of Human Settlements, MOF = Ministry of Finance, MOH = Ministry of Health, MOHA = Ministry of Home
 Affairs, MPH = Ministry of Public Housing, MPW = Ministry of Public Works.
 Source: Asian Development Bank.
8

                                              III.     DUE DILIGENCE

A.         Economic and Financial

23.     About 670,000 low-income households are expected to benefit from the project. The
expected economic benefits are significant and include (i) improved public health status and
reduced per capita costs for health care and medical treatment due to increased coverage of
sanitation services, improved access to safe drinking water, and improved hygiene particularly in
densely populated neighborhoods; (ii) increased income-generating opportunities through
improving essential infrastructure; and (iii) considerable short-term employment generation.
Improving the overall living environments of poor urban neighborhoods where people are engaged
in informal economic activities will enhance income-earning opportunities of small home industries,
particularly related to food processing, handicraft, batik, and small repair services. Upgrading roads
and pathways, and improving water and power supply will improve the overall business conditions
for informal entrepreneurs (including food-stall owners, small restaurants, repair shops). Improved
roads will also provide easier and safer access for residents to reach their places of work.
Transportation costs in general will be reduced to improve access to local markets to deliver goods
and services and buy products, and to schools and health centers. Improving drainage systems will
contribute to reducing damage and losses due to flooding.22

B.         Governance

24.     The project will adopt a CDD approach, which is a key feature of instituting good
governance practices. It will strengthen the ability of communities to articulate their needs and to
seek support for development plans; it will improve the ability of district governments to respond to
the demands of poor communities. Evaluations of CDD infrastructure projects suggest that
community choices are more attuned to local needs; sustainable O&M is more likely as
infrastructure projects chosen by the community members have a direct benefit. Participation in
planning and implementing infrastructure projects yields better oversight and less corruption, and
communities become active partners in development. The project will ensure transparency to
enable the community to know every aspect of the project decision-making process. Management
of funds will be transparent and shared with the entire community. ADB’s Anticorruption Policy
(1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed with the government. Within 3 months
of loan effectiveness, DGHS will establish a project-specific website for public disclosure on use of
the loan proceeds, including details of procurement and contract awards.

C.         Poverty and Social

25.     The project will target poor communities in slum areas that lack basic services and
infrastructure. The selected neighborhoods will have higher than average poverty rates and lower
than average achievement of the MDGs. Improvements of basic infrastructure will increase
income-earning opportunities and accessibility to education and health services for the poor and
near poor. Improved sanitation and cleaner environments resulting from project activities will
reduce diseases linked to unsafe water and poor hygiene, thus contributing to improving the overall
health status of the poor.23 The project will address the key gender issues, including (i) limited
participation and leadership of women in local decision-making processes related to community
infrastructure investments; (ii) insufficient access of women to employment opportunities in local
civil and maintenance works; and (iii) inadequate opportunities for female government staff to
access technical training opportunities. The project’s gender action plan includes (i) developing
slum improvement action plans based on the needs of women and men for public facilities;
(ii) ensuring women comprise 40% of participants in decision-making activities and 20% of BKM
22
     Economic and Financial Analysis (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
23
     Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                           9

members, in aggregate; (iii) undertaking gender audits of all community investment plans; (iv)
providing 20% of paid work created by the project to women; (v) ensuring women comprise 30% of
trainees in all project capacity development activities and 30% of user group members; (vi)
providing gender training to all key project stakeholders; and (vii) developing and using gender
indicators to track implementation of the gender action plan and project outcomes for women.24

D.       Safeguards

26.      Land acquisition and resettlement. The project will not include physical displacement;
less than 10% of productive assets will be lost as a result of involuntary land acquisition. In the
context of specific neighborhood upgrading activities, i.e., construction of public sanitation facilities,
small amounts of land may be acquired from community members or donated voluntarily.25 The
legal title of the land for NSD will be in the name of the project city; the land will be vacant and
ready for implementation. As the scope of land acquisition is expected to be insignificant with no
expected resettlement, the project is classified as category B for involuntary resettlement. Since
communities will be identifying specific interventions during project implementation, potential
issues related to land acquisition can be identified only after the type of infrastructure upgrading
and the specific location are agreed on. A resettlement framework was prepared to provide
guidance to communities on managing land acquisition.26 The NUAPs will record the potential for
land acquisition.

27.      Environment. Overall, the infrastructure upgrading activities are expected to create
positive impacts on the environment and improve the livelihoods at slum communities. The project
is categorized as environment category B. Since it will use a CDD approach, communities will
identify the specific project locations and types of infrastructure interventions during the first year of
implementation. An environmental assessment and review framework was prepared to guide the
environmental assessment process to screen specific infrastructure interventions and set up
institutional arrangements in relation to environmental management and monitoring. Safeguard
specialists and trained community advisors, in close collaboration with the communities, will
conduct assessments in each project neighborhood in the process of preparing the NUAPs. 27 The
NUAPs will record results of the environmental screening process. For the NSD under output 3,
initial environmental examinations will be prepared at each site after the project city has formally
confirmed its readiness to participate in the NSD component and designated the land for the
project. The report will be part of the NSD proposals to be approved by DGHS and ADB. NSD
proposals without an initial environmental examination report will not be endorsed.

28.     Indigenous peoples. The project is not expected to have any negative impacts on
indigenous peoples. It will not discriminate against them or other marginalized groups. Following
CDD principles, the project will include opportunities for screening project impacts on indigenous
groups and incorporating mitigation measures, if any, into the consolidated city investment plans.
In accordance with ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the project is classified category C
for indigenous peoples.28


24
   Gender Action Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
25
   Community members will pay for land from their own resources; loan proceeds will not be used.
26
   Safeguard specialists will direct and supervise implementation of land acquisition by BKMs, and LCOs based on the
   resettlement framework, which has been disclosed (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
27
   National and regional consultant teams will include environmental safeguard experts, who will guide communities and
   LCO to carry out environmental screening and supervise the process. The environmental assessment and review
   framework has been disclosed (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
28
   Indigenous people and other vulnerable groups will be part of the capacity-building, planning, implementation, and
   post-implementation processes; minority and marginalized groups will be represented on BKMs; and indigenous
   groups will benefit from easier access to service delivery, rural infrastructure, training, and construction-related jobs.
10

29.     Operation and maintenance. To ensure sustainability of infrastructure investments, DGHS
will ensure that O&M arrangements are well reflected in the NUAPs. The O&M of facilities
upgraded under output 2 will be managed through a community participatory approach, involving
the local BKM and beneficiary communities. In the preparation of the NUAPs, consultant teams will
guide communities and LCOs to understand the need for O&M provisions and ensure that
appropriate technical and financial measures for O&M are included. BKMs, supervised by the city
administrations, will handle O&M of new sites under output 3.

E.         Risks and Mitigating Measures

30.     In the past, some CDD programs have bypassed local government planning procedures.
The project will mitigate this risk by facilitating a consultation process between BKMs and the city
administrations to jointly formulate consolidated investment plans and ensure that NUAPs are
aligned with spatial plans and development strategies. For the NSD, a potential risk involves
successfully engaging with private stakeholders to establish new housing sites for poor families.
This risk will be mitigated through targeted awareness campaigns to illustrate the mutual benefits
for all stakeholders. Project consultants will be engaged to facilitate dialog among developers,
financial institutions, local administrations, and community members. Previous CDD projects
indicate a risk of “elite capture”—where wealthy and/or articulate, educated community members
dominate decision-making processes. This risk will be mitigated by (i) using transparent processes
in conducting needs assessments and preparing NUAPs; (ii) working through BKMs with elected
representative from the neighborhoods; and (iii) publicly displaying decision-making processes,
tender documents, fund transfers, and progress of civil works. Experienced consultant teams will
support communities in preparing technical designs and implementing civil works to ensure high
quality of infrastructure and effective O&M arrangements. DGHS will set up units to handle
complaints at each project city that will review and address grievances from stakeholders.29

                                   IV.     ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS

31.    The government has assured ADB that implementation of the project shall conform to all
applicable ADB policies including those concerning anticorruption measures, safeguards, gender,
procurement, consulting services, and disbursement as described in detail in the project
administration manual and loan documents. The government has agreed with ADB on certain
covenants for the project, which are set forth in the loan agreement.

                                           V.       RECOMMENDATION

32.    I am satisfied that the proposed loan would comply with the Articles of Agreement of the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve the loan of $74,400,000
to the Republic of Indonesia for the Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Project (Phase 2), from
ADB’s ordinary capital resources, with interest to be determined in accordance with ADB’s London
interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility; for a term of 18 years, including a grace
period of 6 years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance with
those set forth in the draft loan agreement presented to the Board.


                                                                               Takehiko Nakao
                                                                               President

7 March 2014


29
     Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                       Appendix 1        11


                                     DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK
                                  Performance Targets and                Data Sources and
Design Summary                   Indicators with Baselines             Reporting Mechanisms       Assumptions and Risks
Impact                                                                                           Assumption
Improved living                By 2020, in line with the MDG          Central Bureau of          National and local budget
conditions in urban            target 7D: The proportion of           Statistics (Biro Pusat     funds are adequate and
areas                          urban population living in             Statistik)                 provided in a timely
                               slums of the 20 project cities is      MDG progress reports       manner.
                               reduced to at least 6%                                            Central and local
                                                         1
                               Baseline (2011): 12.26%                                           governments continue to
                                                                                                 prioritize reduction of
                                                                                                 slums.



Outcome                                                                                          Assumptions
Improved infrastructure        By 2017:                              PPMS reports                National and local
and access to service          At least 670,000 households           Consultant reports          governments continue to
delivery in slum               living in slum neighborhoods                                      support community-driven
neighborhoods in 20            benefit from the infrastructure       District and city           development.
project cities                 upgrading.                            administration evaluation
                                                                     reports                     Risk
                               At least 50% of community                                         Natural disasters will
                               members in project locations,                                     impact the project areas.
                               of which half are women, are
                               satisfied with improvements in
                               roads, provision of drinking
                               water, sanitation facilities, and
                               other basic urban
                               infrastructure (perception
                               survey to be conducted by
                               2017)
Outputs                                                                                          Assumption
1. Institutional               Local government officials            PPMS reports                Participating local
   capacities for              involved in developing and/or         Consultant reports          governments continue to
   managing pro-poor           revising integrated urban                                         be committed to pro-poor
   urban development           development plans and SIAPs           District and city           spatial planning.
   are strengthened            adopt community-driven                administration evaluation
                               development approaches by             reports                     Risk
                               2017.                                 Feedback from               Informal leaders dominate
                                                                     communities (survey)        the decision-making
                                                                                                 process during preparation
                               At least 100 local government                                     of slum upgrading and
                               staff (30% women) dealing                                         community investment
                               with spatial planning trained on                                  plans.
                               CDD approaches adopted in
                               urban development; and
                               environmental subjects related
                               to water treatment, sanitation,
                               solid waste management,
                               project management, O&M,
                               and other areas identified in
                               the capacity needs
                               assessments
2. Infrastructure in           Individual NUAPs of project           PPMS reports                Assumption
   slum neighborhoods          neighborhoods integrated in           Consultant reports          Community members
   upgraded                    consolidated city infrastructure                                  have enough resources to
                               upgrading investment plans            District and city           carry out simple civil works
                               and harmonized with approved          administration evaluation

1
    The baseline will be updated in 2014 after the project slum neighborhoods are confirmed.
12      Appendix 1


                            Performance Targets and             Data Sources and
Design Summary             Indicators with Baselines          Reporting Mechanisms         Assumptions and Risks
                         spatial plans and development      reports                       and/or construction.
                         strategies                         Feedback from
                         Community implementation           communities (survey)
                         organizations (BKMs) in all
                         project neighborhoods
                         functioning with 40%
                         representation of women
                         involved in the decision-
                         making processes
                         1,500 km of neighborhood
                         roads upgraded
                         134,000 households benefit
                         from upgraded water supply
                         facilities and systems
                         268,000 households benefit
                         from upgraded sanitation
                         facilities and systems
                         At least 80% of infrastructure
                         works evaluated as being in
                         accordance with the national
                         standard and have functioning
                         O&M arrangements
3. New settlements for   New housing areas for poor         PPMS reports                  Risk
   poor families         families constructed in at least   Consultant reports            Engagement with private
   established           five cities                                                      stakeholders to establish
                         PPP schemes to finance and         MOUs and agreements           new housing sites for poor
                         construct new housing areas        between developers,           families is not successful.
                         for poor families are              financial institutions, and
                         established in at least five       city administrations;
                         cities                             contracts with low-income
                                                            families
                         At least 800 poor families         District and city
                         (priority to households headed     administration evaluation
                         by women) living in slums are      reports
                         provided with affordable
                         houses in new housing areas.

                         Housing deeds provided in the
                         name of husband and wife,
                         and in the name of the woman
                         for households headed by
                         women
.
Activities with Milestones                                               Inputs
1. Institutional capacity for managing pro-poor urban development        Loan
strengthened                                                             ADB: $74.4 million (ordinary capital
1.1 Recruit consultant teams to support DGHS and local community         resources)
      governments in preparing and implementing project activities                                      Amount
      (starting Q3 2014)                                                 Item                          ($ million)
1.2 Identify training needs for local government staff (starting Q4       Infrastructure                  60.0
      2014)                                                              NSD                               5.0
1.3 Select local government staff to be trained on pro-poor spatial       Support for institutional
      planning and/or CDD approach (starting Q1 2015)                     development                      1.9
1.4 Implement training for local government staff dealing with spatial    Consulting services              7.5
      planning (starting Q2 2015)
                                                                         Government: $21.6 million
                                                                                           Appendix 1         13


Activities with Milestones                                           Inputs
1.5 Conduct workshops to develop the national housing and            Land                               5.0
     settlement network (starting Q1 2015)                           Infrastructure
1.6 Establish a national housing and settlement network with         improvements                       5.9
     members from at least 20 cities (Q2 2015)                       Institutional development          1.0
                                                                     Project management,
2. Infrastructure investment plans for upgrading slum                monitoring, and
neighborhoods aligned with overall city development plans and        supervision                         3.7
implemented in 20 cities                                             Tax and duties                      1.6
2.1 Socialization of the project scope in all project neighborhoods  Contingency                         0.4
      (starting Q3 2014)                                             Financing charges during
2.2 Help project neighborhoods to identify needs and to prepare      implementation                      4.0
      NUAPs (starting in Q3 2014)                                    Private Sector and Community
2.3 Integrate NUAPs into consolidated infrastructure upgrading       Contribution: $6.0 million
      investment plans for each project city (starting Q4 2014)      Infrastructure and/or in-kind       2.0
2.4 Bupatis (mayors) approve consolidated infrastructure upgrading
                                                                     Houses (at NSD)                     4.0
      investment plans (Q4 2014–Q1 2015)
2.5 Establish user groups in 300 neighborhoods (starting Q1 2015)
2.6 Award civil work contracts for neighborhood upgrading (starting
      Q1 2015)
3. New settlements for poor families established
3.1 Approve selection criteria for potential beneficiaries (Q4 2014)
3.2 Complete MOUs between local governments and financial
      institutions and developers to finance and construct NSDs
      (Q2 2015)
3.3 DGHS selects contractors to construct infrastructure at NSDs
      (starting Q3 2015)
3.4 Construct infrastructure at NSDs (starting Q4 2015)
3.5 Construct houses at NSDs (starting Q1 2016)
3.6 Complete final selection of beneficiaries (Q3 2015)
3.7 Beneficiaries and banks sign loan agreements (Q2 2016)
3.8 Develop strategies to share partnership models for NSDs with
      other local governments (in Q4 2016)
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BKM = Badan Keswadayaan Masyarakat (Community Empowerment Agency),
BPS = Biro Pusat Statistik (Central Statistics Bureau), CDD = community-driven development, km = kilometer, MDG
= Millennium Development Goal, MOU = memorandum of understanding, NSD = new site development, NUAP =
neighborhood upgrading action plan, OCR = ordinary capital resources, O&M =operation and maintenance, PPMS =
project performance monitoring system, PPP = public–private partnership, SIAP = slum improvement action plan.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.
14    Appendix 2




                              LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS
                   http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=46094-001-3


1.    Loan Agreement
2.    Sector Assessment (Summary): Urban Infrastructure
3.    Project Administration Manual
4.    Contribution to the ADB Results Framework
5.    Development Coordination
6.    Economic and Financial Analysis
7.    Country Economic Indicators
8.    Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
9.    Gender Action Plan
10.   Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
11.   Resettlement Framework
12.   Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
