Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




Project Number: 49169-002
August 2018




Proposed Loans and Administration of Loan and
Grants
Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Green Affordable Housing
and Resilient Urban Renewal Sector Project




This is the version of the document approved by ADB’s Board of Directors that excludes
information that is subject to exceptions to disclosure set forth in ADB’s Public Communications
Policy 2011.
                   CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                     (as of 1 August 2018)

                   Currency unit       –    togrog (MNT)
                       MNT1.00         =    $0.00041
                          $1.00        =    MNT2,464.50



                         ABBREVIATIONS

ADB         –   Asian Development Bank
AMC-DBM     –   Asset Management Company of the Development Bank of
                Mongolia
CPP         –   community participation plan
DBM         –   Development Bank of Mongolia
EDAF        –   eco-district and affordable housing fund
ESMS        –   environmental and social management system
FIL         –   financial intermediation loan
GCF         –   Green Climate Fund
ha          –   hectare
HLTF        –   High-Level Technology Fund
km          –   kilometer
m2          –   square meter
MUB         –   Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
PAM         –   project administration manual
SDP         –   sector development plan
SGAP        –   social and gender action plan
VLSP        –   voluntary land swapping plan



                                NOTE

          In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars.
 Vice-President            Stephen Groff, Operations 2
 Director General          Amy S.P. Leung, East Asia Department (EARD)
 Director                  Sangay Penjor, Urban and Social Sectors Division, EARD

 Team leader               Arnaud Heckmann, Senior Urban Development Specialist, EARD
 Team members              Tuul Badarch, Senior Project Officer (Infrastructure), EARD
                           Ruth Benigno, Associate Project Analyst, EARD
                           Christian Ellermann, Climate Change Specialist, Sustainable
                           Development and Climate Change Department (SDCC)
                           Enerelt Enkhbold, Senior Investment Officer, EARD
                           Seung Min Lee, Financial Sector Specialist, EARD
                           Christina Pak, Senior Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                           Mailene Radstake, Senior Safeguards Specialist (Resettlement),
                           EARD
                           Arun Ramamurthy, Senior Public Management Specialist (ICT and
                           e-Governance), SDCC
                           Michael Rattinger, Senior Climate Change Specialist, SDCC
                           Shotaro Sasaki, Senior Environment Specialist, EARD
                           Gohar Tadevosyan, Social Development Specialist (Safeguards),
                           EARD
 Peer reviewers            Joris van Etten, Senior Urban Development Specialist, SDCC
                           Biao Huang, Senior Investment Specialist, Private Sector
                           Operations Department
                           Sung Su Kim, Finance Sector Specialist, SDCC




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                     CONTENTS

                                                                   Page
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                   1
II.    THE PROJECT                                                    1
       A.   Rationale                                                 1
       B.   Impacts and Outcome                                       3
       C.   Outputs                                                   3
       D.   Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan                 4
       E.   Implementation Arrangements                               6
III.   DUE DILIGENCE                                                  7
       A.    Technical                                                7
       B.    Economic and Financial                                   7
       C.    Governance                                               8
       D.    Poverty, Social, and Gender                              8
       E.    Safeguards                                               9
       F.    Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan     11
IV.    ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS                                     12
V.     RECOMMENDATION                                                12

APPENDIXES
1.     Design and Monitoring Framework                               13
2.     List of Linked Documents                                      16
                                                                                         Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                                     PROJECT AT A GLANCE

    1. Basic Data                                                                                        Project Number: 49169-002
       Project Name                   Ulaanbaatar Green Affordable Housing     Department                 EARD/EASS
                                      and Resilient Urban Renewal Sector       /Division
                                      Project
       Country                        Mongolia                                 Executing Agency          Ulaanbaatar Municipal
       Borrower                       Mongolia                                                           Government
    2. Sector                         Subsector(s)                                                        ADB Financing ($ million)
       Water and other urban          Other urban services                                                                  20.00
       infrastructure and services    Urban housing                                                                         25.00
                                      Urban policy, institutional and capacity development                                  25.00
                                      Urban slum development                                                                10.00
                                                                                               Total                        80.00

    3. Strategic Agenda               Subcomponents                            Climate Change Information
       Inclusive economic growth      Pillar 2: Access to economic             CO2 reduction (tons per annum)                 200,000
       (IEG)                          opportunities, including jobs, made      Climate Change impact on the                   Medium
                                      more inclusive                           Project
       Environmentally sustainable    Eco-efficiency
       growth (ESG)                   Global and regional transboundary        ADB Financing
                                      environmental concerns                   Adaptation ($ million)                            55.00
                                      Urban environmental improvement          Mitigation ($ million)                            25.00

                                                                               Cofinancing
                                                                               Adaptation ($ million)                            91.30
                                                                               Mitigation ($ million)                            56.70
    4. Drivers of Change              Components                               Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
       Governance and capacity        Anticorruption                           Effective gender mainstreaming
       development (GCD)              Civil society participation              (EGM)
                                      Institutional development
                                      Organizational development
       Knowledge solutions (KNS)      Application and use of new knowledge
                                      solutions in key operational areas
       Partnerships (PAR)             Commercial cofinancing
                                      Civil society organizations
                                      Implementation
                                      International finance institutions (IFI)
                                      Official cofinancing
                                      Private Sector
       Private sector development     Promotion of private sector investment
       (PSD)                          Public sector goods and services
                                      essential for private sector development
    5. Poverty and SDG Targeting                                               Location Impact
       Geographic Targeting           Yes                                      Urban                                              High
       Household Targeting            No
       SDG Targeting                  Yes
       SDG Goals                      SDG7, SDG8, SDG11, SDG13
    6. Risk Categorization:           Complex
.


    7. Safeguard Categorization            Environment: B Involuntary Resettlement: B Indigenous Peoples: C
.


    8. Financing
        Modality and Sources                                                                     Amount ($ million)
        ADB                                                                                                                     80.00
          Sovereign Sector (Concessional Loan): Ordinary capital resources                                                      20.00
          Sovereign Sector (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources                                                           60.00
        Cofinancing                                                                                                           148.00
          Green Climate Fund - Sector grant (Full ADB Administration)                                                          50.00
          Green Climate Fund - Sector loan (Full ADB Administration)                                                           95.00
          High Level Technology Fund - Sector grant (Full ADB Administration)                                                   3.00

Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.     15062018181354190883                            Generated Date: 19-Jun-2018 15:15:15 PM
                                                                        Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                                  PROJECT AT A GLANCE

      Counterpart                                                                                            342.10
        Beneficiaries                                                                                         63.90
        Government                                                                                            35.00
        Others                                                                                               243.20
      Total                                                                                                  570.10




Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.   15062018181354190883             Generated Date: 19-Jun-2018 15:15:15 PM
                                           I.       THE PROPOSAL

1.      I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on proposed loans to
Mongolia for the Ulaanbaatar Green Affordable Housing and Resilient Urban Renewal Sector
Project. The report also describes (i) the proposed administration of a loan to be provided by the
Green Climate Fund (GCF), and (ii) the proposed administration of grants to be provided by the
GCF and High-Level Technology Fund (HLTF)1 for the project, and if the Board approves the
proposed loans, I, acting under the authority delegated to me by the Board, approve the
administration of the GCF loan, GCF grant, and HLTF grant.

2.       The project will deliver sustainable and comprehensive solutions to transform the
substandard, climate-vulnerable, and heavily polluting ger areas (paras. 3–4) of Ulaanbaatar city
into affordable, low carbon, climate-resilient, and livable eco-districts. It will leverage private sector
investment to (i) deliver 10,000 affordable green housing units;2 and (ii) redevelop 100 hectares
(ha) of ger areas into eco-districts.3

                                            II.      THE PROJECT

A.        Rationale

3.      Following the transition from a centrally planned to a market-based economy in 1991,
Mongolia has experienced rapid rural–urban migration, mainly caused by (i) extreme climate
events, such as droughts and severe winter conditions (dzud), combined with poor veterinary
services and livestock management; and (ii) adoption in 2003 of a policy giving each citizen
access to about 700 square meters (m2) of urban land.4 Inadequate infrastructure investments,
housing policies, and urban planning regulations to accommodate the migrant population led to
the formation of vast peri-urban areas, named ger areas after the Mongolian yurts (gers) around
Ulaanbaatar’s central districts.5 In 2017, the population of ger areas was estimated at 850,000
people, that is 60% of the city’s population of 1.46 million, and 30% of the country’s population.

4.      Ger areas are settlements of low- and middle-income households characterized by loosely
aligned plots, with irregular and unpaved pathways. Dwellings in ger areas are unserved detached
solid houses and gers, 6 poorly insulated, using inefficient coal and biomass-fired stoves
generating large amounts of carbon dioxide emissions and air pollution, especially during winter.7
Most households have land tenure. Poor sanitation, with most households relying on open pit
latrines, coupled with poor solid waste collection create unsanitary living conditions. Residents
have limited access to water, which is being supplied via water kiosks, and access to public space

1
  Financing partner: the Government of Japan.
2 Green housing maximizes climate (i) mitigation measures through the use of resource- and energy-efficient building
  technique and materials, renewable energy systems, and operation and maintenance to maintain building
  performance and occupational health; and (ii) adaptation measures to reduce the vulnerability of ger area residents
  to harsh winters, flood events, hot summers, and soil pollution.
3 Eco-district development is a highly integrated urban planning and development process at the neighborhood level,

  using local responses to build green and sustainable development throughout the city.
4 Average land plots measure 500 m2. In January 2017, the mayor issued an order to restrict the access of rural people

  without official permits to urban areas. In December 2017, the policy was extended until January 2020.
5 The central districts of Ulaanbaatar are formed by apartment blocks with comprehensive utility services, including

  dedicated district heating, piped water supply, and wastewater collection and treatment services.
6 Of the ger area population, 56% lives in solid houses and 44% in traditional gers.
7 Air pollution causes health problems such as cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. World Bank. 2011. Air Quality

  Analysis of Ulaanbaatar: Improving Air Quality to Reduce Health Impacts. Washington DC.
2


and facilities, commercial areas, and economic amenities is lacking. 8 This situation (i) makes ger
areas highly vulnerable to climate change impacts and intensifies their carbon emissions; (ii)
increases the cost of doing business, discourages investors and developers, and inhibits both
economic integration and urban redevelopment processes; and (iii) affects vulnerable groups—
mostly women, children, elderly, and disadvantaged persons. Incremental growth and migration
are increasing the population living in these poor conditions, because affordable housing options
for low- and middle-income households are limited. A 2016 survey by the Capital City Housing
Corporation estimated housing demand at 150,000 units, while available affordable housing stock
is about 4,000 units; with 60% of ger areas residents willing to move to apartment units if
acceptable and affordable solutions are proposed.9

5.      In 1997, the Government of Mongolia and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) developed
a legal and policy framework for the housing sector. Under the National Housing Strategy, housing
policies were made demand-driven with new standards and regulations.10 In 2002, ADB approved
the first housing finance project, which introduced long-term mortgage lending to the banking
system.11 In 2006, the Mongolian Mortgage Corporation was set up to create a pool of long-term
funds to stimulate a secondary mortgage market. Housing finance expanded from 2013 through
the government’s 8% mortgage program. However, stringent mortgage access conditions and a
lack of housing products for low-income households meant the mortgage program mainly served
the upper middle-income households, creating an oversupply of high-end market housing
products. The program is currently suspended. Recently, the government and the Municipality of
Ulaanbaatar (MUB) initiated a series of programs to increase the supply of affordable housing
units, and support ger area redevelopment.12 The objective is to deliver up to 130,000 housing
units through the redevelopment of ger areas and the development of new areas. However, a lack
of viable solutions, infrastructure investment, financing support to developers, and sustainable
housing financing mechanisms have resulted in these programs not developing into
implementable plans. The few residential blocks that were initiated focused on lowering
construction costs, to the detriment of community well-being and sustainable urban planning, and
lacked energy-efficient and renewable energy features.

6.     Through the ADB-financed Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development
Investment Program, MUB is extending basic urban and social services to upgrade economic
hubs or subcenters in ger areas and provide an enabling environment for urban redevelopment
and private and public investments.13 This provides an opportunity to implement onsite solutions
for households to access apartments within their communities by integrating housing solutions

8
   Water consumption in ger areas is about 10 liters per capita per day, about half the minimum recommended by the
   World Health Organization in similar contexts. The cost is 2–10 times more than for residents of other areas.
9
   For medium and low income households, housing costs are considered affordable if rent or mortgage payments and
   utilities fees) is within 30% of gross monthly income. Affordability and willingness to pay of households below the
   seventh income decile are estimated at about MNT1.2 million ($490) per m2 for a 35 m2 apartment, while average
   market price was about MNT2.6 million ($1,070) per m2, based on the December 2017 currency exchange rate.
10
   In 1999, the government approved the Housing Law, National Housing Strategy, Housing Privatization Law, and
   Condominium Law.
11 ADB. Mongolia: Housing Finance (Sector) Project. The project allowed the establishment of a market-based housing

   finance system in Mongolia and the first mortgage finance law approved by the Parliament.
12 MUB is also known as the Governor’s Office of the Capital City Ulaanbaatar. Government initiatives included the (i)

   establishment on 6 July 2013 of the State Housing Corporation, which was tasked with implementing 40,000
   affordable housing units nationwide; and (ii) Rental Housing Program, approved by the Cabinet on 18 June 2015.
   MUB’s main initiatives are the (i) City Housing Program, approved by Resolution 17/17 of the city council in 2014; (ii)
   Affordable Housing Strategy for Ulaanbaatar, approved on 28 May 2015 by the city council; and (iii) Capital City
   Housing Corporation, established in August 2015.
13
   ADB. Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program.
                                                                                                                       3


into an urban renewal program. In addition, in November 2017 the government issued a resolution
ordering the Development Bank of Mongolia (DBM) to establish the first green development fund
to promote green urban development and economy, making DBM a key partner to leverage the
private sector for green housing finance. 14 International housing projects and Ulaanbaatar
housing and redevelopment experience show that a complete solution—integrating housing,
infrastructure, urban development, and financing support to both the supply and demand sides—
is the best way to create a paradigm shift to improve access to green affordable housing, and
resilient and low-carbon urban development.15

B.         Impacts and Outcome

7.      Impacts and outcome. 16 The project is aligned with the following impacts: living
conditions in Mongolia improved; and Ulaanbaatar is a safe, healthy, and green city that is resilient
to climate change, and provides a livable environment for its residents.17 The project will have the
following outcome: access to low-carbon and climate-resilient eco-districts and green affordable
housing in Ulaanbaatar ger areas increased. The project is consistent with ADB's country
partnership strategy for Mongolia, 2017–2020, and with the core themes of green, competitive,
and inclusive cities of ADB’s Urban Operational Plan.18

C.         Outputs

8.        The project will have three outputs: (i) resilient urban infrastructure, public facilities, and
social housing units in ger areas constructed (public sector component);19 (ii) long-term financing
to developers for low-carbon affordable housing, market rate housing, and economic facilities in
ger areas and to households for green mortgages increased (financial intermediation loan [FIL]
component); and (iii) sector policy reforms implemented and capacity strengthened. Output 1 will
deliver (i) green social housing units with climate adaptation and mitigation features; and
(ii) resilient infrastructure, public space, and public facilities. Under output 2, up to $75.7 million
of the GCF loan will be made available under the proposed FIL to enable an eco-district and
affordable housing fund (EDAF) to provide long-term debt financing (denominated in local
currency) to eligible commercial banks to support real estate developers’ participation in the low-
carbon housing market, and produce affordable green mortgages. Output 3 will support (i) project
implementation; (ii) eco-district feasibility and development, policy improvement on climate
change adaptation and mitigation, and improved supply and access to affordable green housing
units; (iii) detailed design and supervision; and (iv) sustainable green housing finance.20

14
     Based on the resolution, the Asset Management Company of the DBM (AMC-DBM) was tasked to manage the fund.
15 Lessons were mainly derived from the following projects: (i) Mexican programs of Hipoteca Verde (green mortgage)

   and EcoCasa that provided low interest loans to developers for eco-affordable housing, (ii) Singapore’s public–private
   partnership design on a build-and-sell scheme, (iii) Thailand’s Baan Eua-Arthorn project, (iv) Hong Kong’s public
   housing program, and (v) ADB’s sector project to develop poor communities in the Philippines. ADB. Philippines:
   Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project.
16
   The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
17 State Great Khural. 2016. Mongolia Sustainable Development Vision 2030. Ulaanbaatar; State Great Khural. 2013.

   Priorities 1 and 2 of Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban Development Master Plan 2020 and Development
   Directions 2030. Ulaanbaatar.
18 ADB. 2017. Country Partnership Strategy: Mongolia, 2017–2020—Sustaining Inclusive Growth in a Period of

   Economic Difficulty. Manila; and ADB. 2013. Urban Operational Plan, 2012–2020. Manila.
19 Social housing refers to rental housing.
20
   The project’s institutional and policy improvement will guide the transformational impacts and paradigm shift with
   respect to regulations, standards, and sector capacity for (i) climate-responsive urban planning; (ii) increased
   performance, energy efficiency, and renewable energy in buildings; (iii) improved supply and access to low-carbon
   affordable housing; (iv) sustainable green housing finance; and (v) eco-efficient urban services.
4


9.      Eco-district parameters. The project eco-districts will be low-carbon, climate-resilient,
mixed-income, and mixed-use areas with approximately 30% public space. The project’s five
phases will deliver about 20 eco-districts or subprojects, with each covering an average of 5 ha.
Phase 1 include two core subprojects (10 ha) in Bayankhoshuu and Selbe subcenters, phases
2–3 will have 8 subprojects (40 ha), and phases 4–5 will have 10 subprojects (50 ha). Each
subproject should be completed within 5 years.21 Phases 2–5 will identify and prepare a batch of
subprojects to be appraised based on eligibility and selection criteria, including financial and
physical parameters, formulated from the feasibility study of the two core subprojects.22 A detailed
infrastructure and architectural design produced for each subproject will ensure (i) adequate ratio
for social (15%), affordable (55%), and market rate (30%) housing units; (ii) balance between
public space and amenities, commercial areas, and residential units; and (iii) financial viability
and rentability to allow private sector participation. The redevelopment process and housing
construction will be undertaken onsite, and will be demand-driven.

10.      Sector lending with financial intermediation loan component modality. The sector
lending modality was deemed the most appropriate modality to achieve the project objectives
because (i) a large number of subprojects in the sector are to be financed; (ii) the government
and MUB have sector development plans (SDPs) to ensure the priority development needs of the
cross sectoral policy improvement plan are met, and to guide project implementation; (iii) sector
and institutional capacity analyses23 have shown that the government and MUB have adequate
institutional capacity to implement the SDPs and the project; and (iv) policies applicable to the
sector are deemed appropriate and will be improved, if warranted (paras. 5–6). The project will
support the government and MUB in translating their SDPs into implementable investments, and
coordinated policies, actions, and institutional improvement.24

11.     Financial and institutional arrangements will facilitate the application of a blended finance
strategy using the FIL modality. The FIL modality will leverage private resources through the
EDAF to be established and managed by the Asset Management Company of DBM (AMC-DBM)
on behalf of the Ministry of Finance.25 The EDAF will be established as a private investment fund
structured as a revolving fund, and will be used to onlend a portion of the GCF loan to participating
commercial banks. Based on eligibility and selection criteria, commercial banks will use the GCF
loan proceeds to support housing supply and demand: (i) for supply, the EDAF will provide
medium-term loans to selected private developers, which will be combined with the developers’
equities and additional loans by DBM and participating commercial banks to implement output 2;
and (ii) for demand, the loan proceeds will be converted into low-cost long-term mortgages to
home buyers for purchases of the affordable housing and market rate housing units.

D.         Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan

12.        The project is estimated to cost $570.1 million. The investment component of the project

21
     The phased approach will allow project parameters to be adjusted based on socioeconomic changes.
22 Subproject eligibility and selection criteria are in para. 30 of the Project Administration Manual (PAM) (accessible

     from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
23 Financial Management Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
24 The SDPs are in the Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services (accessible

     from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2) and the sector reform plan is in the section I.G of the PAM.
25 The     EDAF establishment requirements are in Schedule 5 of the Loan Agreement: Ordinary Operations
     (Concessional) (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). Based on Government Resolution 135
     and DBM Board of Directors Resolution 66 dated 23 August 2017, DBM established AMC-DBM and acquired a
     special license for investment management services. In accordance with Financial Regulatory Commission
     Resolution 241 dated 15 December 2017, AMC-DBM received the right to establish and manage investment funds.
                                                                                                                      5


comprises outputs 1 and 3 and will cost $157.0 million (Table 1). Output 2, which will be delivered
through an FIL component, will require an estimated $413.1 million. Detailed cost estimates by
expenditure and by financier are included in the project administration manual (PAM). 26 The
investment component will support civil works, with necessary equipment, design and
construction supervision; and project management, including safeguards and due diligence.

                                    Table 1: Summary Investment Plan
                                                ($ million)
 Item                                                                                                           Amounta
 A. Base Costs     b

     1.      Output 1: Resilient urban infrastructure, public facilities, and social housing units in ger areas    93.5
             constructed (public sector component)
     2.      Output 3: Sector policy reforms implemented and capacity strengthened                                 33.6
                     Subtotal (A)                                                                                 127.1
 B. Contingenciesc                                                                                                 23.4
 C. Financial Charges During Implementationd                                                                        6.5
                              Total (A+B+C)                                                                       157.0
 a  Includes taxes and duties of $13.16 million. Such amount does not represent an excessive share of the project cost.
    Taxes and duties will be financed by the government through exemptions, or the MUB will provide funds to pay
    such taxes and duties, in accordance with relevant laws and regulations.
 b
    In mid-2017 prices as of April 2018.
 c
    Physical contingencies were computed at 10% for civil works. Price contingencies were computed at average of
    1.5% on foreign exchange costs, and 7% on local currency costs, and include provisions for potential exchange
    rate fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
 d
    Includes service fees, and interest and commitment charges. Interest during construction has been computed (i) at
    2% per annum for the concessional ordinary capital resources loan, and (ii) at the 5-year US dollar fixed swap rate
    plus an effective contractual spread of 0.5%, a maturity premium of 0.1%, and a commitment charge of 0.15% per
    year (the interest and commitment charges during construction to be capitalized in the loan) for the ordinary capital
    resources loan. The financing charges for the Green Climate Fund loan used a service fee of 0.25% per annum
    and a commitment fee of 0.50% of the undisbursed portion of the loan.
 Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

13.      The summary financing plan is in Table 2. For the investment loan component, the
government has requested (i) a concessional loan of $20 million; and (ii) a regular loan of $60
million, both from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, to help finance the project. The concessional
loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period of 5 years, an interest rate of 2.0% per
year during the grace period and thereafter, and such other terms and conditions set forth in the
draft loan and project agreements. The regular loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace
period of 5 years, an annual interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s London interbank
offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility, and such other terms and conditions to be set forth in
the loan and project agreements. Based on the straight line repayment method, the average
maturity is 15.25 years. The government will relend the proceeds of the ADB loans to MUB on
terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB, which will be combined with a $35 million MUB
counterpart fund to finance output 1 and a portion of output 3, i.e., project management support
and detailed design. MUB will finance 35.5% of taxes and duties through exemptions, or will
provide funds to pay such taxes and duties in accordance with relevant laws and regulations.
HLTF will provide a $3 million grant to finance a smart renewable energy and building
performance control and monitoring system. The GCF will provide grant cofinancing equivalent
to $50 million and loan cofinancing equivalent to $95 million, to be administered by ADB as an
accredited entity. The GCF loan will have a 40-year term, including a 10-year grace period, annual
principal repayments from year 11 to year 20 equivalent to 2% of the initial principal, and from
year 21 to year 40 equivalent to 4%, and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft
GCF loan agreement. The interest and commitment charges during implementation will be

26 PAM (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
 6


 capitalized as part of the GCF loan. Under output 1, about $19.3 million of GCF loan will be relent
 to MUB and about $12.1 million GCF grant will be passed on to MUB to finance climate change
 mitigation investments (such as solar panels). Under output 3, $7.6 million of the GCF grant will
 be passed on to MUB and DBM to finance consulting services.

                                        Table 2: Summary Financing Plan
  Source                                                            Amount ($ million)      Share of Total (%)
   A. Investment Project Components
       1. Asian Development Bank
          Concessional ordinary capital resources (loan)                    20.0                  12.7
          Ordinary capital resources (loan)                                 60.0                  38.2
               Subtotal (1)                                                 80.0                  50.9
       2. Green Climate Fund (grant)a                                       19.7                  12.6
       3. Green Climate Fund (loan)a                                        19.3                  12.3
       4. High-Level Technology Fund (grant)b                                3.0                   1.9
       5. Municipality of Ulaanbaatar                                       35.0                  22.3
          Subtotal (A)                                                     157.0                 100.0
   B. Financial Intermediation Loan Component
       1. Green Climate Fund (grant)a                                       30.3                   7.3
       2. Green Climate Fund (loan)a                                        75.7                  18.3
       3. Development Bank of Mongolia/commercial banks                    111.4                  27.0
       4. Developers                                                       131.8                  31.9
       5. Beneficiaries                                                     63.9                  15.5
          Subtotal (B)                                                     413.1                 100.0
                   Total (A and B)                                         570.1
a
    Administered by the Asian Development Bank.
b
    Financing partner: the Government of Japan. Administered by the Asian Development Bank.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

 14.      For the FIL component, the government will invest about $75.7 million of the GCF loan
 proceeds into the EDAF to finance output 2. AMC-DBM will manage the EDAF, which will serve
 as the apex financial institution for the project funds to be channeled to financial intermediaries.27
 It is estimated that GCF loan proceeds, reforms in green finance under the project, will lead to
 DBM and other participating commercial banks to contribute $111.4 million, developers to finance
 $131.8 million in the form of equity participation, and beneficiaries to contribute $63.9 million from
 their own resources. Moreover, about $30.3 million of the GCF grant will be passed on to MUB to
 provide performance-based grants through a green building facility to qualified private developers
 for climate change mitigation and adaptation features. Climate mitigation is estimated to cost
 $81.7 million and climate adaptation is estimated to cost $146.6 million. ADB will finance 30.6%
 of mitigation costs and 37.5% of adaptation costs. Details are in the PAM.

 E.        Implementation Arrangements

 15.   The implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in
 the PAM (footnote 26).

                                    Table 3: Implementation Arrangements
  Aspects                           Arrangements
  Implementation period             September 2018–December 2026
  Estimated completion date         31 December 2026
  Estimated loans and grants        30 June 2027
  closing date
  Management

 27 Apex mechanisms usually involve financial institutions through which donor-funded FILs are channeled to a second

     layer of financial intermediaries, which will in turn onlend such loan proceeds to the subborrowers.
                                                                                                                     7


 Aspects                           Arrangements
 (i) Oversight body                A project steering committee headed by the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB), will
                                   comprise government officials from the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
                                   Environment and Tourism, MUB relevant departments and agencies, Ministry of
                                   Construction and Urban Development, Development Bank of Mongolia (DBM), and
                                   the Capital City Housing Corporation, will be established to oversee project
                                   implementation and provide strategic and policy guidance.
 (ii) Executing agency             MUB
 (iii) Key implementing agency DBM
 (iv) Implementation units         MUB project management office under the mayor of Ulaanbaatar for the public
                                   sector component and project implementation unit under the Asset Management
                                   Company of the DBM (AMC-DBM) for the financial intermediation loan component.
 Procurement                       For the financial intermediation loan component, developers will undertake
                                   procurement of goods and civil works in accordance with commercial practices
                                   acceptable to the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
                                   International competitive bidding (including             8 contracts $40.49 million
                                   procurement in loans to financial
                                   intermediaries for works/commercial practice)
                                   National competitive bidding                             5 contracts $6.54 million
                                   Community procurement package                            8 contracts $0.20 million
 Consulting services               Quality- and cost-based selection              1,350 person-months $12.53 million
                                   Quality-based selection                           42 person-months $0.20 million
 Advance contractinga              Advance contracting for recruitment of consulting services has been requested by
                                   MUB. MUB has been informed that ADB’s support for advance contracting does
                                   not commit ADB to approve the loan project or to finance the recruitment costs.
 Disbursement                      The loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed following ADB's Loan Disbursement
                                   Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements
                                   agreed between the government and ADB.
a Subject to the ratification of amendment of the National Procurement Law, prior to loan effectiveness.

Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                            III.     DUE DILIGENCE

A.       Technical

16.    This includes comparative analyses, technical specifications, sustainability, design
methods, standards, and cost estimates specific to ger areas and cold climate, and in line with
national standards. The specifications applied to eco-district design will match the principles of
energy and resource conservation and promotion of renewable energy best practices.

B.       Economic and Financial

17.     The project is economically viable. The resulting base-case economic internal rates of
return of the core subprojects are 11.26% to 15.53%, exceeding the ADB prescribed minimum
discount rate of 9%, confirming they are economically robust, with anticipated economic and
health benefits arising from reduced environmental pollution that exceed the estimated economic
costs. Sensitivity analysis showed that the subprojects will remain economically viable under
various scenarios. A financial analysis was carried out to assess the viability of the revenue-
generating core subprojects to be financed using the GCF grant and loan proceeds under
output 2. The financial analysis was undertaken from the developer’s perspective. Financial
revenues were derived from the sale of affordable housing and market rate housing units, as well
as the sale of parking spaces and commercial lots for shops and offices. Base case financial
internal rates of return for the Bayankhoshuu core subproject is 20.75%, and for the Selbe core
subproject is 21.61%, exceeding the estimated weighted average cost of capital of 5.49%.
Sensitivity analysis showed that the core subprojects were vulnerable to decreases in revenues.
Under output 1, a financial sustainability analysis of MUB was conducted in lieu of estimating the
8


core subprojects’ financial rates of return. It confirmed MUB has the capacity to absorb the debt
servicing and operation and maintenance requirements of the core subprojects. Financial due
diligence for the FIL component was carried out on XacBank as a sample representative bank in
Mongolia. XacBank qualifies as a participating bank and meets ADB’s performance standards in
terms of capital adequacy, asset quality, management, earnings, and liquidity. The bank was
deemed financially viable and capable of meeting financial obligations, including debt service
payments. A debt sustainability assessment was conducted and the bank’s financial standing was
assessed to be sufficiently robust to absorb the related credit risks of the subprojects as well as
the interest rate and exchange rate risks. The integrity due diligence carried out on XacBank
showed that there are no significant integrity risks.

C.      Governance

18.      ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed
with the government, MUB, and DBM. The specific policy requirements are described in the PAM.
The financial management risk of MUB is moderate as it has established a fully functional project
management office that is currently implementing ongoing ADB projects (footnote 13). Also, MUB
developed and made operational a financial management system that incorporates ADB’s loan
and grant disbursement policies and procedures. Refinements to the system to accommodate
changes will be provided by the project capacity development support. The financial management
assessment on AMC-DBM indicated two significant risks and corresponding mitigating measures:
(i) as a newly established entity, AMC-DBM may lack the capability to manage the EDAF outright,
and DBM has provided assurance that it will assign or engage qualified and experienced staff to
AMC-DBM; and (ii) because AMC-DBM lacks prior experience in managing ADB disbursements
and is not familiar with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to
time), AMC-DBM has committed to undertake the needed staff training to comply with ADB’s loan
disbursement policies and procedures. Capacity building support, incorporating relevant financial
management training, will complement AMC-DBM’s planned risk mitigating measures. All
procurement financed by ADB will be carried out in accordance with ADB’s Procurement
Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time) and Guidelines on the Use of Consultants (2013,
as amended from time to time).28

D.      Poverty, Social, and Gender

19.      The project’s direct beneficiaries include 10,000 households who will have access to
housing units and a total of about 17,000 households that will benefit from both living and working
in 100 ha of ger areas developed into eco-districts. A total of 229 households, living within the
perimeter of the core subprojects located in Bayankhoshuu and Selbe subcenters, will benefit
from onsite redevelopment through the voluntary land swapping mechanism, and about
2,000 households will benefit from living and working in fully developed eco-districts. To ensure
full realization of the benefits, the community participation plan (CPP) and social and gender
action plan (SGAP) include a public awareness component, an education program, consultations,
and participation activities.29 The CPP and SGAP will ensure continued consultation with and
participation of the local communities and guide the community mobilization and consultation
processes throughout implementation.



28
   Universal procurement will apply per ADB. 2013. Blanket Waiver of Member Country Procurement Eligibility
   Restrictions in Cases of Cofinancing for Operations Financed from Asian Development Fund Resources. Manila.
29 The CPP is in section XI of the Voluntary Land Swapping Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in

   Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                       9


20.       The project is categorized effective gender mainstreaming. The SGAP presents specific
effective gender mainstreaming measures and outlines the strategies to address key gender
concerns with respect to access to services and livelihood opportunities to be provided by the
project, and to ensure that project components will be gender-responsive, appropriate, and
affordable to its target users, especially vulnerable households. The CPP and SGAP also include
measures to (i) facilitate and support the affected communities to avoid any loss of livelihood and
business; (ii) support vulnerable households that lack the financial means to afford better houses
through skills training and linkages with job opportunities, training, and financial institutions;
(iii) identify and integrate beneficiary community needs in project design documents; (iv) sustain
awareness and support for the project by different stakeholders; (v) mobilize and organize
beneficiary community members to support the development and implementation of houses and
infrastructure; and (vi) facilitate effective monitoring and evaluation of the different aspects of
these components. Consulting services—185 person-months of inputs (45 international and
140 national)—will be provided to support MUB in establishing the mechanisms, and
implementing and monitoring the CPP and SGAP.

E.       Safeguards

21.    In compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the project’s safeguard
categories are as follows.30

22.      Environment (category B). An initial environmental examination, environmental
management plan, and environmental assessment and review framework were prepared in
compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement.31 The anticipated environmental impacts
during construction include dust and noise, temporary traffic disturbance, and risks to community
and workers’ health and safety. The demolition of ger houses will not produce toxic waste as ger
houses are not made from toxic materials. Demolished housing materials will be disposed at
landfill sites approved by MUB. Affected plot owners and local communities were consulted on
any issues or concerns they have with the project. Mitigation measures defined in the
environmental management plan, such as construction site management and regular monitoring
of the environmental performance during construction and operation, will minimize the anticipated
impacts and construction-related health and safety concerns. Ensuing subprojects with similar
components are expected to be category B for environment as no category A subproject will be
financed under the project. The carbon emission reduction estimated for the project is 200,000
tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year, equal to 8 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent
during the project lifetime (40 years). The project will also contribute to black carbon reduction of
about 83 tons per year.32

23.      Involuntary resettlement (category B). For output 1, a resettlement framework has been
prepared in accordance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement for areas outside the project eco-
districts’ perimeters where involuntary resettlement impacts are expected. The resettlement
framework will serve as a guide for screening project for involuntary resettlement impacts, and for
preparation and implementation of land acquisition and resettlement plans. Infrastructure
construction impacts outside the perimeters of the eco-districts—such as widening of roads and
construction of utilities to connect the eco-districts with main trunk infrastructure— will be avoided
or mitigated to the extent possible. The selection criteria for the redevelopment blocks include

30 ADB. Safeguard Categories.
31
   Initial Environmental Examination, and Environmental Assessment and Review Framework (accessible from the list
   of linked documents in Appendix 2).
32 In line with the Climate and Clean Air Coalition objectives. Black carbon particles are components of fine particulate

   matter formed by the incomplete combustion of biomass or fossil fuels.
10


proximity to the main trunk infrastructure, so that connections can be provided with a minimum of
involuntary resettlement impacts. Activities with category A involuntary resettlement impacts will
be excluded.

24.      Voluntary land swapping. The project will implement a demand-driven approach within
the perimeters of the project eco-districts, based on a voluntary land swapping mechanism,
supported by voluntary land swapping plans (VLSPs).33 The proposed resettlement is voluntary
in nature as households will be provided with an option to participate or not.34 Each VLSP will
cover landowners and non-landowners, with provisions for poor and vulnerable households as
well as for affected persons under ADB’s Ulaanbaatar Urban Services and Ger Areas
Development Investment Program (footnote 13).35 Depending on the socioeconomic situation of
each household, an affordable housing solution will be proposed through a land and asset swap
agreement, a rent-to-own scheme, or an affordable rental scheme.36 Meaningful consultations are
incorporated in the three stages of project cycle (identification, feasibility, and detailed design) to
ensure that potential beneficiaries are fully informed about the project and its implications, and to
build a consensus among households living on a plot of land regarding whether or not to
participate in the project. Such consultations will also help to address concerns of potential
beneficiaries, and any adverse impacts.37 If households on a plot decide not to participate after
undertaking consultations, the proposed eco-district will be redesigned to avoid the non-
participating plot.38 Notwithstanding that the proposed resettlement for the project eco-districts is
voluntary, the VLSPs will be prepared and implemented to avoid or minimize impacts during the
transition period, and improve the standard of living of the potential beneficiaries, especially the
poor and other vulnerable households.

25.      A VLSP has been prepared for two core subprojects (Selbe and Bayankhoshuu). The
potential beneficiaries of the two core subprojects include 78 landowners and 52 non-landowners
in Selbe and 64 landowners and 35 non-landowners in Bayankhoshuu.39 The VLSP specifies the
(i) principles of and procedures for voluntary land and/or asset swapping, based on transparency,
consistency, and fairness; 40 (ii) meaningful consultation and participation during identification,
feasibility study, detailed design, and implementation to ensure that participation of landowners

33 The VLSP has been designed to maximize the project benefits to the local population by promoting an “in-situ”

   mechanism that preserves the fabric of communities and improves the quality of housing and urban infrastructure at
   an affordable cost.
34 Specifically, a plot of land within the perimeter of an eco-district will be included in an eco-district redevelopment only

   if the residents of the plot (including owners and non-owners of the plot) are willing to participate.
35
   Affected people under other ADB projects implemented in ger areas, including ADB’s ongoing Ulaanbaatar Urban
   Services and Ger Areas Development Investment Program, will have priority access to affordable housing with
   subsidized mortgages, or rent and rent-to-own housing.
36
   For non-landowners or renters, priority access will be given to rental or social housing based on rent-to-own or rental
   schemes, depending on their income. For poor households (belonging to the income decile categories from 1 to 3),
   the monthly housing costs (including rent and utility fees) will not exceed 25% of the monthly income of one
   household. For the most vulnerable households, specific measures will be taken to ensure that they will not pay more
   than they currently do for their rent and/or utilities services. Additionally, targeted employment and training program
   will be implemented for poor households.
37 Potential coercive practices are mitigated by the consultation process; verification by an independent external

   monitor; and a grievance redress mechanism with documentation of consultation meetings, grievances, and actions
   taken to address such grievances.
38 The location, design, and shape of an eco-district is not predetermined. It will be developed and adapted based on

   the willingness of households living on a plot to participate and can change until finalization of the detailed design.
39
   Based on the sample socioeconomic survey in Table 37 in the VLSP, it is estimated that there are 69 poor and
   vulnerable households. The numbers will be verified during detailed design.
40 A written record of consultations and willingness to participate surveys undertaken during the identification and

   feasibility study are presented in the VLSP.
                                                                                                                    11


and non-landowners is based on an informed decision that is free of intimidation or coercion;
(iii) land and asset valuation methodology, which is based on replacement cost;41 (iv) support to
potential beneficiaries, especially the poor and vulnerable households, through access to social
housing, cash grants, and livelihood improvement programs; (v) written record of ownership of
the apartment unit for landowners as well as other housing arrangements (including social
housing) for non-landowners; (vi) establishment of a grievance redress mechanism that requires
proper documentation of grievances, and actions taken to address such grievances; (vii) budget
requirements and availability of funds for community engagement, green economy and business
opportunity development, provision of a training and capacity building program for livelihood
improvement, consulting services, management and administration costs, and external
monitoring; (viii) institutional arrangements and support from project implementation consultants,
with clear roles and responsibilities; (ix) setting up of internal monitoring; and (x) engagement of
an external monitor to validate the process and procedures set out in the VLSP, specifically the
validation of the negotiation process. VLSP implementation will be closely monitored and
supervised by ADB. The VLSP for the two core subprojects has been reviewed and cleared by
ADB, and disclosed to potential beneficiaries (on 27 May 2018, with a revised version disclosed
on 5 July 2018).42 Eco-district development for subsequent subprojects will have similar VLSPs.

26.    Indigenous peoples (category C). No specific community of ethnic minority or ethnic
group has been identified and no adverse impact is expected.

27.    Financial intermediaries (category B). An environmental and social management
system (ESMS) will be adopted. For core subprojects, an ESMS arrangement was prepared and,
based on a due diligence of XacBank, it was found that XacBank has adequate institutional
capacity to implement ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement procedural and substantive
requirements contained in the ESMS. An ESMS will be developed by each participating
commercial bank prior to loan disbursement. Financial intermediaries will ensure that there will
be no subproject classified as category A for involuntary resettlement and the environment. A
subproject under the voluntary land swapping agreement shall be considered for financing,
provided that a VLSP has been prepared for the subproject, disclosed to the beneficiaries, and
cleared by ADB.

F.       Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan

28.      Significant risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 4 and described in
detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.43

                         Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
Risks                                                             Mitigation Measures
Lack of availability of loans from   Due diligence and consultations will be carried with respect to banking and
commercial banks, and equity         private sector capacity and interest at the beginning of each implementation
contribution by the developers       phase. Eco-district designs and sizes can be modified to adjust to economic
                                                          ,

41
   For landowners, a written record of land swap agreements will be prepared during the detailed design of each
   subproject (i.e., each eco-district development block), and after the valuations of the land and other immovable
   properties have been agreed upon and finalized. Beneficiaries who will not enter into such land swap agreements
   are eligible for access to subsidized social housing, cash grants, and livelihood improvement programs. Written
   records of housing arrangement agreements (rent or rent-to-own schemes under social housing) will be prepared.
42
   For site selection, the VLSP should demonstrate that less than 15% of households over a minimum of 4 ha area are
   unwilling to participate. For eco-district implementation, the VLSP should demonstrate that 100% of households over
   a minimum of 3 ha area are willing to participate. These two conditions have been met by the core subprojects.
43 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
12


Risks                                                                 Mitigation Measures
                                    and financial challenges, and to ensure the eco-districts’ financial feasibility.
Financial sustainability adversely  Consultants will provide training and capacity development on sustainable O&M
affected by lack of financial       of the new facilities, tariff setting, and financial management. While tariffs will be
management skills and insufficient adjusted over time to cover O&M costs, the government will cover any funding
utility tariff adjustments          gap if tariff revenues are insufficient.
Unclear and tedious screening       Well-defined parameters based on income, property, taxes, and addresses will
and selection parameters of         be further developed during implementation and will be enforced at the
beneficiaries                       commercial bank level through the capacity building and auditing process.
Voluntary land swapping             Bidding documents for developers will reflect detailed design parameters and
agreements and detailed design by specifications prepared by the PMO for each eco-district. Penalties will apply if
selected private firms not enforced the bidding document detailed design specifications are not followed.
 O&M = operation and maintenance, PMO = project management office.
 Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                 IV.      ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS

29.     The government, MUB, and DBM have assured ADB that implementation of the project
shall conform to all applicable ADB policies, including those concerning anticorruption measures,
safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement as described in detail
in the PAM and loan documents. The government, MUB, and DBM have agreed with ADB on
certain covenants for the project, which are set forth in the draft loan, grant, and project
agreements.44

                                          V.       RECOMMENDATION

30.    I am satisfied that the proposed loans would comply with the Articles of Agreement of the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve
       (i)    the loan of $60,000,000 to Mongolia for the Ulaanbaatar Green Affordable Housing
              and Resilient Urban Renewal Sector Project, from ADB’s ordinary capital
              resources, in regular terms, with interest to be determined in accordance with
              ADB’s London interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility; for a term of
              25 years, including a grace period of 5 years; and such other terms and conditions
              as are substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft loan and project
              agreements presented to the Board; and
       (ii)   the loan of $20,000,000 to Mongolia for the Ulaanbaatar Green Affordable Housing
              and Resilient Urban Renewal Sector Project, from ADB’s ordinary capital
              resources, in concessional terms, with an interest charge at the rate of 2% per year
              for a term of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years; and such other terms
              and conditions as are substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft
              loan and project agreements presented to the Board.

                                                                                   Takehiko Nakao
                                                                                   President
3 August 2018

44 Nonstandard   disbursement conditions include (i) delivery of executed subsidiary loan agreement between the
  Ministry of Finance and MUB; (ii) EDAF lending policies and guidelines acceptable to ADB; (iii) an ESMS established
  by each qualified commercial bank acceptable to ADB; and (iv) templates acceptable to ADB for (a) participation
  agreement between AMC-DBM and a qualified commercial bank; (b) sub-loan agreement between a qualified
  commercial bank and qualified developer; (c) mortgage agreement for affordable housing units between a qualified
  commercial bank and a qualified homebuyer; (d) legal agreement among MUB, DBM-AMC, and a qualified developer
  setting out affordability parameters; (e) land and asset swap agreement; (f) housing arrangement agreement, and
  (g) procurement template for the selection and supervision of qualified developers.
                                                                                                  Appendix 1        13


                              DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK

Impacts the Project is Aligned with
Living conditions in Mongolia improved (Mongolia Sustainable Development Vision 2030)a
Ulaanbaatar is a safe, healthy, and green city that is resilient to climate change, and provides a livable environment
for its residents (Priorities 1 and 2 of Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban Development Master Plan 2020 and
Development Directions 2030)b
                             Performance Indicators with Targets and                Data Sources and
Results Chain                                   Baselines                        Reporting Mechanisms           Risks
Outcome                By 2028:
Access to low-         a. At least 7,000 households, of which 30% are            a.     MUB annual report Continued
carbon and                   headed by women, relocated into, or have                   on urban             tight fiscal
climate-resilient            ownership and/or rental titles for social and              construction and     conditions
eco-districts and            affordable housing units in the 100 ha of eco-             district records     and
green affordable             districts in ger areas (2017 baseline: 0)           b.     MUB and NOSK         changed
housing in             b.     Energy consumption per housing unit built in              annual report on     government
Ulaanbaatar ger              targeted areas reduced to 150 kWh/m2/year                  urban construction priorities
areas increased              (2017 baseline: 395 kWh/m2/year)                           and social housing shift
                       c.    200,000 tons of carbon dioxide emission per         c.–d. MUB record on         resources
                             year avoided (2017 baseline: 0)                            urban construction, away from
                       d.     6,000 person-months per year of employment                and eco-districts’   affordable
                             opportunities for operation and maintenance of             records on           housing
                             facilities and infrastructure created, of which 40%        business and         programs.
                             are filled by women (2017 baseline: 0)                     employment
Outputs                By 2026:
1. Resilient urban 1a. 1,500 social housing units constructed (2017              1a.–g. MUB and eco-         Changed
   infrastructure,           baseline: 0)                                               districts’ annual    government
   public facilities, 1b. 13.7 km of road, 5.5 km of water supply pipes,                report on urban      and/or MUB
   and social                6.1 km of sewerage network, 5.5 km of district             construction         leadership
   housing units in          heating pipes, and 450 low-consumption street                                   leads to
   ger areas                 lights constructed (2017 baselines: 0)                                          lower
   constructed         1c. 15 ha of public space and green areas, and                                        support for
   (public sector            36,000 m2 of public facilities constructed (2017                                the project.
   component)                baselines: 0)
                       1d. 72,000 m2 of photovoltaic solar panels installed                                  Rising world
                             (2017 baseline: 0)                                                              prices of
                       1e. 100% of constructed buildings equipped with                                       energy and
                             energy-efficient insulation, utility metering, and                              construction
                             heating regulation systems (2017 baseline: 0)                                   materials
                       1f. 2,000 m2 of greenhouses in targeted areas built                                   significantly
                             (2017 baseline: 0)                                                              increase the
                       1g. Smart monitoring system and sensors for building                                  project’s
                             performance and renewable energy control                                        investment
                             installed, including energy storage pilot of 0.5-                               and
                             megawatt capacity (2017 baseline: 0)                                            operation
                       1h. 100,000 person-months of employment                   1h. Contractors annual and
                             opportunities during project construction created,         employment           maintenance
                             of which 30% are filled by women (2017                     records              costs.
                             baseline: 0)
2. Long-term           By 2026:
   financing to        2a. At least 20 developer subloans approved and           2a. EDAF and
   developers for            released by EDAF (2017 baseline: 0)                        commercial banks’
   low-carbon                These subloans will produce:                               financial records
   affordable                (i) 5,500 affordable housing and 3,000 market-      2a.(i)–(iv) MUB and eco-
   housing,                        rate housing units built (2017 baseline: 0)          districts’ annual
   market-rate               (ii) 204,000 m2 of commercial facilities, shops,           report on business
   housing, and                    and parking; and 22 km of pedestrian and             development and
   economic                        bike lanes built (2017 baseline: 0)                  urban construction
   facilities in ger         (iii) 79,000 m2 of greenhouses installed (2017
   areas and to                    baseline: 0)
   households                (iv) 100% of constructed buildings equipped with
14     Appendix 1


                         Performance Indicators with Targets and                    Data Sources and
Results Chain                               Baselines                             Reporting Mechanisms          Risks
  for green                    energy efficient insulation, utility metering,
  mortgages                    and heating regulation systems (2017
  increased                    baseline: 0)
  (financial        2b. At least 5,500 green mortgages approved and               2b.      Commercial
  intermediation          released, with at least 30% of households                        banks’ mortgage
  loan                    headed by women provided with access to                          records
  component)              affordable housing units (2017 baseline: 0)
                    2c. At least 40% of businesses located in the                 2c–2d. MUB and eco-
                          commercial facilities in the eco-districts are led             districts’ annual
                          by women                                                       report on
                    2d. 200,000 person-months of employment                              business
                          opportunities during project construction created,             development and
                          of which 30% are filled by women (2017                         urban
                          baseline: 0)                                                   construction
3. Sector policy    Project implementation and management
   reforms          3.1a. By 2019, gender-disaggregated project                   3.1a.   PMO monitoring
   implemented            performance and management system                               report
   and capacity           established (2017 baseline: 0)
   strengthened     Eco-district feasibility and development
                    3.2a. By 2020, green building and eco-district norms          3.2a.–d. Policy and
                          and standards are in place (2017 baseline: 0)                    regulation orders
                    3.2b. By 2021, regulations for grid-connected                          from related
                          electricity generation from small-scale renewable                agency or
                          sources are in place (2017 baseline: 0)                          ministry (Ministry
                    3.2c. By 2020, regulation to enable viability gap                      of Construction
                          funding of subprojects through eco-district utilities            and Urban
                          tariff cross-subsidy mechanism approved                          Development,
                    3.2d. By 2026, 40% of the overall jobs created within                  Ministry of
                          the perimeter of each eco-district benefit local                 Energy, Energy
                          communities, at least 40% of job-holders are                     Regulation
                          women, and 15% vulnerable people (2017                           Commission,
                          baseline: 0)                                                     MUB)
                    Sustainable green housing finance
                    3.3a. By 2020, the EDAF is established and structured         3.3a.    Policy and
                          in accordance with the applicable Mongolian law                  regulation orders
                          and requirements (2017 baseline: 0)                              from the MOF
                                                                                           and the Financial
                                                                                           Regulation
                                                                                           Commission
Key Activities with Milestones
1: Resilient urban infrastructure, public facilities, and social housing units in ger areas constructed (public
sector component)
2: Long-term financing to developers for low-carbon affordable housing, market rate housing, and economic
facilities in ger areas and to households for green mortgages increased (financial intermediation loan
component)
Phase 1 (10 ha, 2 core subprojects)
1.1a Complete infrastructure and architectural detailed design (2019–2020)
1.1b Update and implement the VLSP (2019–2024)
1.1c Procure goods and works (2020–2021)
1.1d Construct and commission infrastructure, social housing units, social facilities, and public space (2020–2022)
2.1a Shortlist commercial banks (2020)
2.1b Select developers (2020)
2.1c Construct and commission affordable housing and market housing units, and commercial areas (2021–2024)
2.1d Sell housing units and approve subloan mortgages (2021–2025)
Phases 2 and 3 (40 ha, 8 subprojects)
1.2a Identify and formulate eco-district feasibility studies (2019–2020)
1.2b Complete infrastructure and architectural detailed design (2020–2021)
1.2c Prepare, complete, and implement the VLSP or land acquisition (2019–2025)
1.2d Procure goods and works (2021–2022)
1.2e Construct and commission infrastructure, social housing units, social facilities, and public space (2021–2023)
                                                                                               Appendix 1        15


  Key Activities with Milestones
  2.2a Shortlist commercial banks (2020–2021)
  2.2b Select developers (2021)
  2.2c Construct and commission affordable housing and market housing units, and commercial areas (2021–2025)
  2.2d Sell housing units and approve subloan mortgages (2021–2026)
  Phases 4 and 5 (50 ha, 10 subprojects)
  1.3a Identify and formulate eco-district feasibility studies (2020–2021)
  1.3b Complete infrastructure and architectural detailed design (2021–2022)
  1.3c Prepare, complete, and implement the VLSP or land acquisition (2020–2026)
  1.3d Procure goods and works (2021–2023)
  1.3e Construct and commission infrastructure, social housing units, social facilities, and public space (2022–2024)
  2.3a Shortlist commercial banks (2021–2022)
  2.3b Select developers (2022)
  2.3c Construct and commission affordable housing and market housing units, and commercial areas (2022–2026)
  2.3d Sell housing units and approve subloan mortgages (2022–2026)
  3: Sector policy reforms implemented and capacity strengthened
  3.1 Project implementation and management
  3.1a Recruit and train PMO staff (2018)
  3.1b Hire project implementation and management support consulting services (2018)
  3.1c Train and increase capacity of PMO staff and targeted institutions (2019–2023)
  3.1d Prepare, implement, supervise, and monitor VLSP activities (2019–2026)
  3.2 Eco-district feasibility, development, and policy reforms
  3.2a Hire eco-district feasibility, development, and policy reform consulting services (2018)
  3.2b Implement eco-district planning, green building standard, social and affordable housing, and develop guidelines
        and regulations (2019–2020)
  3.2c Complete feasibility study for the five phases of implementation (2019–2021)
  3.2d Implement policy and sector reforms related to climate change adaptation and mitigation, and improved supply
        and access to green social and affordable housing (2019–2022)
  3.3 Detailed design and supervision
  3.3a Hire detailed design and supervision consulting services (2018)
  3.3b Complete detailed design and final voluntary land swapping agreement for each phase: phase 1 (2020), phases
        2 and 3 (2021), and phases 4 and 5 (2022)
  3.3c Supervise construction for each phase: phase 1 (2024), phases 2 and 3 (2025), and phases 4 and 5 (2026)
  3.4. Sustainable green finance
  3.4a Hire sustainable green finance consulting services (2018)
  3.4b Develop standard, guidelines, and regulations for the use of the EDAF (2019–2020)
  3.4c Implement policy and sector reforms related to green finance (2019–2021)
  Inputs
  Asian Development Bank (ordinary capital resources concessional loan): $20.0 million
  Asian Development Bank (ordinary capital resources regular loan): $60.0 million
  Green Climate Fund: $50.0 million (grant)
  Green Climate Fund: $95.0 million (loan)
  High-Level Technology Fund: $3.0 million (grant)
  Municipality of Ulaanbaatar: $35.0 million
  Development Bank of Mongolia/commercial banks: $111.4 million
  Developers: $131.8 million
  Beneficiaries: $63.9 million
  Assumptions for Partner Financing
  Not applicable
EDAF = eco-district and affordable housing fund, ha = hectare, km = kilometer, kWh/m2/year = kilowatt hour per square
meter per year, m2 = square meter, MUB = Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, NOSK = Capital City Housing Corporation, PMO
= project management office, VLSP = voluntary land swapping plan.
a State Great Khural. 2016. Mongolia Sustainable Development Vision 2030. Ulaanbaatar.
b
   State Great Khural. 2013. Priorities 1 and 2 of Adjustments to the Ulaanbaatar City Urban Development Master Plan
   2020 and Development Directions 2030. Ulaanbaatar.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
16    Appendix 2


                              LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS
                   http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=49169-002-3

1.    Loan Agreement: Ordinary Operations
2.    Loan Agreement: Ordinary Operations (Concessional)
3.    Loan Agreement: ADB Green Climate Fund
4.    Grant Agreement: ADB Green Climate Fund
5.    Grant Agreement: High-Level Technology Fund
6.    Project Agreements
7.    Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services
8.    Project Administration Manual
9.    Contribution to the ADB Results Framework
10.   Development Coordination
11.   Climate Change Assessment
12.   Financial Analysis
13.   Economic Analysis
14.   Country Economic Indicators
15.   Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
16.   Social and Gender Action Plan
17.   Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
18.   Initial Environmental Examination
19.   Resettlement Framework
20.   Voluntary Land Swapping Plan
21.   Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan


Supplementary Documents
22.   Safeguards and Social Dimensions Summary
23.   Financial Management Assessments
