pmo


Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________




INTERNAL


Project Number: 49430-005
March 2023




Proposed Multitranche Financing Facility
Mongolia: Aimags and Soums Green Regional
Development Investment Program




Distribution of this document is limited until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, this document will be reclassified as public and disclosed in accordance
with ADB's Access to Information Policy.
                    CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                     (as of 28 February 2023)

              Currency unit          –        togrog (MNT)
                  MNT1.00            =        $0.00028
                     $1.00           =        MNT3,517.00

                        ABBREVIATIONS

ADB             –     Asian Development Bank
ADF             –     Asian Development Fund
AMC             –     Development Bank of Mongolia Asset Management SC LLC
COVID-19        –     coronavirus disease
ESMS            –     environmental and social management system
FAM             –     facility administration manual
FFA             –     framework financing agreement
FIL             –     financial intermediation loan
GCF             –     Green Climate Fund
GIRAF           –     green and inclusive regional agribusiness fund
LARP            –     land acquisition and resettlement plan
LCADP           –     low-carbon and climate-resilient agribusiness development
                      plan
LCLVC           –     low-carbon and climate-resilient livestock and agrobusiness
                      value chain
MCUD            –     Ministry of Construction and Urban Development
MED             –     Ministry of Economy and Development
MFF             –     multitranche financing facility
MOFALI          –     Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry
NMLP            –     National Mongolian Livestock Program
NSO             –     National Statistics Office
O&M             –     operation and maintenance
PIHMP           –     participatory and inclusive herd management plan
PIU             –     project implementation unit
PUG             –     pasture user group
RUA             –     rangeland use agreement
SMEs            –     small and medium-sized enterprises
tCO2e           –     ton of carbon dioxide equivalent

                            GLOSSARY

aimag           –     province
dzud            –     succession of droughts and severe winters
ger             –     yurt or traditional dwelling
soum            –     subunit of an aimag

                               NOTE

         In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars.
Vice-President             Ahmed M. Saeed, Operations 2
Director General           M. Teresa Kho, East Asia Department (EARD)
Director                   Asif Cheema, Urban and Social Sectors Division (EASS), EARD

Team leaders               Arnaud Heckmann, Principal Portfolio Management Specialist, Nepal
                               Resident Mission, South Asia Department
                           Jie Bai, Urban Development Specialist, EASS, EARD
Team members               Tuul Badarch, Senior Project Officer (Infrastructure), Mongolia Resident
                               Mission (MNRM), EARD
                           Ruth Benigno; Project Analyst; Public Management, Financial Sector, and
                               Regional Cooperation Division; EARD
                           Mark R. Bezuijen; Principal Environment Specialist; Environment, Natural
                               Resources and Agriculture Division (EAER); EARD
                           Jinqiang Chen, Urban Development Specialist (Climate Change), EASS,
                               EARD
                           Maria Lorena Cleto, Social Development Specialist (Resettlement), EASS
                           Jubie Leah Mae Coles, Associate Financial Management Officer, Office
                               of the Director General (EAOD), EARD
                           Christian Ellermann, Senior Climate Change Specialist, Climate Change
                               and Disaster Risk Management Division, Sustainable Development
                               and Climate Change Department (SDCC)
                           Enerelt Enkhbold, Senior Investment Officer, MNRM, EARD
                           Abigail Garrovillas, Senior Operations Officer, EAOD, EARD
                           Jan Hinrichs, Senior Natural Resources Economist, EAER, EARD
                           Shinsuke Kawazu, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                           Noellé Dianne Laspiñas, Project Analyst, EASS, EARD
                           Rosemary Ong, Senior Public–Private Partnership Specialist, Advisory
                               Division 2, Office of Public–Private Partnership
                           Viswanathan Ramasubramanian, Senior Safeguards Specialist
                               (Resettlement), EASS, EARD
                           Mark Allister Robis, Senior Financial Management Officer, EAOD, EARD
                           Shotaro Sasaki, Senior Environment Specialist, EASS, EARD
                           Gohar Tadevosyan, Senior Social Development Specialist, EASS, EARD
                           Hiet T.H. Tran; Senior Procurement Specialist; Procurement Division 2;
                               Procurement, Portfolio, and Financial Management Departmenta
                           Rochelle Villanueva, Associate Project Analyst, EASS, EARD
Peer reviewers             Lara Arjan; Urban Development Specialist; Urban Sector Group, Office of
                               the Cluster Head; SDCC
                           Takeshi Ueda; Principal Natural Resources and Agriculture Economist;
                               Environment, Natural Resources and Agriculture Division; Southeast
                               Asia Department
a   Outposted to the Mongolia Resident Mission.




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                      CONTENTS

                                                                    Page
INVESTMENT PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
MAP
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                    1
II.    RATIONALE                                                       1
III.   THE INVESTMENT PROGRAM                                          6
       A.    Impact and Outcome                                        6
       B.    Outputs                                                   6
       C.    Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan                 9
       D.    Implementation Arrangements                              11
IV.    DUE DILIGENCE                                                  12
       A.    Technical                                                12
       B.    Economic and Financial                                   12
       C.    Governance                                               13
       D.    Poverty, Social, and Gender                              14
       E.    Safeguards                                               14
       F.    Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan      16
V.     ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS                                      17
VI.    RECOMMENDATION                                                 17

APPENDIXES
1.     Design and Monitoring Framework for the Investment Program     18
2.     List of Linked Documents                                       23
                                                                                          Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                            INVESTMENT PROGRAM AT A GLANCE

    1. Basic Data                                                                                               Project Number: 49430-005
       Project Name                     Aimags and Soums Green Regional        Department/Division                 EARD/EASS
                                        Development Investment Program
       Country                          Mongolia                               Executing Agency                    Ministry of Economy and
       Borrower                         Mongolia                                                                   Development
       Country Economic                 https://www.adb.org/Documents/Lin
       Indicators                       kedDocs/?id=49430-005-CEI
       Portfolio at a Glance            https://www.adb.org/Documents/Lin
                                        kedDocs/?id=49430-005-PortAtaGl
                                        ance
    2. Sector                           Subsector(s)                                                           ADB Financing ($ million)
       Water and other urban            Other urban services                                                                     50.000
       infrastructure and services      Urban housing                                                                            44.600
                                        Urban policy, institutional and capacity development                                     25.000
                                        Urban slum development                                                                   20.000
                                        Urban solid waste management                                                               6.000
       Agriculture, natural             Agricultural policy, institutional and capacity development                              18.400
       resources and rural              Irrigation                                                                               12.000
       development                      Land-based natural resources management                                                  16.000
                                        Livestock                                                                                16.000
       Energy                           Electricity transmission and distribution                                                14.000
                                        Energy efficiency and conservation                                                       13.000
                                        Energy utility services                                                                  30.000
       Finance                          Finance sector development                                                                 3.000
       Transport                        Urban roads and traffic management                                                         5.000
                                                                                                         Total                  273.000

    3. Operational Priorities                                                  Climate Change Information
       OP1: Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities             GHG reductions (tons per annum)                    3,035,665
       OP2: Accelerating progress in gender equality                           Climate Change impact on the                            High
       OP3: Tackling climate change, building climate and disaster             Project
       resilience, and enhancing environmental sustainability
       OP4: Making cities more livable                                         ADB Financing
       OP5: Promoting rural development and food security                      Adaptation ($ million)                                24.000
       OP6: Strengthening governance and institutional capacity                Mitigation ($ million)                                29.000
       OP7: Fostering regional cooperation and integration
                                                                               Cofinancing
                                                                               Adaptation ($ million)                                89.800
                                                                               Mitigation ($ million)                                85.200
       Sustainable Development Goals                                           Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
       SDG 2.4                                                                 Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
       SDG 6.a
       SDG 7.2, 7.3, 7.a                                                       Poverty Targeting
       SDG 8.10                                                                Geographic Targeting
       SDG 9.1, 9.3
       SDG 11.1, 11.3, 11.6, 11.7
       SDG 12.2
       SDG 13.a
       SDG 15.1, 15.3
    4. Risk Categorization:       Complex
.


    5. Safeguards Categorization       Environment: B Involuntary Resettlement: B Indigenous Peoples: C
       [Tranche 1]
.


    6. Financing




Source: Asian Development Bank                    17022023104012887927
This document must only be generated in eOps.                                                         Generated Date: 27-Feb-2023 11:19:48 AM
                                            INVESTMENT PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
       Modality and Sources                                  Indicative Tranches ($million)                         Amount
                                                     I                     II                   III                ($million)
       ADB                                                                                                                273.000
        Sovereign MFF-Tranche (Grant):                     3.000                0.000                   0.000               3.000
        Asian Development Fund
        Sovereign MFF-Tranche                             45.000              52.200                   37.800             135.000
        (Concessional Loan): Ordinary
        capital resources
        Sovereign MFF-Tranche                             45.000              50.000                   40.000             135.000
        (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital
        resources
       Cofinancing                                                                                                        355.000
        European Investment Bank -                        52.900              59.400                   37.700             150.000
        MFF-Tranche (Loan) (Not ADB
        Administered)

         European Investment Bank -                       10.500              11.400                    8.100              30.000
         MFF-Tranche (Grant) (Not ADB
         Administered)

         Green Climate Fund -                             50.200              48.000                   31.800             130.000
         MFF-Tranche (Loan) (Full ADB
         Administration)

         Green Climate Fund -                             25.000              12.000                    8.000              45.000
         MFF-Tranche (Grant) (Full ADB
         Administration)

       Counterpart                                                                                                        107.000
        Beneficiaries - Loan                               3.400                2.000                   1.300               6.700

         Government - Loan                                20.700              33.500                   21.100              75.300

         Others - Loan                                    14.300                7.500                   3.200              25.000

                                      Total              270.000             276.000                  189.000             735.000


     Currency of ADB Financings: US Dollar




Source: Asian Development Bank                  17022023104012887927
This document must only be generated in eOps.                                                 Generated Date: 27-Feb-2023 11:19:48 AM
                                                 INVESTMENT PROGRAM AT A GLANCE

  7. Country Partnership Strategy
     CPS                                                        https://www.adb.org/documents/mongolia-country-partnership-strategy-2021-2024

  8. Investment Program Summary
     The program represents a fundamental paradigm shift in applying a transformative model to promote green territorial
     development and urban-rural linkages, whereby livable human settlements-aimag (province) and soum (subunit of an aimag)
     centers-become anchors of green agribusinesses that promote sustainable, resilient, and high-carbon sequestration rangeland
     management. Initially focusing on Mongolia's western aimags, the program will promote climate finance and private sector
     investment mechanisms that can be replicated countrywide.
     Impact: Green development, regional development sustainability, quality of life, and human development achieved
     Outcome: Green and inclusive agro-territorial development advanced
     Outputs: (i)Climate-resilient, low-carbon, and attractive aimag and soum centers developed, (ii)Climate-resilient, high-carbon
     sequestration, and sustainable rangeland and agricultural management implemented, (iii)Accessible financing for low-carbon
     and climate-resilient livestock and agrobusiness value chains created (financial intermediation loan component), and
     (iv)Institutional capacity and policies for low-carbon and climate-resilient agro-territorial development strengthened

      Implementation Arrangements: Ministry of Economy and Development will be the executing agency.
      Project Readiness: Facility preparatory activities are being undertaken under an ongoing transaction technical assistance.

  9. Indicative Tranche Approval Plan
     Modality                                        Estimated Approval                Estimated Completiona
     Tranche I                                       22 March 2023                     22 March 2029
     Tranche II                                      30 December 2025                  30 December 2032
     Tranche III                                     3 January 2028                    22 March 2033

 10. Project Data Sheet (PDS)
     PDS b                                           http://www.adb.org/projects/49430-005/main

a For tranches, this refers to the tranche closing date.
b Safeguard documents can be viewed by clicking the Document's hyperlink in the Project Data Sheet (PDS) page.




Source: Asian Development Bank                             17022023104012887927
This document must only be generated in eOps.                                                           Generated Date: 27-Feb-2023 11:19:48 AM
210135 17 MON ABV
                                            I.         THE PROPOSAL

1.      I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed
multitranche financing facility (MFF) to Mongolia for the Aimags and Soums Green Regional
Development Investment Program. The report also describes the proposed tranche 1, and if the
Board approves the proposed MFF, I, acting under the authority delegated to me by the Board,
approve tranche 1. The program represents a fundamental paradigm shift in applying a
transformative model to promote green territorial development and urban–rural linkages, whereby
livable human settlements—aimag (province) and soum (subunit of an aimag) centers—become
anchors of green agribusinesses that promote sustainable, resilient, and high-carbon
sequestration rangeland management. Initially focusing on Mongolia’s western aimags, the
program will promote climate finance and private sector investment mechanisms that can be
replicated countrywide.

                                                 II.    RATIONALE

2.      In 1990, upon disengaging from the Soviet Union, Mongolia entered a transitional period.
Aimag and soum centers were unable to play their role as anchors of rural economy.1 Herders
started to migrate to urban areas in response to (i) the low value of livestock; (ii) higher exposure
of their animals to disease because of poor livestock breeding, feed supply, and veterinary
services; and (iii) the impact of climate change, especially the increase of extreme weather such
as dzud (succession of droughts and severe winters) causing massive losses of livestock,
particularly during 2000–2001 and in 2010. The loss of large quantities of livestock during the
past dzud illustrates the vulnerability of herders and the severe impact of extreme climate events
on national livestock assets. During the dzud of 2000–2001, 25% of Mongolia’s livestock perished.
From 1999 to 2003, about 180,000 people migrated to Ulaanbaatar having lost their livelihoods
to the severe winters, and started to settle on the outskirts of Ulaanbaatar and in aimag centers
overwhelming the capacity of cities to absorb them; and formed vast substandard settlements,
known as ger areas, which account for about 60% of Ulaanbaatar’s population and more than
70% of the population of aimag centers.2 In 2021, the urbanization ratio in Mongolia represented
about 69.4% of the country’s 3.4 million population. This caused urban systems, already
exceeding their planned service life, to further deteriorate and become undersized to meet
existing and future needs for Mongolia’s growing urban population.3 With 1.6 million population,
Ulaanbaatar accounts for 69% of the urban population, and 63% of gross domestic product. The
demographic and economic weight of the capital city illustrates the country’s drastic territorial
imbalance.

3.      The combination of herders expanding herd size to compensate for anticipated livestock
losses (especially from dzud), open access to pasture, unbalanced herd composition (with a high
proportion of goats which are particularly destructive to rangelands but can generate good income

1 Aimag center refers to the aimag capital. Except for Darkhan and Erdenet (each with about 80,000 people), the
  population of most aimag centers ranges from 15,000 to 40,000. Soum center refers to the main town in a soum.
  Inter-soum centers refer to soum centers of strategic and economic importance within an aimag, with populations
  ranging from 2,000 to 10,000.
2 Ger areas are settlements characterized by loosely aligned plots, irregular and unpaved pathways, and poor access

  to basic infrastructure. Poorly insulated detached solid houses and ger tents use inefficient coal stoves that produce
  heavy carbon dioxide emissions and air pollution, especially during winter.
3 In aimag and soum centers, gaps between supply and demand for urban services are mainly caused by

  (i) underperforming urban systems with limited operation and maintenance (O&M) resources; (ii) lack of drainage
  and flood protection infrastructure; (iii) a stagnating economic situation that constricts infrastructure investment;
  (iv) overcrowded public buildings in poor condition (e.g., for education, government, and health services), especially
  in soum centers; and (v) lack of provision for affordable housing.
2


from cashmere), and poor rangeland management practices has put Mongolia’s rangelands,
which covers 82% of the country, under severe threat. In addition, climate change has reduced
the productivity of rangelands, affected glacier-fed water regimes, and increased exposure of
herders and the animal husbandry sector to climate-related natural hazards.4 Overgrazing is on
average 22.6% above the rangeland carrying capacity, and as a result, about 70% of pastoral
land has been degraded.5 The situation has impacted livestock productivity and made herds more
vulnerable to climate events and disease, resulting in deteriorating quality of meat, wool, and
other livestock products and lower incomes for herders who compensate by further increasing
herd sizes.6 This vicious cycle has led to uncontrolled and exponential increases of livestock
heads. While livestock numbers ranged from 20 million to 25 million heads during 1970–1990, it
has reached 66.5 million in 2018 and 71.1 million in 2022.7 Ongoing rangeland degradation is
also associated with considerable reduction of above- and below-ground biomass, and lessening
the carbon storage capacity of soil. Improving rangeland management thus offers huge climate
change mitigation prospects. It is estimated that Mongolia can avoid emissions of more than 440
million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) over the next 20-year period from soil carbon
sequestration.8

4.       During the last decade, the Government of Mongolia has set policies and objectives to
reverse overgrazing trends and reduce overall livestock numbers to sustainable levels. However,
those attempts failed to reverse the exponential increase of animals and overcome complex and
interrelated barriers inherent to the livestock industry.9 The Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation through the Green Gold project has established pasture user groups (PUGs) and
rangeland use agreements (RUAs) to strengthen traditional user groups of herders for inclusive
and improved grazing management of common seasonal rangelands. 10 Green Gold project
activities were gradually handed over to the National Federation of Pasture User Groups and the
Aimag Federation of Pasture User Groups. Yet, few RUAs have been officially registered and
even fewer stocking adjustment rates have been formulated. 11 PUGs lack incentives and
marketing opportunities to sell animals and reduce herd sizes. The lack of well-functioning
cooperatives, certification systems, and linkage with agriculture value chain led to a dearth of
quality livestock raw materials and failure to establish sustainable mechanisms to reduce herds
and ensure sustainable rangeland management.




4  Based on Mongolia’s updated National Determined Contribution, November 2019, the frequency of extreme weather
   phenomena has doubled in the last 2 decades. This is expected to increase by 23%–60% by the middle of the century
   as compared to present conditions.
5 Data from the 2017 National Mongolian Livestock Program (NMLP), the National Statistical Office (NSO) of Mongolia,

   and soum-level datasets of the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry (MOFALI).
6 NSO indicates that two-in-five herder families live in poverty. If the situation continues, more herder families will be

   pushed into poverty, eroding national food security and contributing to turning rangelands into deserts.
7 Livestock data from NSO. Mongolian Statistical Information Service (accessed January 2022).
8 Carbon sequestration is the process of capturing and storing carbon dioxide. It reduces the amount of carbon dioxide

   in the atmosphere, contributing to the mitigation of global climate change.
9 The rapid growth of animal husbandry since 2010 has caused numbers to exceed the NMLP targets. The NMLP

   target for sheep heads unit for 2021 is 79.7 million while the actual number for 2021 was 117.6 million, exceeding
   the target by 48%. Sheep head unit is commonly used to convert the grazing impact of animals to a sheep equivalent.
10 Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation. 2021. Sustainably Managed Pastures and Healthy Animals:

   Mongolia’s ‘Green Gold’. RUA is a collective and voluntary agreement between a group of herders and the soum
   government that is (i) legally recognized and registered by the Agency for Land Management and Administration,
   Geodesy and Cartography and the Ministry of Justice and Home Affairs; and (ii) socially and politically accepted by
   all parties. To be legally registered and binding, it must include five annexes with information such as herd size,
   composition, pasture use, state of rangeland, and carrying capacity.
11 Stocking adjustment rate is the number of animal units set at or below the carrying capacity of a certain land area.
                                                                                                                      3


5.      Weak small and medium-sized enterprise development. Development of small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Mongolia is constrained by unaffordable interest rates and
short-term loans; high and rigid collateral requirements, especially for immovable assets; overly
complicated administrative procedures; and low financial literacy of SME borrowers.12 In remote
aimags, SMEs lack access to appropriate urban and economic services. Local agricultural
enterprises and value chains suffer from weak finance ecosystems; dominance of large
agribusiness companies based in Ulaanbaatar; low entrepreneurial skills; and lack of start-up
capital and support to access available financing, affordable financing products, and supportive
national program and policies. These challenges impede agribusiness investments at the
point-of-need, preventing job creation and local development, which are required to promote
economic diversification, counterbalance Mongolian’s overdependence on mining, and reverse
the flow of migration to Ulaanbaatar.

6.       The weak agribusiness SMEs development and the lack of quality and sustainably
certified agricultural product both prevent capturing the (i) growing domestic demand in higher-
quality and greener meat product mainly in urban areas and especially in Ulaanbaatar; (ii) large
export potential for green and sustainably certified agricultural products coming from sizable
markets demand such as the People’s Republic of China, the Russian Federation, Central Asia
countries, Japan, Iran, and Viet Nam; and (iii) growing demand from developed country markets
for sustainably certified cashmere and wool products.

7.      Western aimags. The three western aimags of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs have fragile
ecosystems and rely heavily on mountain pastureland, high mountain water flow, and oases. The
population and environment of these three aimags are particularly vulnerable to climate change.
Melting permafrost and glaciers, rising temperatures, and changing precipitation patterns are
severely affecting the composition and distribution of water resources. The overgrazing rate in
the western aimags, estimated at 27.4% more than the carrying capacity, is five percentage points
higher than the national average. The lack of investment in the three western aimags has left
them isolated and underequipped, despite (i) being a strategically important trade and western
development link along Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation corridor 4a, (ii) the
importance of the area in balancing Mongolia’s territorial development and boosting regional
trade, and (iii) the prominence of animal husbandry in employment (it accounts for about 38%–
51% of total employment).

8.     Government road map. The government is fully aware of the severity of the situation and
has formulated Vision 2050, a two-stage framework supported by the Asian Development Bank
(ADB), to guide long-term development and promote human development, quality of life, green
development, and sustainable regional development. 13 The New Recovery Policy of the
government aims to create the conditions to reach the objectives of the first implementation stage
(2021–2030) of Vision 2050. 14 It promotes Recovery of Operations of Border Ports, Energy
Recovery, Industrial Recovery (especially through supporting agrobusiness industry development
and increased value-added of local agro-processing industry for domestic and export markets),
Urban Rural Recovery (especially through supporting the development of regional clusters,
reversing migration to Ulaanbaatar, and decreasing the Capital City congestion); and Recovery

12 As of December 2022, the average interest rate for SME business loans was 17.3%—much higher than the Bank of

   Mongolia’s policy rate of 13.0%. Banks require collateral to guarantee a loan in 99.7% of cases, and collateral value
   required is about 200.0% of the loan’s value on average.
13 State Great Khural. 2020. Vision 2050: Long-Term Development Policy of Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar. The plan was

   formed with the support of ADB. Mongolia: Human Settlements Development Program; and the Japan International
   Cooperation Agency’s Regional Development Policy.
14 Enacted by the Act of Parliament No.106 dated 30 December 2021.
4


through Green Development (especially through sustainable rangeland management and green
urban development), and Recovery of Public Productivity. Finally, following the food security and
promoting food supply resolution of the Parliament,15 the government, through the Ministry of
Economy and Development (MED), has developed a national food safety and sustainable food
supply strategy based on Mongolia’s specific climatic, geographical, and local resources
conditions using an integrated planning approach aiming to upgrade agricultural production,
supply, and logistic clusters in selected soums.16 Ministries have developed sector plans and
policies to support and guide the implementation of the road map. The Ministry of Construction
and Urban Development (MCUD) and the MED are implementing territorial and regional
development studies that formulate key strategic directions for aimag development and priority
public and private investments. The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry (MOFALI)
formulated the State Policy on the Food and Agriculture Sector (2016–2025), 2015; the Mongolian
Herders National Program, 2020; and the Mongolia Livestock II Program (2022–2024).17 Finally,
Mongolia’s Third National Communication drives the national climate action plan.18 The program
is included in the public investments plan of Mongolia’s Five-Year Development Guidelines
(2021–2025).19

9.      Program priorities and approach. Implementing the comprehensive government road
map in aimags and soums will help arrest the vicious cycle of interrelated and mutually reinforcing
sector bottlenecks (para. 3), further aggravated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis and
the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which generated exogenous shocks that adversely impact
Mongolian economy. In this context, a piecemeal, short-term, or single sector-oriented approach
would be unsustainable and insufficient. For example, investing solely in infrastructure in a
stagnating economic context would be inefficient and would not promote a functional and dynamic
urban development process. Providing financial support for agriculture and livestock husbandry
while failing to address lagging infrastructure, complicated SME administrative services and the
problem of poor animal value would not be enough. Supporting better management of natural
resources would be unsustainable and less effective without parallel provision of services for
herders and support for market links to promote inclusive and green value chains. Finally,
promoting agricultural trade and ensuring sustainable food supply implies improving livestock
health and promoting transboundary sanitary and phytosanitary measures, such as veterinary
regulated quarantine zones. Through its comprehensive and multisector long-term approach, the
MFF program of ADB will ensure that real transformation takes place within rural communities,
motivated and sustained by low-carbon and climate-resilient livestock and agrobusiness value
chains (LCLVCs), with livable aimag and soum centers acting as anchors for private sector
investment. 20 The MFF program will incorporate this approach into a regional development


15 On 17 June 2022, the parliament ratified a resolution on ensuring food security and promoting food supply, which

   includes the following key measures: (i) promote export-oriented food production and increase food production to
   reduce dependency on imported food; (ii) improve standards, quality controls, innovation, and M&E mechanism in
   food production, storage, transportation, and trade; (iii) increase domestic supply of fodder and forage; (iv) promote
   irrigated agriculture production; (v) develop agro-industrial parks for establishing cluster-based agriculture value
   chains; (vi) improve livestock sanitary condition and improve pastureland management; and (vii) support domestic
   food processing.
16 This includes 10 soums located in the western region.
17 MOFALI Minister Order No. A/177, June 2022, following the Mongolian National Livestock Program.
18 Ministry of Environment and Tourism. 2018. Mongolia Third National Communication under the United Nations

   Framework Convention on Climate Change. Ulaanbaatar.
19 State Great Khural. 2020. Public Investment Program 2021–2025 (Attachment 2). Ulaanbaatar.
20 LCLVC means that the full range of herders, herder groups, agrobusinesses, cooperatives, and firms and their

   successive coordinated value-adding activities that transform, sell, and dispose after use agricultural raw material,
   especially livestock derived materials in a manner that is profitable throughout the value chains, promotes rangeland
   regenerative practices, is water efficient, reduces GHG emissions, and increases soil carbon sequestration.
                                                                                                                     5


strategy and develop a green agro-territorial21 model supported by policy reforms and institutional
strengthening at both the local and national levels and building on agricultural production, supply,
and logistic clusters model formulated by MED.

10.      Policy framework. Aligning with the long-term strategic development objectives of the
road map, the program will follow integrated and synergetic guiding principles for its policy
framework,22 capacity development, and investment outputs: (i) inclusive and green urban–rural
transformation, through improved living conditions and performance of priority urban settlements
as anchors for local economic development, to attract LCLVC investments at the point-of-need
and reconnect urban and rural economies; (ii) sustainable, climate-resilient, and low-carbon
rangeland management, driven by incentives to encourage better rangeland management
practices, grassroots organization, and transitional support for herders; improve animal feed,
breeding, and health to support more productive and quality animals; reverse ecosystem
degradation and increase its capacity for carbon sequestration; enhance rangeland and herder
communities’ resilience to climate change; and, by improving resource efficiency and food
production, improve food security despite the adverse impacts of climate change; (iii) well-
functioning and inclusive LCLVCs (that provides stakeholders with services to sustain their
activities while minimizing their carbon footprint, supporting sustainable management of natural
capital, and promoting climate adaptation), hinged on accessible and responsive financial and
nonfinancial support for herders, SMEs, and other stakeholders involved in the agriculture sector
operating in the aimag and inter-soum centers; and (iv) improved planning, capacity, knowledge,
and institutions, especially for all the stakeholders of the agriculture sector, to support
transformational low-carbon, climate-resilient, and inclusive territorial development plans and
policies.

11.      Strategic context. The strategic context and long-term support of the road map (i) is
consistent with ADB’s country partnership strategy for Mongolia, 2021–2024,23 especially with its
post–COVID-19 recovery action plan, and will contribute to overcoming economic contraction and
exacerbated inequalities to promote sustainable economic growth, diversification, and
inclusiveness; (ii) is aligned with the seven operational priority plans of ADB’s Strategy 2030;24
and (iii) supports Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation 2030 and its Common Agenda for
Modernization of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures for Trade by contributing to agricultural
trade and regional public goods, mitigating desertification and climate change, and containing
transboundary animal health problems.25




21 A territorial approach aims to realize the potential of a territory through strategic management of the relationship

   between economic development, social inclusion, and environmental sustainability. The goal of agro-territorial
   development is to link smaller cities and towns with their rural “catchment areas” and improve access to food and
   income opportunities for the urban and rural poor. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2017.
   Development Economics Policy Brief: Strong Rural–Urban Linkages are Essential for Poverty Reduction. Rome.
22 The policy framework is outlined in the Framework Financing Agreement (FFA) (accessible from the list of linked

   documents in Appendix 2), and details are in Appendix 8 of the Facility Administration Manual (FAM) (accessible
   from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
23 ADB. 2021. Country Partnership Strategy: Mongolia, 2021–2024—Laying Resilient Foundations for Inclusive and

   Sustainable Growth. Manila.
24 ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific.

   Manila.
25 ADB. 2017. CAREC 2030: Connecting the Region for Shared and Sustainable Development. Manila.
6


                                   III.      THE INVESTMENT PROGRAM

A.       Impact and Outcome

12.    The investment program is aligned with the following impact: green development, regional
development sustainability, quality of life, and human development achieved (footnote 13). The
investment program will have the following outcome: green and inclusive agro-territorial
development advanced.26

B.       Outputs

13.     Output 1: Climate-resilient, low-carbon, and attractive aimag and soum centers
developed. This output will target development of priority infrastructure and services to support
the transition of targeted aimag and inter-soum centers into anchors for LCLVC investments. It
will address aimags and soums infrastructure gaps to support green agri-business development
and the agriculture sector based on the locations for agricultural logistics and supply centers,
industries, and clusters identified by MED. It will employ a comprehensive and integrated
approach to address urban service deficiencies (such as district heating, drainage and flood
protection, power, roads, social facilities, waste collection and treatment, wastewater treatment,
and water supply) and improve the living conditions in aimag and inter-soum centers. The output
will promote low-carbon solutions through the use of renewable energy and energy efficient urban
services and buildings. In each targeted aimag and soum center, an agro-industrial park
dedicated to LCLVCs will be developed, including utilities to attract processing activities and an
incubator center. 27 Finally, a smart land management center will improve land and urban
management; and monitor rangeland health (rangeland health refers to the set of environmental
conditions that sustain rangeland productivity and biodiversity), water availability, and soil carbon
sequestration.

14.      Output 2: Climate-resilient, high-carbon sequestration, and sustainable rangeland
and agricultural management implemented. This output will support climate vulnerable herder
groups and empower them with sustainable livestock and agricultural management practices
(e.g., improved grazing practices, balanced herd composition, reduced herd size, and improved
animal breeding) to reverse rangeland degradation while producing high-value agricultural
products. It will (i) support the implementation of community-based investment projects for
participating herder groups belonging to PUGs that have signed RUAs and are included in the
participatory and inclusive herd management plan (PIHMP); (ii) provide financial support to
cooperatives of participating PUGs; (iii) establish a certification system and process; and (iv)
provide incentives to reduce herd sizes, improve livestock commercialization, create an adequate
herd structure, improve livestock breeding, and increase fodder production.28 Primary works for
irrigated perimeters and water conservancy solutions will enable the expansion of fodder
production and increase herders’ capacity to cope with water shortages induced by climate
change. Animal health and veterinary services will be strengthened at each level of the
agribusiness value chain to develop a reliable animal health control and traceability system. This
includes supporting the construction of veterinary laboratories in the location identified by MED to

26 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
27 Agro-industrial parks will boost food exports and local economies by bringing processing facilities to the point-of-

   need (thereby shortening processing circuits, decreasing the carbon footprint of livestock value chains, and tightening
   geographic and economic integration between herders, rangeland management, and the food industry). Agricultural
   production, supply, and logistic clusters identified by MED will be prioritized.
28 The PIHMP identifies and prioritizes short- to medium-term investments and activities to improve rangeland

   management, herd quality, and the livelihoods of PUG members. The RUA is one of its components.
                                                                                                                        7


support agricultural production, supply, and logistic clusters.29 Critically, the certification system
and improved animal quality and health will attract LCLVC investments; link certified herders,
cooperatives, and PUGs; and herders’ livelihoods will be improved on a sustainable basis through
share of profits from processing activities which will compensate them for maintaining lower herd
size.

15.       Output 3: Accessible financing for low-carbon and climate-resilient livestock and
agrobusiness value chains created (financial intermediation loan component). This output
will establish a green and inclusive regional agribusiness fund (GIRAF) to provide climate-smart
financial mechanisms and institutions to overcome the financial bottlenecks of agribusiness SMEs
in the targeted areas, especially in the agricultural production, supply, and logistic clusters defined
by MED 30 by (i) loans with affordable interest rates, longer grace periods and tenors, and a
customized repayment plan that take into account the production cycle and its seasonality to help
SMEs overcome the financial barriers described in para. 5;31 (ii) credit guarantees that could be
used as a substitute for collateral in lending and will reduce the risks of financiers, thereby
contributing to more affordable interest rates and facilitating access to the GIRAF loans; and
(iii) reimbursable innovation grants to stimulate pioneering agribusiness enterprises to advance
innovative green products, processes, and business models such as (a) precision livestock
farming that uses biosensors; (b) smartphone applications that synchronize with farm
management software; (c) green and intelligent packaging; (d) digital systems in livestock
marketing and distribution; or (e) renewable energy solutions. The GIRAF will support investments
that demonstrate clear supply linkages and/or profit-sharing mechanisms with herders, PUGs,
and cooperatives that are certified in sustainable rangeland management, and preferably located
in agro-industrial parks that support local development and exports.

16.      Output 4: Institutional capacity and policies for low-carbon and climate-resilient
agro-territorial development strengthened. The output will focus on building the government
and main stakeholders’ capacity (including professional associations of the agriculture sector,
academics, herders, farmers, the private sector, and SMEs), especially in the priority locations
identified by MED, to ensure efficient program management and implementation. Output 4 will
(i) establish soft tools and plans necessary for the implementation of other program outputs such
as the PIHMP, the low-carbon and climate-resilient agribusiness development plan (LCADP)—
based on a participatory and consensus-building process with all local stakeholders the LCADP
29 The program will (i) appoint a community-based animal health worker in each PUG to provide preliminary veterinary

   services and raise herders’ awareness on animal health; (ii) establish a unified database for livestock breeding
   services and registration and supply equipment for veterinary services and a traceability system; (iii) construct
   laboratories in the aimag and inter-soum centers, including one regional research development center; and
   (iv) construct disease-free establishments to facilitate animal health control.
30 The GIRAF will be established following the Law of Mongolia and the eligibility criteria for financial intermediation

   loans (FILs) as per ADB. 2003. Financial Intermediation Loans. Operations Manual. OM D6/BP. Manila. GIRAF will
   be managed by a “GIRAF Manager” which (i) satisfies the eligibility criteria set forth in para. 37 of Schedule 4 of the
   Loan Agreement, (ii) manages GIRAF and is responsible for implementing output 3 of the project, and (iii) may be
   the Development Bank of Mongolia Asset Management SC LLC (AMC) or any other party agreed upon between the
   Borrower and ADB and acceptable to GCF.
31 The GIRAF will have three lending windows. Window 1 will provide three categories of loans to support SMEs

   engaged in livestock processing, commercial and logistic investments for retail and exports, and other forms of
   economic diversification. To be eligible, subprojects should be implemented by SMEs in partnership and profit-
   sharing agreements with certified herders’ cooperatives and should be included in the LCADP. Window 2 will provide
   loans to qualified medium and large enterprises involved in livestock production, processing, distribution and
   marketing, and international trade. The proposed agribusinesses should demonstrate congruence and consistency
   with the LCADP. Window 3 will be piloted for potential expansion for microfinance that will be channeled through
   savings and credit cooperatives to certified herders engaged in microenterprises. Details of financing terms and
   conditions are in Boxes 4, 5, and 6 and Appendix 3 of the FAM (accessible from the list of linked documents in
   Appendix 2).
8


will prioritize investments and activities necessary to develop LCLVCs—or the green urban
development and certification, and traceability systems; (ii) support the design, installation, and
operationalization of the program’s measurement, reporting, verification, and monitoring and
evaluation systems; and (iii) explore public–private partnership arrangements especially related
to agro-industrial park management. It will implement the program policy framework to strengthen
the government’s capacity to formulate, implement, and enforce policies and plans that are
conducive to integrated green agro-territorial development, as well as climate-smart livestock
husbandry, rangeland management, and urban development. The output will conduct policy
dialogues and advocacy for the program’s green agro-territorial model replication inside and
outside of Mongolia, and explore a partnership for low-carbon and climate-resilient rangeland
management in Central Asia.32

17.     The multitranche financing facility. The program will be implemented using an MFF
modality with a financial intermediation loan (FIL) component, over a 10-year period with three
tranches. Lessons from similar ADB sector interventions indicate that a comprehensive urban–
rural development program requires close coordination among multiple government agencies and
strong government capacity to carry out policy reforms, sustain the program outcome, and
replicate outputs to other regions of the country.33 This is built into the program’s detailed policy
framework, its capacity development component, and the stakeholder engagement plan, which
are linked to the outputs and tranche structure of the MFF. The MFF structure will enhance ADB’s
value addition in carrying out the necessary transformations, remove barriers and implement
replicable mechanisms over its successive tranches, and drive the paradigm shift promoted by
the program and its road map. Subsequent tranche investments will fall within the framework of
the overall MFF and its output structure, conditional upon the MFF undertakings, subproject
readiness, selection criteria, and decision filters.34 The FIL component will be implemented in
close coordination with the Private Sector Operations Department of ADB for lending window 2
of the GIRAF that will provide entry points and opportunities for the Private Sector Operations
Department’s parallel investment support to qualified medium- and large-scale enterprises.

18.      Modality advantage. Compared with other modalities, only an MFF could generate the
critical mass, continuity, predictability, and replicable mechanisms to support communities, the
government, and the private sector to transform the status quo of the animal husbandry industry
and the urban economy in a sustainable manner.35 The MFF’s well-defined and phased shifts will
allow the government to upscale, mainstream, and maintain the green agro-territorial model,
focusing in priority locations for agricultural production, supply, and logistic clusters identified by
MED, to achieve the objectives of the road map. Specifically, the MFF will (i) allow effective
implementation of processes and plans (para. 16) that require sustained long-term engagement
and phasing; (ii) pilot innovations in project 1 (para. 20) and phase their upscaling and replication
without losing momentum, capacity, and knowledge; (iii) deploy in a timely manner lessons from
earlier tranches to subsequent tranches, and ensure necessary adjustments to accommodate the
local context; (iv) build cross-agency institutional coordination and cooperation mechanisms
through a large upfront capacity-building component, sustained over the subsequent tranches;
(v) provide stakeholders and development partners with multiple entry points for policy dialogue
and apply lessons from tranche-to-tranche; and (vi) replicate the green agro-territorial

32 Box 8 of the FAM (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
33 Lessons in urban development, rangeland and livestock management, and financial intermediation and support for

   SMEs and agribusinesses are in Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services;
   and Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development; and in Development Coordination (accessible from the
   list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
34 Schedule 4 of the FFA (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
35 Comparison of Financing Modality (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                            9


development model by capturing achievements from complementary sector-focused initiatives
using a set of well-defined readiness and selection criteria, and focusing in priority locations for
agricultural production, supply, and logistic clusters identified by MED.

19.    Eligibility of financial intermediary.36 An apex financial institution will be established to
channel the funds to participating banks. Selection of financial intermediaries is based on eligibility
and selection criteria that include the following: (i) duly registered bank in Mongolia under the
applicable laws of Mongolia; (ii) adequate capacity to conduct retail banking for agriculture and
agribusiness in the targeted aimags and soums; (iii) meet ADB’s reporting, governance,
safeguard, and financial due diligence policies and standards; (iv) have no past-due obligations
with the Bank of Mongolia or adverse audit findings; and (v) have agriculture sector and
multisector financing experience in the targeted aimags.

20.     Scope of projects 1–3 under tranches 1–3. The program will cover up to 17 aimags, for
targeted investments from outputs 1 and 2.37 Outputs 3 and 4 will cover the above mentioned
aimags, but can also be implemented over the entire country based on selection criteria and
beneficiaries' conditions and requirements as provided in Boxes 4, 5, and 6 of the Facility
Administration Manual (FAM).38 Tranche 1 (Project 1) will focus on up to 11 aimags. This includes
Bayan-Ulgii aimag, Khovd aimag, and Uvs aimag for targeted investments; plus up to eight other
additional aimags for outputs 1 and 2 initial activities and project preparation, to be identified
during tranche 1 based on selection criteria in Schedule 4 of the FFA and agricultural cluster
location identified by the MED. Output 2 will cover all affiliated soums that are under the area of
influence of the targeted aimag or inter-soum centers under output 1.39 Tranche 2 (Project 2) will
cover project 1 locations to complement project 1 activities and will cover additional aimags based
on selection criteria in Schedule 4 of the FFA and based on priority locations for agricultural
development identified by MED (footnote 37). Project 2 will build on ongoing ADB, United Nations
Development Programme, or other initiatives wherein some of the program outputs are already
in place and are compatible with the program’s green agro-territorial model.40 Similarly, tranche 3
(Project 3) will assess local achievement in other aimags and provide complementary investments
to replicate the program’s green agro-territorial model, using its resources more strategically to
cover a wider geographical scope based on the 17 aimags identified for priority implementation
(footnote 37).

C.       Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan

21.     The program is estimated to cost $735.0 million. The investment component of the
program, comprising outputs 1, 2, and 4, will cost $617.4 million (Table 1). Output 3, which will be
delivered through the FIL component, will require an estimated $117.6 million. Detailed cost

36 The detailed eligibility and selection criteria are discussed in FAM (accessible from the list of linked documents in

  Appendix 2).
37 Based on priority locations for agricultural production, supply and logistic clusters identified by MED, and other criteria

   such as socioeconomic development level, urban hierarchy and urban development, rangeland degradation and
   overgrazing, vulnerability to climate change, livestock agribusiness development potential criteria, up to 17 aimags
   have been identified for priority implementation: Khovd, Uvs, Bayan Ulgii, Arkhangai, Dornod, Tuv, Khentii, Bulgan,
   Selenge, Dundgovi, Darkhan-Uul, Khuvsgul, Ovorkhangai, Bayankhongor, Zavkhan, Dornogovi, and Govi-Altai.
38 FAM (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
39 Output 1 activities will focus on (i) Ulgii aimag center and Deluun inter-soum center in Bayan-Ulgii, (ii) Khovd aimag

   center, and (iii) Ulaangom aimag center and Umnogovi inter-soum center.
40 In southern Khovd aimag or in other aimags, United Nations Development Programme Mongolia. 2021. Improving

   Adaptive Capacity and Risk Management of Rural Communities in Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar; ADB. Mongolia: Climate-
   Resilient and Sustainable Livestock Development Project; and ADB. Mongolia: Vegetable Production and Irrigated
   Agriculture Project.
    10


    estimates by expenditure accounts and by financiers are included in the FAM. The investment
    component will cover civil works, equipment, support to PUGs and cooperatives, design and
    construction supervision, project implementation and management support, safeguards and due
    diligence, and consulting services.

                                  Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates ($ million)
   Item                                                                                                          Amounta
A. A. Base Costsb
          1. Output 1: Climate-resilient, low-carbon, and attractive aimag and soum centers developed              395.7
          2. Output 2: Climate-resilient, high-carbon sequestration, and sustainable rangeland and                  99.2
                agricultural management implemented
          3. Output 4: Institutional capacity and policies for low-carbon and climate-resilient agro-territorial    38.5
                development strengthened
              Subtotal (A)                                                                                         533.4
B. B. Contingenciesc                                                                                                59.3
C. C. Financial Charges During Implementationd                                                                      24.7
                              Total (A+B+C)                                                                        617.4
   a Includes taxes and duties estimated at $48.0 million for the investment program and $16.2 million for tranche 1. Such

     amount does not represent an excessive share of the investment program cost. The government will finance taxes
     and duties through tax exemptions.
   b In 2023 prices as of 17 January 2023.
   c Physical and price contingencies, and a provision for exchange rate fluctuation are included.
   d Includes service fees, interest, commitment, and other charges on all sources of financing.

   Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

    22.     Financing plan. The government has requested an MFF in an amount of up to
    $448 million from a blend of regular loans ($135 million) and concessional loans ($135 million)
    from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, a grant ($3 million) from ADB’s Special Funds resources
    (Asian Development Fund [ADF]), and cofinanced loan ($130 million) and grant ($45 million) from
    the Green Climate Fund (GCF) to be administered by ADB, to help finance a part of the investment
    program. The European Investment Bank will provide cofinancing (non-ADB-administered)
    comprising a loan of up to $150 million equivalent and a grant of up to $30 million equivalent from
    the Asia Investment Facility of the European Union (administered by the European Investment
    Bank). The government will finance $75.3 million, including taxes and duties, resettlement, civil
    works, equipment, consulting services, project management, and other miscellaneous costs. The
    investment project component comprises outputs 1, 2, and 4 and will cost $617.4 million. Output 3
    will be delivered through an FIL component for which the government will invest $87.6 million of
    the GCF loan proceeds into the GIRAF. In addition, the $5.0 million GCF grant will be passed on
    to the government’s green innovation grants facility as reimbursable grants to qualified investors
    to promote innovations in green and inclusive agribusiness. The GIRAF will serve as the apex
    financial institution for the program funds to be channeled through financial intermediaries based
    on eligibility and selection criteria.41 The GCF loan proceeds will leverage financial contributions
    from private entrepreneurs, and other participating commercial banks estimated at $25.0 million.
    The contribution from beneficiary households is estimated at $6.7 million. The MFF will consist of
    three tranches, subject to the government’s submission of related periodic financing requests,
    execution of the related loan and project agreements for each tranche, and fulfillment of terms
    and conditions and undertakings set forth in the framework financing agreement.




    41 Apexmechanisms usually involve financial institutions through which development partner-funded FILs are
      channeled to a second layer of financial intermediaries, which in turn onlend such loan proceeds to subborrowers.
                                                                                                                11


                              Table 2: Summary Financing Plan ($ million)
                                                Tranche (estimated year of PFR submission)            Share of
Source                                            1 (2023)      2 (2025)        3 (2028)    Amount Total (%)
A. Investment Project Component
   1. Asian Development Bank
      (i) OCR (regular loan)                          45.0          50.0           40.0       135.0     18.4
      (ii) OCR (concessional loan)                    45.0          52.2           37.8       135.0     18.4
      (iii) Special Funds resources (ADF grant)        3.0           0.0            0.0           3.0    0.4
   2. Green Climate Fund (loan)a                      11.8          18.4           12.2        42.4      5.8
   3. Green Climate Fund (grant)a                     22.0          10.8            7.2        40.0      5.4
   4. European Investment Bank (loan)b                52.9          59.4           37.7       150.0     20.4
   5. European Investment Bank (grant)b               10.5          11.4            8.1        30.0      4.1
   6. Government of Mongolia                          20.7          33.5           21.1        75.3     10.2
   7. Beneficiaries                                    3.4           2.0            1.3           6.7    0.9
      Subtotal (A)                                  214.3          237.7          165.4       617.4     84.0
B. Financial Intermediation Loan Component
   1. Green Climate Fund (loan)a                      38.4          29.6           19.6        87.6     11.9
   2. Green Climate Fund (grant)a                      3.0           1.2            0.8           5.0    0.7
   3. Commercial banks/Private sectorc                14.3           7.5            3.2        25.0      3.4
      Subtotal (B)                                    55.7          38.3           23.6       117.6     16.0
                    Total (A+B)                     270.0          276.0          189.0       735.0    100.0
ADF = Asian Development Fund, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PFR = periodic financing request.
a Administered by the Asian Development Bank.
b Parallel cofinancing, not administered by the Asian Development Bank.
c Equity from private sector investors and agribusiness small and medium-sized enterprises.

Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

23.     Climate mitigation is estimated to cost $114.2 million and climate adaptation is estimated
to cost $113.8 million under the MFF from ADB and ADB-administered funds. Based on the
comprehensive program climate risk assessment, the extra grant from the ADF 13 thematic pool
will be used to strengthen capacity, raise awareness, improve the regulatory and institutional
framework, build resilience focusing on vulnerable populations and ecosystems, and design
innovative solutions such as green agro-territorial models or ecosystem-based solutions. Details
are in the FAM (footnote 38).

D.       Implementation Arrangements

24.    Implementation arrangements of the investment program are summarized in Table 3 and
described in detail, including specific arrangements for project 1, in the FAM (footnote 38).

                                  Table 3: Implementation Arrangements
Aspects                                                           Arrangements
MFF availability period           22 March 2023–22 March 2033
Estimated completion date         MFF: 22 September 2032; Project 1: 22 September 2028
Estimated closing date            MFF: 22 March 2033; Project 1: 22 March 2029
Management
(i) Oversight bodies              The projects steering committee is comprised of representatives from the MED
                                  (chair), MCUD (vice-chair), MOFALI (vice-chair), Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
                                  Environment and Tourism, targeted aimag governments, and the European Union.
(ii) Executing agency             MED
(iii) Key implementing agencies   MCUD, MOF, and MOFALI
(iv) Implementation unit          Under MED, an integrated PIU that will closely coordinate and be guided by MCUD,
                                  MOFALI, and MOF and includes aimag-level PIUs that will coordinate with their
                                  respective aimag and soum government offices will be established. The GIRAF
                                  manager will manage the financial intermediation loan component.
Procurement                       For the financial intermediation loan component, developers will undertake
(Project 1)                       procurement of goods and civil works in accordance with commercial practices
                                  acceptable to ADB.
12


Aspects                                                            Arrangements
                                 OCB international             Works (1 contract)                     $2.2 million
                                 advertisement
                                 OCB national advertisement Works (22 contracts)                      $40.9 million
                                                               Goods (3 contracts)                    $2.5 million
                                 Request for quotations        Works (multiple contracts)             $0.4 million
                                                               Goods (multiple contracts)             $1.2 million
                                 Community participation in    Multiple contracts                     $12.6 million
                                 procurement
Consulting services              Quality- and cost-based       4,124 person-months                    $30.1 million
(Project 1)                      selection                     International: 817 person-months
                                                               National: 3,307 person-months
                                 Quality-based selection       National: 63 person-months             $0.3 million
Advance contracting              For project 1, advance procurement will apply to recruit consultants and PIU staff.
Disbursement                     Disbursement of ADB and Green Climate Fund loan and grant proceeds will follow
                                 ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2022, as amended from time to time) and
                                 detailed arrangements agreed between the government and ADB.
ADB = Asian Development Bank; GIRAF = green and inclusive regional agribusiness fund; MCUD = Ministry of
Construction and Urban Development; MED = Ministry of Economy and Development; MFF = multitranche financing
facility; MOFALI = Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry; OCB = open competitive bidding; PIU = project
implementation unit.
Source: ADB.

                                          IV.      DUE DILIGENCE

A.        Technical

25.     Technical due diligence has been carried out on each proposed component for the first
tranche of the program. Infrastructure designs are in line with Mongolian norms and standards
and are compatible with existing urban systems. Operation and maintenance (O&M) cost and
training for the new systems will be provided under the program to ensure sufficient capacity at
the aimag and soum levels for sustainable asset management. Solutions to improve rangeland
management are compatible with local ecological, economic, and sociocultural context.

B.        Economic and Financial

26.        The economic and financial analysis focused on project 1. 42 The base case results
confirmed the economic viability of the project, with economic internal rates of return of 10.57%
to 28.81%, exceeding ADB’s minimum prescribed discount rate of 9.0%. A sensitivity analysis,
undertaken to further test the economic viability of project 1, determined that the project will
remain economically robust under several scenarios, including (i) a 10% increase in capital cost;
(ii) a 10% increase in O&M costs; (iii) a 10% decline in benefits; (iv) a combination of scenarios
(i), (ii), and (iii); and (v) a 1-year delay in anticipated benefits. For the sustainable rangeland
management component (output 2) and access to green and inclusive agribusiness finance
(output 3), both of which will be financed by the GCF, the estimated economic internal rate of
return reached 28.81%, reflecting sizable global warming damages avoided through an estimated
net reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to the quantified economic benefits, the
project will generate cross-border spillovers, mainly in the form of increased trade in Mongolia’s
western region LCLVCs.



42 ADB. 2017. Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects. Manila; ADB. 1994. Framework for the Economic and

  Financial Appraisal of Urban Development Sector Projects. Manila; and ADB. 2002. Handbook for Integrating Risk
  Analysis in the Economic Analysis of Projects. Manila.
                                                                                                           13


27.      The financial analysis confirmed the viability of the revenue-generating components of the
project, particularly the water, wastewater, and heating components. The resulting base case
financial internal rates of return ranged from 2.07% to 8.04%, above the estimated weighted
average cost of capital of 0.38%. A sensitivity analysis undertaken to further test the financial
viability of project 1 under varying scenarios showed that the financial internal rates of return were
highly vulnerable to increases in capital costs, decreases in tariff revenues, or a combination of
both. The assumed tariffs were found to be affordable. They were within the target households’
willingness to pay in the participating aimags, except for wastewater treatment and heating in
Khovd and Uvs, where there is a need to better communicate the benefits of the improved
services to the communities involved. The financial sustainability analysis concluded that utility
operators could meet the project’s debt servicing and O&M requirements through tariff
adjustments and continuous subsidy provision.

C.      Governance

28.      For project 1, financial management assessments were conducted on the executing and
implementing agencies following relevant ADB guidelines.43 The overall pre-mitigation financial
management risk rating for the program is substantial. Although the risk rating for MCUD, MOF,
and MOFALI is moderate, the risk rating for MED and the Development Bank of Mongolia Asset
Management SC LLC (AMC), which has been identified as executing and implementing agencies
for the FIL component of the program, is substantial because of their relatively weak financial
management capacity and limited experience with ADB’s loan and grant disbursement
procedures and policies. However, their risk rating is expected to become moderate as their staff
acquire sufficient training and experience under an ongoing ADB-funded project. 44 Financial
management risks identified will be mitigated with support from financial management consultants
and appropriate capacity development, as outlined in the action plan for the executing and
implementing agencies. A project procurement risk assessment was carried out for the project in
Q4 2019 and updated in Q2 2021 and Q1 2023 using a four-level risk scale: extreme, high,
medium, and low. Procurement risk was considered high because of the (i) complexities of the
financing arrangements and project activities; (ii) large number of stakeholders involved in the
implementation of the project; (iii) large number of contracts to be procured; (iv) wide geographic
spread of project sites; (v) limited experience of MED as executing agency; and (vi) unknown
capacity of the project implementation unit (PIU), which has yet to be established. To mitigate
these risks, (i) a full-time procurement specialist will be recruited for the PIU; (ii) the project
implementation management support consulting firm will provide capacity-building support in
procurement and project implementation to the executing and implementing agencies and the
PIU; (iii) ADB will provide procurement training to the executing and implementing agencies and
the PIU at the start of the project and on a regular basis; and (iv) manuals will be developed to
guide the implementation of community-based investment projects and the FIL component. ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed with the
government, MED, MOF, AMC, MCUD, MOFALI, and National Federation of Pasture User
Groups. The specific policy requirements and supplementary measures are described in the FAM
(footnote 38).




43 ADB. 2019. Financial Analysis and Evaluation: Technical Guidance Note. Manila; and ADB. 2018. Financial Due

  Diligence for Financial Intermediaries: Technical Guidance Note. Manila.
44 ADB. Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar Green Affordable Housing and Resilient Urban Renewal Sector Project.
14


D.       Poverty, Social, and Gender

29.     Social impacts. For project 1, the ger area redevelopment component under output 1 will
improve the quality of life and health of about 30% of the total ger area population in the aimag
centers of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs—or 8,500 of the 17,000 herder households suffering from
the lack of public services and amenities, and access to affordable housing. Urban interventions
in the inter-soum centers will produce additional positive social impacts, including (i) improved
dormitory environment and learning conditions for all children, leading to improved enrollment of
herders’ children and prevention of family separation during the school year; and (ii) development
of sports and other social activities. Outputs 2 and 3 will (i) reduce land disputes and social
conflicts through improved rangeland management and signing of long-term RUAs; (ii) improve
herders’ participation in local governance; 45 (iii) provide herder households access to basic
community needs and improve their resilience to extreme events by financing facilities and
equipment to support their engagement in sustainable rangeland management; (iv) improve
herders’ livelihoods through support to herder cooperatives, and improve product quality and
marketing so their products fetch higher prices;46 and (v) create job opportunities in agro-industrial
parks and irrigated perimeters, and support SME development. Outputs 2 and 3 will benefit
17,600 herder households of Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd, and Uvs; two-thirds of which earn incomes that
are below the subsistence level.47 The program will support the creation of 11,400 green jobs,
which in turn will create more than 155,000 indirect jobs, addressing the high unemployment in
the targeted areas.

30.     Gender. Project 1 is classified as effective gender mainstreaming. The project will have
significant benefits for women by enhancing women’s access to basic rural and urban
infrastructure and services, affordable housing, and economic and financial resources; and
enhancing women’s voices and rights through their participation in PUGs and savings and credit
cooperatives. Women strongly support the project as it will improve women’s quality of life and
create an affordable, eco-friendly, and healthy living environment; safe and improved public
infrastructure for education and work; and business, employment, and income opportunities for
them and for their family members. A combined social and gender action plan has been developed
and includes among others, the following gender targets: (i) equal gender participation in street
development council management; (ii) 50% of State Housing Corporation’s housing units with
female ownership; (iii) public buildings in inter-soum centers are equipped with gender-sensitive
water, sanitation, and hygiene facilities; (iv) 100% of signed RUAs under the project include an
annex that both spouses sign; (v) 20% female leadership in PUGs and 40% female participation
in cooperatives; and (vi) GIRAF participating enterprises’ proposals include gender elements.

E.       Safeguards

31.     In compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the safeguard categories
of project 1 are as follows.48

32.  Environment (category B). The initial environmental examination and environmental
management plans for project 1 were prepared along with the domestic general environmental

45 The Green Gold project (footnote 10) showed that the PUG system serves as an institutional platform that enables

   herders to influence local governments’ decision-making, resulting in improved herders’ representation in the citizens’
   assembly, improved access to local and soum development funds, and land access for rangeland management.
46 Increased value of agricultural products will compensate for the loss of revenue from reduced herd size.
47 NSO. 2018. Mongolian Statistical Yearbook 2017. Ulaanbaatar.
48 ADB. Safeguard Categories. https://www.adb.org/site/safeguards/safeguard-categories. Safeguards documents

   mentioned in this section have been disclosed on the ADB website.
                                                                                                        15


impact assessment pursuant to the Safeguard Policy Statement and the Mongolian Law on
Environmental Impact Assessment (2012). An environmental assessment and review framework
was prepared for the program that will guide the screening and categorization, environmental
assessment, and preparation and implementation of environmental safeguards for projects 2 and
3, pursuant to the Safeguard Policy Statement and the Mongolian Law on Environmental Impact
Assessment. The initial environmental examination and comprehensive aimag environmental
management plans were prepared based on the feasibility design of project 1 and will be updated
as required during detailed design. A detailed hydrological assessment will be undertaken during
project 1 under the detailed design to confirm that extraction and use of surface and groundwater
resources are carried out sustainably. Potential environmental impacts will be site-specific.
Short-term disturbances that will arise from the construction of project subcomponents are
insignificant and reversible. Construction-related disturbances such as noise, dust, soil erosion,
surface water sedimentation, solid and liquid waste pollution, worker camp disturbances, reduced
local access, traffic safety issues, and worker and public safety issues can be managed with
standard construction practices and guidelines. To ensure effective environmental safeguards
implementation, a capacity-building program for government implementing agencies, the PIU,
and aimag-level PIUs, will be implemented.

33.      The program will contribute to the government’s adaptation and mitigation agenda by
(i) achieving a 121.4 million tCO2e reduction in total greenhouse gas emissions 49 (including
94.0 million tCO2e from carbon sequestered in the soil, the rest will come from reduced methane
and nitrous oxide from livestock, and carbon dioxide emissions in urban areas); (ii) improving the
climate resilience of 550,000 people, including 54,000 vulnerable herder households; and
(iii) restoring an estimated 28.8 million hectares of rangeland ecosystem.

34.     Involuntary resettlement (category B). A resettlement framework was prepared for the
program to guide screening and categorization, assessment of impacts, and preparation and
implementation of land acquisition and resettlement plans (LARPs) pursuant to the Safeguard
Policy Statement and Mongolia’s national requirements on land acquisition and resettlement. A
LARP for project 1 was prepared based on the feasibility designs and in line with the resettlement
framework. The LARP will be updated upon completion of the detailed design of the project.
Project 1 will impact 26 residential households and three business entities. The total affected land
area is 2,181 square meters in 21 land parcels, of which 20 would be partially affected and 1 fully
affected. The institutional arrangements and grievance redress mechanism for resettlement
implementation established under project 1 will remain effective for the subsequent projects.
Consultants will support the PIU and aimag-level PIUs in preparing and implementing the LARPs.

35.     Framework for voluntary participation in ger area development. Project 1 will provide
access to urban services and better neighborhood living conditions through improved household
connections to urban infrastructure and street development. Importantly, participation of
beneficiary households in ger area development will be purely voluntary, without forced
participation. A framework for voluntary participation has been prepared consistent with the
Safeguard Policy Statement requirements on negotiated land acquisition and national
requirements. Voluntary participation plans will be prepared and implemented for each of the
street development subprojects to be taken up in the aimag centers.

36.    Indigenous peoples (category C). The analysis of ethnic minority issues, focusing on
the cases of Kazakh, Khoton, Tuva, and other ethnic groups, found that no differentiated impact

49 Totalemission reduction over the program lifetime, excluding emission leakages (such as emissions during
  construction) estimated at about 4 million tCO2e.
16


is expected on ethnic groups under project 1. An indigenous peoples planning framework was
prepared for the MFF to guide the preparation of projects 2 and 3.

37.     Financial intermediaries (category B). An environmental and social management
system (ESMS) compliant with the Safeguard Policy Statement and the national requirements of
Mongolia will be adopted, prior to loan disbursement, by each participating bank.50 The ESMS
arrangement, prepared based on due diligence of the financial intermediaries, outlines
(i) procedures to screen, assess, and address environment and social impacts from the FIL
component, including provisions for adherence to core labor standards; (ii) institutional capacities
required for implementing ESMS provisions; (iii) capacity-building and training requirements; and
(iv) monitoring and reporting requirements to ensure effective implementation of the ESMS. The
participating financial intermediaries will ensure that the FIL component will exclude any
subproject classified as category A for environment safeguards, and any subproject classified as
category A or B for involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples safeguards.

F.        Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan

38.      Significant risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 4 and described in
detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.51

                           Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
Risks                                                            Mitigation Measures
Lack of coordination among        To facilitate coordination between government agencies, an integrated PIU
government agencies, especially   including aimag-level PIUs will be set up directly under MED and the projects
between MOFALI and land           steering committee, comprised of representatives from aimag governments, the
departments of selected aimags    European Union, MCUD, MED, Ministry of Environment and Tourism, Ministry of
and soums                         Finance, and MOFALI.
Financial sustainability adverselyConsultants will be engaged to provide capacity development and training on
affected by lack of service       sustainable O&M of the new facilities, tariff setting, and financial management.
providers’ financial management   Tariffs will be adjusted to cover O&M costs, and the government will cover any
skills and insufficient utility tariff
                                  funding gap if revenues from tariffs are insufficient to maintain compliance with
adjustments                       the utilities' covenanted financial ratios.
Insufficient financial management The PICS hired will work with MED, MCUD, MOFALI, and GIRAF manager to
capacity of executing and         develop and fully operationalize an efficient financial management system for the
implementing agencies             program.
Insufficient capacity (and lack ofTraining programs (business planning, marketing, strategy, and technology) will
technical capacity) of the privatebe delivered to targeted agribusinesses to strengthen their capacities. The
sector (agri-cooperatives and     investment program will include construction of a business incubator in the agro-
SMEs) to develop agribusinesses,  industrial park of each aimag and inter-soum center to build the capacity of the
diversify livestock products, and private sector. The Mongolian National Chamber of Commerce and Industry will
create economic opportunities     be actively involved in the management of the incubator and the preparation of
                                  LCADPs.
GIRAF = green and inclusive regional agribusiness fund; LCADP = low-carbon and climate-resilient agribusiness
development plan; MCUD = Ministry of Construction and Urban Development; MED = Ministry of Economy and
Development; MOFALI = Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry; O&M = operation and maintenance; PICS =
program implementation support consulting services; PIU = project implementation unit.
Source: Asian Development Bank.




50 ESMS arrangement was prepared based on due diligence of XacBank and Khan Bank, which are both ADB clients.

   It was found that they have adequate institutional capacity to implement the Safeguard Policy Statement’s procedural
   and substantive requirements contained in the ESMS.
51 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                               17


                          V.      ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS

39.     The government and MED have assured ADB that implementation of the investment
program shall conform to all applicable ADB policies, including those concerning anticorruption
measures, safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement as
described in detail in the FAM and loan documents. The government and MED have given certain
undertakings for the MFF, which are set forth in the framework financing agreement. Specific
covenants agreed by the government and MED with respect to individual tranches under the MFF
are set forth in the loan, grant, and project agreements for the respective tranches.

                                 VI.     RECOMMENDATION

40.     I am satisfied that the proposed multitranche financing facility would comply with the
Articles of Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board
approve the multitranche financing facility to Mongolia for the Aimags and Soums Green Regional
Development Investment Program in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding the equivalent
of $448,000,000, which comprises (i) the provision of loans from ADB’s ordinary capital resources,
in regular terms, with interest and other terms to be determined in accordance with ADB’s Flexible
Loan Product; (ii) the provision of loans from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in concessional
terms, with interest and other terms to be determined in accordance with ADB’s applicable policies
relating to ordinary capital resources; (iii) the provision of grant from ADB’s Special Funds
resources (Asian Development Fund); and (iv) the administration by ADB of the loan and grant to
be provided by the Green Climate Fund; and is subject to such other terms and conditions as are
substantially in accordance with those set forth in the framework financing agreement presented
to the Board.

                                                            Masatsugu Asakawa
                                                            President

1 March 2023
18        Appendix 1



        DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK FOR THE INVESTMENT PROGRAM
Impact the Investment Program is Aligned with
Green development, regional development sustainability, quality of life, and human development achieved (Vision 2050:
Long-Term Development Policy of Mongolia)a
                                                                               Data Sources and          Risks and Critical
Results Chain                  Performance Indicators                       Reporting Mechanisms            Assumptions
Outcome          By 2034
Green and        a. 3.036 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent      a–b. ALAMGAC and National R: Changed
inclusive agro- per annum avoided through soil carbon                    Agency for Meteorology and      government
territorial      sequestration and methane, nitrous oxide, and           Environmental Monitoring        priorities shift
development      carbon dioxide emissions reduced (2021 baseline:        externally verified MRV report, resources away
advanced         0) (OP 3.1)                                             and MOFALI annual report on from supporting
                                                                         livestock and land use          aimag development
                 b. 28.8 million ha of rangeland restored and more
                 sustainably managed (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 3.3.3)                                       A: EIB inputs and
                                                                                                         outputs timely
                 c. Climate and disaster resilience of 550,000 people c. ALAMGAC local land officer delivered
                 strengthened (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 3.2, 3.3, 4.1)       and soum government report

                  d. 500 SMEs or cooperatives and 1,000                d–e. Audited financial and
                  microenterprises established under the GIRAF         operational reports from
                  (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 1.2, 2.1, 5.2.3)              beneficiary enterprise or
                                                                       qualified commercial bank,
                  e. 11,400 direct green jobs created, of which 40%    and oversight reports from
                  are filled by women (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 1.2, 2.1) FRC

                  f. Number of livestock heads in targeted areas   f. National Statistics Office
                  decreased by 2.5% per annum (2021 baseline: 2.5% annual data on livestock
                  per annum growth)

                  g. Wastewater treatment efficiency in targeted          g. Aimag water and
                  aimag and soum centers improved to 90% (2021            wastewater operating
                  baseline: 50% in targeted aimag centers and 0% in       companies’ measurement of
                  targeted soum centers) (OP 4.3)                         biological oxygen demand
                                                                          removal in the effluent
                                                                          discharge in compliance with
                                                                          Mongolian standards MNS
                                                                          4943:2011
Outputs           By 2033
1. Climate-       1a. 35 km of urban roads built and 215.9 km of          1a–h. Mongolia state special    R: Reduced
resilient, low-   connection roads improved; water supply capacity        inspection monitoring report,   cooperation and
carbon, and       increased by 3,000 cubic meters per hour; 25 km of      and aimag and soum              coordination
attractive        water supply pipes laid; 35 km of sewerage network      governments' report on          among the project
aimag and         laid; 16 km of district heating pipes laid; 135 km of   urban construction              key stakeholders
soum centers      power lines built; 20 km of drainage built; 173.5 km
developed         of optical cable laid; 10.2 megawatts from solar                                        R: Rising world
                  panels installed; 10 km flood protection                                                prices of energy
                  infrastructure built; and 1,230 ha of solid waste                                       and construction
                  dump site cleared (2021 baseline: 0)b (OP 4.1.2)                                        materials
                                                                                                          significantly
                  1b. Existing open dump site cleaned and closed,                                         increase the
                  and municipal as well as agrobusiness solid waste                                       project's
                  segregated and safely disposed of at new landfills                                      investment and
                  (that includes recycling facilities for livestock and                                   operation and
                  agricultural waste) in 12 aimag and soum centers                                        maintenance costs
                  (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 4.1.1)
                                                                                                          A: Significant
                  1c. Pilot for ger area streets upgrading implemented                                    interest from
                  and replicated (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 3.1.3, 4.1.2)                                     herders’
                                                                                                          cooperatives and
                  1d. 150 ha of agro-industrial parksc developed and                                      private sector to
                                                                                                    Appendix 1      19


                                                                              Data Sources and           Risks and Critical
Results Chain                 Performance Indicators                        Reporting Mechanisms           Assumptions
                12 agribusiness incubators operating in targeted                                         participate in
                locations, with at least 40% of workspaces allocated                                     project activities
                to women-led and/or owned businesses (2021
                baseline: 0) (OP 5.2.3)                                                                  A: Compliance with
                                                                                                         the program road
                1e. 12 domestic WWTPs with a total capacity of                                           map
                30,000 m3/d meet Mongolian standards; and 12
                agro-industrial park WWTPs with a total capacity of                                      A: Timely delivery
                12,500 m3/d constructed and/or upgraded (2021                                            of EIB inputs and
                baseline: 0) (OP 4.1.2, 4.3.1)                                                           outputs

                1f. Heat metering and associated consumption-
                based tariffs implemented in targeted aimag and
                soum centers (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 4.1.1, 6.2)

                1g. Smart land management and climate-responsive
                digital center built (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 3.3.3, 4.2)

                1h. At least 6 education facilities improved with
                gender-sensitived WASH facilitiese (2021 baseline:
                0) (OP 2.4.1, 4.1.2)

                1i. 300,000 person-months of employment
                opportunities during project construction created, of     1i. Contractors' annual
                which 20.0% are filled by women (2021 baseline:           employment records
                17.2% of women in the construction sector) (OP
                1.2, 2.1)

2. Climate-      By 2033
resilient, high- 2a. At least 180 PUGs and herder groups signed     2a. Aimag and soum
carbon           (by both spouses) the updated RUA and sustainable governments’ monitoring data
sequestration, and inclusive pasture management plan and            on land management, and
and sustainable benefited from CPP activities, with 45% female      ALAMGAC RUA registration
rangeland and participation (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 5.1, 6.2.4)      data system
agricultural
management       2b. 60 PUG-based cooperatives established, with at 2b. Aimag and soum
implemented      least 30% led by women;f and 12 aimag and inter-   governments' reports, and
                 soum centers, 6 aimags, and 1 regional cooperative MOFALI annual reports on
                 organized (2021 baseline: 23%) (OP 2.3, 5.1)       cooperatives

                2c. 10 disease-free establishments and 12 aimag-,     2c–d. Aimag and soum
                and inter-soum-level veterinary laboratories built    governments' reports on
                (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 5.2.4)                         livestock and rural
                                                                      development, and Mongolia
                2d. Primary works for the irrigated perimeter of at   State Special Inspection
                least 2,500-ha fodder and crop farms built, including monitoring reports
                ecosystem-based water harvesting and
                conservancy solutions (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 3.3.2,
                3.3.5, 5.1.1)

                2e. 45,000 person-months of employment                    2e. Contractors' annual
                opportunities during project construction created, of     employment records
                which 20% are filled by women (2021 baseline: 0)
                (OP 1.2)
20        Appendix 1


                                                                                 Data Sources and            Risks and Critical
Results Chain                    Performance Indicators                        Reporting Mechanisms            Assumptions
3. Accessible       By 2033
financing for       3a. Under window 1, loans, subloans, or loans plus       3a–e. Audited financial and
low-carbon and      credit risk guarantees of at least $50 million           operational reports from
climate-resilient   provided for SME investments, of which at least          beneficiary enterprises or
livestock and       30% led by women, in targeted aimag and inter-           qualified commercial banks,
agrobusiness        soum centers, through PUGs and herder groups             and oversight reports from
value chains        (2021 baseline: 0)g (OP 1.3.2, 5.2.3)h                   FRC
created
(financial          3b. Under window 2, loans, subloans, or loans plus
intermediation      credit risk guarantee of at least $60 million provided
loan                for medium and large investments in targeted aimag
component)          and inter-soum centers, through PUGs and herder
                    groups (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 1.3.2, 5.2.3)i

                    3c. Under window 3, 1,000 micro green loans
                    approved (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 1.3.2)

                    3d. 100 partnership agreements signed with SMEs,
                    of which at least 30% led by women, investing in
                    pre-processing facilities (2021 baseline: 0) (OP
                    2.1.3, 5.2.3)

                    3e. At least $5 million reimbursable grants from
                    Green Innovation Grant Facility provided to qualified
                    investors to promote green and inclusive
                    innovations in agribusiness (2021 baseline: 0) (OP
                    5.2.3)

4. Institutional    By 2032
capacity and        4a. By 2032, at least 180 (PUG-level) PIHMPs and         4a–d. MOFALI policy
policies for        at least 60 (soum-level) low-carbon and climate-         department reports, and local
low-carbon and      resilient agribusiness development plans developed       governments' reports on urban
climate-            and consolidated into at least 10 aimag level and 3      construction and economic
resilient agro-     regional-level agro-territorial development plans        development
territorial         (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 6.1.2)
development
strengthened        4b. By 2025, traceability and certification systems at
                    herder-, PUG-, and cooperative-levels operational,
                    with 40% of targeted herder groups and PUGs
                    certified (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 5.2.4)

                    4c. By 2032, at least 180 community-based animal
                    health workers trained, of which 95% report
                    improved knowledge and skills on veterinary
                    services and 50% are women (2021 baseline: 0)
                    (OP 5.3.1)

                    4d. By 2032, 6 national policies for rangeland and
                    agricultural management and green territorial
                    development prepared and implemented, and 2
                    policy recommendations included in the Mongolian
                    Livestock 2 program (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 3.3.2,
                    6.1.2)j

                    4e. By 2025, business plan and technical                 4e. FRC and project
                    specification template for investments supported by      implementation reports
                    GIRAF developed; and training programs for
                    agribusiness development held, of which 40% are
                    women (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 2.1.1)
                                                                                                   Appendix 1         21


Key Activities with Milestones
1. Climate-resilient, low-carbon, and attractive aimag and soum centers developed
1.1 Complete infrastructure and detailed architectural design (2024–2030)
1.2 Pilot the ger area street development voluntary participation (2024–2026)
1.3 Procure goods and works (2024–2031)
1.4 Construct, supervise, and commission infrastructure, and socioeconomic facilities (2026–2033)
2. Climate-resilient, high-carbon sequestration, and sustainable rangeland and agricultural management
implemented
2.1 Engage and consult with herders, PUG, and herder groups to ensure their participation (2024–2032)
2.2 Complete detailed design for irrigated perimeters and storage facilities (2024–2030)
2.3 Prepare and sign PUG and herder groups' RUA including PIHMP (2024–2032)
2.4 Establish or upgrade cooperatives (2025–2033)
2.5 Procure goods and works (2025–2031)
2.6 Procure and implement CPP (2025–2033)
2.7 Construct, supervise, and commission infrastructure (2026–2033)
3. Accessible financing for low-carbon and climate-resilient livestock and agrobusiness value chains created
(financial intermediation loan component)
3.1 Establish the GIRAF (2024–2025)
3.2 Finalize the green and inclusive agri-value chain development plan (2024–2030)
3.3 Reach out to local businesses and receive bidding proposals for financing (2025–2032)
3.4 Short-list commercial banks (2025–2031)
3.5 Establish and implement environmental and social management system for each commercial bank (2025–2032)
3.6 Select proposals for financing (2025–2032)
3.7 Construct production and logistic facilities or establish businesses (2025–2032)
4. Institutional capacity and policies for low-carbon and climate-resilient agro-territorial development
strengthened
4.1 Capacity building and policy reforms
4.1a Train and increase capacity of PIU staff, targeted institutions, and all related stakeholder in the agriculture sector
on project implementation safeguards and due diligence (2024–2031)
4.1b Implement policy and sector reforms (2024–2032)
4.2 Detailed design and supervision
4.2a Hire detailed design and supervision consulting services (2023–2028)
4.2b Prepare feasibility study for tranches 2 and 3 (2026–2029)
4.2c Complete detailed design of all civil works under project 1 and update safeguard documents, including the initial
environmental examination, land acquisition and resettlement plans, and voluntary participation plans (2025–2030)
4.2d Supervise civil works construction and monitor implementation of safeguard provisions (2025–2033)
4.2e Implement policy and sector reforms (2025–2032)
4.3 Rangeland management
4.3a Hire consulting services (2023–2028)
4.3b Engage with herders, herder groups, and PUGs (2024–2032)
4.3c Complete detailed design of irrigated perimeters and disease-free facilities (2023–2029)
4.3d Train PUGs and herder groups and implement CPP activities (2023–2031)
4.3e Train cooperatives (2025–2032)
4.3f Implement policy and sector reforms (2025–2032)
4.4. Green agribusiness finance
4.4a Hire consulting services (2023–2029)
4.4b Develop standards, guidelines, and regulations for GIRAF (2024–2025)
4.4c Implement policy and sector reforms (2025–2032)
Investment Program Management Activities
Establish and fully staff the PIU.
Hire project implementation and management support consulting services.
Fully train PIU staff on ADB safeguards, due diligence, procurement, and financial management.
Perform day-to-day management and supervision during program implementation.
Coordinate with government agencies, aimag governments, and other involved parties for program implementation.
Manage consulting services, monitor deadlines for procurement packages, and implement key procurement activities.
Monitor civil works and infrastructure implementation.
Meet targets in the design and monitoring framework, social and gender action plan, consultation and participation
plan, stakeholder communication strategy, and facility administration manual.
Complete and operate sex-disaggregated project performance management system and comprehensive MRV system.
Prepare and submit ADB, EIB, and Green Climate Fund relevant progress, safeguards, and financial audit reports.
Conduct inception, annual, midterm, and final review missions.
Prepare tranches 2 and 3, including due diligence (tranche 2 by 2025 and tranche 3 by 2027).
 22       Appendix 1


  Inputs
  ADB ordinary capital resources: $135.0 million (regular loan)
  ADB ordinary capital resources: $135.0 million (concessional loan)
  ADB Special Funds resources (Asian Development Fund): $3.0 million (grant)
  Green Climate Fund: $130.0 million (loan)
  Green Climate Fund: $45.0 million (grant)
  European Investment Bank: $150.0 million (loan)
  European Investment Bank: $30.0 million (grant)
  Government of Mongolia: $75.3 million
  Commercial banks/Private sector: $25.0 million
  Beneficiaries: $6.7 million
A = assumption; ADB = Asian Development Bank, ALAMGAC = Agency for Land Management and Administration,
Geodesy and Cartography; CPP = community participation in procurement; EIB = European Investment Bank; FRC =
Financial Regulatory Commission; GIRAF = green and inclusive regional agribusiness fund; ha = hectare; km =
kilometer; m2 = square meter; m3/d = cubic meter per day; MOFALI = Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry;
MRV = measurement, reporting, and verification; OP = operational priority; PIHMP = participatory and inclusive herd
management plan; PIU = project implementation unit; PUG = pasture user group; R = risk; RUA = rangeland use
agreement; SMEs = small and medium-sized enterprises; WASH = water, sanitation, and hygiene; WWTP = wastewater
treatment plant.
a State Great Khural. 2020. Vision 2050: Long-Term Development Policy of Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar.
b Excludes agro-industrial park infrastructure.
c Agro-industrial park is a comprehensive complex with full provision of engineering infrastructure for transportation,

   logistics, trading, processing, and manufacturing services to support the transformation and the trade of green
   livestock and agricultural raw materials, and promote green food manufacturing and food safety.
d A gender-sensitive public space refers to urban designs where women feel comfortable using the public space and is

   adapted to the needs and demands of both women and men.
e Gender-sensitive WASH facilities have at least the following characteristics: separate male and female toilets with

   separate washbasins and bins, adequate lighting and privacy, and facilities adapted to young women/girls, including
   those with disabilities.
f Cooperatives "led by women" must have (i) at least 51% female representation on the board, or (ii) a female executive

   director or board president and at least 30% female representation on the board. Swiss Agency for Development and
   Cooperation. 2021. Sustainably Managed Pastures and Healthy Animals: Mongolia's 'Green Gold'.
g SMEs led by women refer to those owned and managed by women. Proxy baseline was from the results of 2019

   World Bank Mongolia Enterprise Surveys: (i) 43.7% of firms have female participation in ownership, of which 45.9%
   are small, 40.0% are medium, and 32.4% are large firms; and (ii) 38.9% of firms have a female top manager, of which
   44.4% are small, 26.9% are medium, and 24.4% are large firms. Men are predominant in large-scale business
   operations while women lead small businesses. Women are predominant in service-oriented industries and retailing
   and less involved in livestock agribusiness operations targeted by the program. Survey results by sector are
   not available.
h Window 1 will support SMEs processing livestock products, commercial and logistic investments for retail and exports,

   and other forms of economic diversification.
i Window 2 will support qualified medium- and large-scale enterprises involved in livestock production, processing,

   distribution, and marketing, and engaged in international trade.
j MOFALI Minister Order No. A/177, June 2022, following the Mongolian National Livestock Program.

Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities
The expected values and methodological details for all OP indicators to which this operation will contribute results are
detailed in Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix
2). In addition to the OP indicators tagged in the design and monitoring framework, this operation will contribute results
for:
OP 1.3 Poor and vulnerable people with improved standards of living (number)
OP 7.3.1 Measures to improve shared capacity of developing member countries to mitigate or adapt to climate change
            supported in implementation (number)
OP 7.3.3 Measures to improve regional public health and education services supported in implementation (number)
Source: ADB.
                                                                        Appendix 2      23


                             LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS
                  http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=49430-005-3

1.    Loan Agreement: Ordinary Operations
2.    Loan Agreement: Ordinary Operations (Concessional)
3.    Grant Agreement: Special Operations
4.    Grant Agreement: Externally Financed
5.    Loan Agreement: ADB Green Climate Fund
6.    Framework Financing Agreement
7.    Periodic Financing Request for Project 1
8.    Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services;
      and Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development
9.    Comparison of Financing Modality
10.   Facility Administration Manual
11.   Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities
12.   Development Coordination
13.   Financial Analysis
14.   Economic Analysis
15.   Country Economic Indicators
16.   Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
17.   Draft Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
18.   Draft Resettlement Framework
19.   Draft Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
20.   Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
21.   Climate Change Assessment
22.   Social and Gender Action Plan for Project 1
23.   Draft Initial Environmental Examination
24.   Draft Resettlement Plan
25.   Draft Resettlement Framework: Framework for Voluntary Participation
      in Ger Area Development—Providing Access to Urban Services
      through Household Connections and Development of Streets in Ger
      Areas
26.   Environmental and Social Management System Arrangement
Supplementary Document
27.   Detailed Economic Analysis
