Environmental Monitoring Report


PUBLIC




Annual Report (January – December 2025)
February 2026




Uzbekistan: Mortgage Market Sector Development
Program




Prepared by Mortgage Refinancing Company of Uzbekistan (UzMRC) for the Asian
Development Bank (ADB).
                                   ABBREVIATIONS

    ADB          -    Asian Development Bank
    ESMS         -    Environmental Social Management System
    MRA          -    Master Refinancing Agreements
                      The National Bank for Foreign Economic Activity of the
    NBU          -
                      Republic of Uzbekistan
    PFI          -    Participating Financial institution
    BRB          -    Biznesni rivojlantirish banki
    SQB          -    Sanoat Qurilish bank (Uzpromstroybank)
    UzMRC        -    Mortgage Refinancing Company of Uzbekistan
    OFB          -    Orient Finans Bank




This environmental monitoring report is a document of the borrower. The views expressed
herein do not necessarily represent those of ADB's Board of Directors, Management, or
Staff, and may be preliminary in nature. Your attention is directed to the “terms of use”
section of ADB’s website.

In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document,
ADB does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory
or area.
           MORTGAGE REFINANCING COMPANY OF UZBEKISTAN
            ANNUAL ESMS IMPLEMENTATION REPORT, 2025


Name of the organization       Mortgage Refinancing Company of Uzbekistan
                               (UzMRC)
Filled out by (name)           Umrbek Jumaniyazov
Position                       Senior Refinance Analyst (ESMS coordinator)
Checked and approved by (name) Ulugbek Rakhmatov
Position                       Head of products department
Reporting period               01 January 2025 – 31 December 2025
Reporting date                 10 February 2025




                                                                        1
                                                      CONTENTS
                                                                                                                       Page



I.     INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 3
II.    LIST OF SUB-LOANS SCREENED IN LINE WITHIN REQUIREMENTS OF ADB
       CREDIT LINE IN THE REPORTING PERIOD PER PFI ......................................... 4
III.   MONITORING OF OUTSTANDING SUB-LOAN PORTFOLIO .............................. 5
IV.    STATUS OF ESMS IMPLEMENTATION AT PFIS ................................................ 10
V.     CAPACITY BUILDING AT PFIS and UzMRC ......................................................... 12
VI.    CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS ......................................................... 13
ANNEXS
 1. SUBLOAN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING CHECKLIST ........... 15
 2. COMPLETED CHECKLIST SAMPLES OF PFIs ...................................................... 17
 3. SCREENING OF MORTGAGE LOANS..................................................................... 18
 4. TEMPLATE MONITORING REPORT ........................................................................ 19
 5. FORMAT FOR SAFEGUARDS REPORTING TO UZMRC..................................... 20
 6. SUBMITTED SAMPLES OF PFIs ............................................................................... 21
 7. MONITORING REPORTS BY THE PFIs ................................................................... 22
 8. STATUS OF ESMS IMPLEMENTATION IN PFIS .................................................... 23
 9. RESPONSIBLE PERSONS OF PFIS FOR ESMS ................................................... 24
 10.CONTACTING ONLINE WITH UZMRC ON QUESTIONS AND APPEALS ........ 25




                                                                                                                              2
                                          I.       INTRODUCTION
The Mortgage Refinancing Company of Uzbekistan (UzMRC) is addressing the lack of
long-term financing in the banking sector of Uzbekistan. UzMRC is playing a pivotal role
in expanding the medium to long-term mortgage finance sector by mobilizing long-term
capital from institutional sources and setting standards for assessing borrowers' solvency
and procedures for granting mortgage loans.
UzMRC refinances mortgage portfolios of financial institutions (banks) with which UzMRC
has signed Master Refinancing Agreements (MRA).
The financing provided by UzMRC to Participating Financial institutions (PFIs) is not
aimed at developing the real estate sector or mass housing construction, but at
refinancing loans to individuals for the following purposes:
      1)     purchase of existing houses/apartments (primary and secondary market); and
      2)     renovation of existing houses/apartments.
UzMRC refinances only those sub-loans that have no negative impact on the environment
and social environment or have minimal impact (i.e. they are categorized in category C in
terms of environmental impact, involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples' rights).
Assessment of loans category is done in accordance with the Environmental and Social
Management System (ESMS) introduced in UzMRC1 and in the PFIs.
The UzMRC ESMS document describes: (i) the environmental and social policies of
UzMRC; (ii) screening, categorization, and review procedure; (iii) organizational structure
and staffing including skills and competencies in environmental and social areas; (iv)
training requirements; and (v) monitoring and reporting.
The ESMS is developed in line with the ADB’s 2009 Safeguards Policy Statement (SPS),
the goal of which is to promote the sustainability of project outcomes by protecting the
environment and people from the project’s potential adverse impacts.
The goal of the ESMS is to ensure that all PFIs have an appropriate screening process
as a part of their ESMS acceptable to ADB in place, which will confirm safeguards
category C for all of its ADB-financed on-lending portfolio to PFIs and enforce all national
laws and regulations that provide protection to homeowners.
Further, the Refinance Mortgage Portfolio Environmental and Social Screening Checklist,
Extended list of Excluded Activities and ADB’s Prohibited Investment Activities List and
ESMS review form for PFIs (Annexes 1, 3, 4, 5 of the UzMRC ESMS document) apply
for the PFIs to conduct their screening processes.

All sub-loans refinanced under the Program, including mortgage purchases and
household-level renovation loans, consistently present minimal or no environmental or
social risks. The financed activities are limited to existing residential properties and small-
scale interior renovation works that do not involve land acquisition, involuntary
resettlement, structural alteration, demolition, or expansion into environmentally sensitive


1
    Categorization is based on ADB safeguard requirements.


                                                                                            3
areas. Therefore, all sub-loans are classified as Category C for Environment, Involuntary
Resettlement, and Indigenous Peoples under ADB SPS 2009.
During 2025, among originated mortgages by PFIs, there are “green renovations” as well.
For clarification, 'green renovation' loans refer to renovation sub-loans that include
energy-efficiency improvements (e.g., insulation, window replacement, efficient heating
systems, installment of solar panels) where sub-borrowers get green certificates in
green.uzmrc.uz platform, while standard renovation loans refer to minor interior repairs
and upgrades not necessarily linked to energy-efficiency outcomes. Both categories
remain household-level activities with minimum environmental and social risk.

UzMRC updated its ESMS policy in 2025, to strengthen labor-related provisions, including
explicit prohibitions on child labor, forced labor, and discrimination, as well as reinforcing
grievance redress and reporting requirements. These updates were aligned with ADB
SPS 2009 and communicated to all PFIs.

  II.     LIST OF SUB-LOANS SCREENED IN LINE WITHIN REQUIREMENTS OF
              ADB CREDIT LINE IN THE REPORTING PERIOD PER PFI

Need to note that the ESMS procedures were applied as an integral part of the PFIs’
frameworks for Risk Management and Underwriting, embedded in the overall lending
screening and appraisal process and form part of the lending decision-making. In
particular, the screening for eligibility for a mortgage loan is based on the Environmental
and Social Screening Checklist (see Annex 1 and Annex 2) as well as guidelines for its
application indicated in the ESMS. These guidelines are designed to help the ESMS
Manager and credit officers to determine the significance of potential environmental
and/or social impacts associated with mortgage loans. Credit staff is responsible for
mortgage loan screening and on-site monitoring compiles the screening checklist and
submits it to ESMS Manager for further review (as indicated in the diagram in Annex 3).
The compiled checklist is kept in the subproject files.
During 2025, under the project, 5 PFIs originated the total of 905 (228 of which were
given for green and standard renovation) eligible mortgages that amounted to UZS
186.36 billion out of their own funds. About 14.7% of the eligible mortgages issued in
2025 were allocated to generate green and standard renovation loans in terms of
quantity. As of 31st December 2025, the outstanding balance of the Total refinanced
mortgage portfolio (under the loans 3870-UZB and 4245-UZB) amounted to UZS
4,190.74 billion, which was issued by PFIs including those issued in 2020-2025. All 905
eligible mortgages issued in 2025 were screened without exception using the
Environmental and Social Screening Checklist (Annex 1). Screening compliance rate -
100%. The detailed information is given in below table:
Table 1. PFIs detailed information on sub-loans                             in UZS billion
                                                Total refinanced       Total refinanced
                      Total originated
                                                    mortgage              mortgage
         PFI         eligible mortgage
                                              portfolio during 2025,   portfolio during
                      portfolio in 2025
                                                   (4245-UZB)             2020-2025
   SQB                                    -                        -                841.63


                                                                                             4
   Hamkorbank                     65.13                   48.20                    821.18
   Ipoteka-bank                  103.04                  121.12                    844.84
   Asakabank                           -                       -                   426.99
   BRB                                 -                       -                   253.08
   Turonbank                           -                       -                   309.10
   Agrobank                        1.91                        -                   172.32
   NBU                                 -                       -                   306.58
   Xalq banki                      9.87                   13.53                    215.02
   OFB                             6.41                        -                         -
         Total                   186.36                  182.85                   4,190.74

Compared to previous years, mortgage issuance under the ADB-supported refinancing
program showed moderate stabilization in 2025. Variations among PFIs reflect
refinancing timing differences and portfolio rollover from 2024 to 2025 rather than
changes in eligibility criteria. PFIs with no newly originated ADB criteria eligible mortgages
in 2025 either relied on previously generated portfolios for refinancing or prioritized
commercial mortgage operations based on UzMRC commercial criteria.

The values given in “Total refinanced mortgages" shows the outstanding balance of the
mortgage portfolio at the date of refinancing. The mortgage loans listed within the above
table were screened and found to comply with the ESMS. From the above table, it is clear
that, in 2025, PFIs originated UZS 186.36 billion eligible mortgages where it constitutes
for almost 4.4% of Total refinanced mortgage portfolio since the beginning of the Project.
In some cases, like Ipoteka-bank and Xalq banki, Total refinanced mortgage portfolio
amount during 2025 is more than Total originated one in that year. The reason behind is
that, such PFIs originated those portfolios in earlier years like 2024 but were able to
refinance them only in 2025. Regards the gender requirement given by ADB - 32.5%,
312 mortgages including (green) renovations of 905, were given to female-borrowers.

          III.    MONITORING OF OUTSTANDING SUB-LOAN PORTFOLIO
Relevant procedures for monitoring mortgage loans have been established and practiced
by the PFIs. Besides, UzMRC carried out several spot checking (desk reviews and on-site
                       visits) activities during the reporting period.

Monitoring by PFIs
The monitoring processes and procedures are set by each PFI in the established order
that complies with the ESMS. At this, PFIs monitor the mortgage loans for environmental
and social (E&S) future risks because they may change during the typically long life of
the mortgage. Key events or changes that can raise, or present new, E&S risks include:
   I.    Change in the use of the mortgaged property (e.g. for commercial or industrial
         purposes instead of private use, the introduction of construction works at the
         site of mortgaged property);
   II.   Regulatory investigations, fines, or penalties imposed on the property. Public


                                                                                             5
            complaints or adverse media reports;
   III.     Accidents or incidents causing significant damage to the environment or human
            health and safety;
   IV.      Amendments to relevant E&S laws and regulations;
   V.       New developments or changes in land/property use, on adjacent land.

Monitoring (through field visits and desk reviews) for E&S risks is set by the PFIs to take
place alongside standard mortgage reviews to ensure sub-loan activities have minimal or
no adverse environmental, land acquisition, and involuntary resettlement impact (remain
within category C). In case non-compliance is identified, the PFIs are committed to
engaging in discussions/consultations to address areas of non-compliance or consider
terminating the mortgage loan, if necessary. Thus, during the whole life of sub-loans, the
PFIs are obliged to monitor disbursed sub-loans for early identification of events listed
above.
The PFIs have established competent systems and labor units and are conducting
monitoring activities through selective field visits to borrowers (financed property),
maintaining permanent contact with clients, screening news, reviewing changes of
appropriate legislation, etc.
As of the reporting period, no unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and
impacts, actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures and requirements
set forth in the ESMS was identified by PFIs in connection with the mortgage loans listed
in the second section.

Monitoring by UzMRC
Besides, during 2025, UzMRC carried out several spot-checking activities in the form of
desk reviews and site visits to the PFIs’ head offices to monitor mortgage portfolios
generated by the PFIs out of ADB funds.

Desk reviews
Desk reviews are conducted on a monthly and quarterly (in the frame of monthly and
quarterly monitoring of pledged mortgage portfolios and reporting) and ad-hoc (when a
new mortgage portfolio is being refinanced) bases. Accordingly, based on UzMRC
request, PFIs (Agrobank, Asakabank, Hamkorbank, Ipoteka-bank, Biznesni Rivojlantirish
Banki, SQB, Turonbank, NBU, OFB and Xalq Banki) provide a scanned version of all the
loan documents for several mortgages (that are selected by UzMRC in line with the on-
site spot check monitoring procedure). The checking takes place in three similar, but at
the same time, independent stages:
  1.      The relationship manager of the PFI, as the first line of defense, checks the loan
          documents for eligibility. If any deficient mortgage is identified, it should be omitted
          from the portfolio and the scope of checking should be enlarged by requesting loan
          documents of additional mortgage loans;
  2.      The second line of defense is the Portfolio manager of UzMRC. The manager
          conducts extended review of the portfolio and the loan documents. Once the



                                                                                               6
       portfolio manager confirms the clearance of the portfolio, it can further be
       submitted for the review by the Risk Manager of UzMRC;
  3.   At the third stage, after reviewing by the Risk Manager of UzMRC and confirming the
       clearance of the portfolio, the portfolio is allowed for refinancing.
Overall, while checking the mortgage documents by UzMRC, in case any inconsistency
with the eligibility criteria including the shortcomings related to the preliminary ESMS
screening through the filing of the checklists are identified, these mortgages are excluded
from the list of the to-be-refinanced portfolio.
As was stated earlier, UzMRC has established 2 tier monitoring systems that undergo the
three steps of checking as stated above. These tiers are as follows:
  1.   Annual – in the form of reporting from the PFIs on the annually progress of ESMS
       implementation and maintenance. At this, the PFIs provide annual reports in the set
       format (see Annex 4 and Annex 5) to UzMRC that are thoroughly reviewed and
       gathered to make an annual report of UzMRC to ADB.
       Besides, UzMRC gathers loan documents of selected mortgage loans (chosen in
       line with the spot check monitoring procedure) out of the pledged mortgage
       portfolios. At this, the loan documents include ESMS checklists (Annex 1 and
       Annex 2), monitoring sheets (Annex 3). Thus, UzMRC can ascertain that the
       mortgage loan is issued and monitored in the established order.
  2.   Ad-hoc basis – whenever the PFI submits a new portfolio to UzMRC for
       refinancing, the latter should make sure the portfolio is clear, or said otherwise,
       comply with the eligibility criteria. For this purpose, the PFI are requested to
       provide the loan documents of the selected mortgage loans (again, selected in line
       with the spot check monitoring procedure) out of the submitted mortgage portfolio
       to confirm its clearance. Within this kind of check, the ESMS screening checklists
       will also be reviewed by UzMRC and the risk consultant of ADB.
Currently, All PFIs has got quite adapted to issuing mortgage loans under ESMS
requirements since the project started, although there were some minor deficiencies
related to the ESMS screening of mortgages in the early years. Specifically, some PFIs
mismarked some sub-questions of checklist incorrectly. One of the main reasons for such
“involuntary” mistakes is inattentiveness during the filling of checklist (for instance C.2.
and E.1. sub-questions) by some regional credit officers of banks. In addition, various
shortcomings in annual reporting by PFIs were identified (see Annex 6).
Based on the results of such reviews, calls were organized in form of meetings with the
PFIs’ representatives responsible for ESMS. During these calls (meetings), the pitfalls
were presented and actions to prevent such mistakes in the future were discussed.
UzMRC explained the essence of the environmental and social management in the
project, its importance, and sustainability as well as gave detailed information on how to
screen the eligibility of the housing finance projects step-by-step. As one of the mitigating
actions, during the on-site monitoring visits to PFIs, UzMRC team members stressed the
attention of responsible ESMS managers and lending division line managers on the
mistakes encountered in filling ESMS checklists due to inattentiveness. Besides, it was
recommended to the ESMS managers of the PFIs to conduct individual training for their



                                                                                          7
credit officers working in the PFI branches to better equip them with an understanding of
the ESMS and the overall project requirements.
As a result of the above actions taken by UzMRC, the consistency of the ESMS screening
of mortgage loans and annual reporting by PFIs enhanced. However, UzMRC is providing
continuous support to the PFIs to fully employ ESMS in practice.
Field/site visits to the Head offices of the PFIs
Generally, UzMRC considers it as its core mandate to periodically monitor the PFIs are
issuing mortgages as per UzMRC’s eligibility criteria and mortgage loan originating
standards (CBU instruction #3269 and 3269-1)2. The goal of the spot checks is to ensure
that the PFI has established an appropriate loan screening, underwriting, ESMS
acceptable to UzMRC in place, which will confirm the generated mortgage loans comply
with the eligibility criteria and enforce all national laws and regulations.
In this sense, the refinance team and portfolio manager of UzMRC, incorporating the spot
check unit, conducted on-site monitoring of the mortgage activities of all 11 PFIs, namely,
SQB, Ipoteka-bank, Hamkorbank, Agrobank, Turonbank, BRB, NBU, Xalq banki,
Asakabank, OFB and Infinbank3 under the project. At this, a respective number of
mortgages generated by each PFI out of their mortgage portfolios were selected (in line
with the on-site spot check monitoring procedure) by the RM/refinance analyst in
reconciliation with portfolio manager.
The aim of this monitoring was to check that UzMRC standard of mortgage lending
(according to the PAM, last updated on November 2025) had been applied as integral
part of the PFIs’ frameworks for Risk Management and Underwriting, embedded in the
overall lending screening and appraisal process and form part of the lending decision-
making and in particular, the compliance of the mortgage loans with UzMRC’s ESMS and
ADB’s SPS. On top of that, UzMRC conducted site visits to Infinbank and OFB as well,
but only on commercial mortgages. Information about the dates of the spot checks and
the number of mortgage loans reviewed in each PFI is provided below where it
differentiates total:
                                                           Number of
                                 Dates of site visits                    ADB* line related
    #    Name of the PFI                              mortgages reviewed
                                      to PFIs                              sub-loans
                                                            (Total)
    1   OFB                       Oct 27, 2025                  6                 -
    2   BRB                       Oct 29, 2025                 10                10
    3   NBU                      Oct 30-31, 2025               11                11
    4   Turon                     Nov 3-4, 2025                13                11


2
 Resolution of the Central Bank Board of Directors No. 13/8 dated 11 June 2020 On the Approval of the
Regulation of the Terms and Conditions of Allocating Mortgage Loans to Residents. (In uzbek)
Resolution of the Central Bank Board of Directors No. 3269-1 dated 21 July 2025 On Introducing
Amendments to the Regulation on the Maximum (Limit) Conditions for the Provision of Mortgage Loans to
the Population (in uzbek)
3
 Infinbank cooperates with UzMRC only on commercial resources and is not cleared by ADB on 4245- UZS.
Therefore, no further information is provided regarding the Infinbank in this Report.


                                                                                                  8
  5   Asakabank                 Nov 5-7, 2025                  25                   22
  6   Xalq banki               Nov 10-11, 2025                 15                    5
  7   Agrobank                 Nov 12-14, 2025                 29                    4
  8   Hamkorbank                Dec 1-6, 2025                  51                   48
  9   SQB                      Dec 9-15, 2025                  40                   32
 10   Ipoteka                  Dec 16-23, 2025                 50                   44
                       Total                                  250                  187
* UzMRC chose those mortgages originated under 3870-UZB and 4245-UZB Loans both. All
other mortgages other than ADB criteria were originated under the commercial terms of
UzMRC.

During the field visit monitoring process, Typical deficiencies identified during monitoring
included: (i) checklist mis-marking due to clerical errors; (ii) incomplete reporting fields in
annual submissions; and (iii) minor inconsistencies in encoding borrower information.
Renovation-related sub-loans financed under the program consist exclusively of small-
scale, household-level works such as interior repairs, replacement of fixtures, energy-
efficiency upgrades, and improvements not requiring demolition or structural alteration.
These activities generate only minimal domestic construction waste and do not require
environmental permits. Therefore, all renovation sub-loans continue to be classified as
Category C under ADB SPS 2009.
No substantive environmental or social non-compliance was identified. Following the
results of the spot checking, the remedy actions by UzMRC were taken. At this, the
mistakes related to ESMS checklist filling were categorized as negligible risk, where the
deficiency is preliminary suspected of breach of UzMRC criteria and the PFI was allocated
a time to either fix it or provide the proof of the consistency of the mortgage loan to the
eligibility criteria. The following activities were conducted to prevent deficiencies in the
future:
       1. A meeting with the top management of the PFI. It was important that they were
          aware of the spot check results: the support of the Management would facilitate
          the mitigation of the issues.
       2. A joint call with the ESMS managers of the PFIs. During the call, the pitfalls were
          presented and actions to prevent such mistakes were discussed. This was done
          to ensure that the PFI's spot check results were accurate and that the PFIs'
          ESMS checklists were filled correctly.
Even though no ESMS audit was held on site in PFIs during 2025, UzMRC side has
received some questions regarding the ESMS procedures, where UzMRC gave
comprehensive response. Several minor technical mistakes are still being made by the
PFIs during the preparation of reports despite the fact that the majority of PFIs adapted
to submit reports in a correct way. For further information, a brief analysis of the
conducted audits and on-the-job training for each PFI is presented in Annex 6.
Regarding the actions of UzMRC, the comments were sent to each PFI for consideration
and duly correction, which will be closely monitored during consecutive quarters.
Overall, site visits gave clearance that banks comply with ESMS management where
screening and monitoring set off properly. During the field visits, UzMRC chose


                                                                                            9
24 renovation sub-loans (13 of them are ADB related mortgages) to check for ESMS
requirements. Findings show that the level of construction wastes that are generated as
result of these activities are minimal and followed national requirements on household
level waste management proper disposal. On top that, GRM monitoring was conducted
during the reporting period. Regarding the renovation loans under the program, neither
UzMRC nor PFIs received no grievances. To identify that GRM communication channels
(website, hotline, email) of both UzMRC and PFIs were reviewed and confirmed
operational.

               IV.    STATUS OF ESMS IMPLEMENTATION AT PFIS

Existence of ESMS policies in PFIs (under other ADB projects)
As of the reporting date, all the PFIs have their ESMS that meet UzMRC requirements.
In particular:
    1)     Each PFI has ESMS at the bank level, which applies/complies with ADB
           safeguards;
    2)     Screening mechanisms are applied with respect to the mortgage loans;
    3)     Respective reporting is established and practiced.
Prior to the project initiation (before Loan #3870), seven banks – Ipoteka-bank, Agrobank,
Biznesni Rivojlantirish Banki (former QQB), National Bank of Uzbekistan (NBU), Xalq
Banki, Asakabank, and Turonbank had introduced ESMS in the frame of the
implementation of ADB projects "Uzbekistan: Affordable Rural Housing Program",
''Livestock Value Chain Development Project" and “Horticulture value chain development
project” and only one bank - Hamkorbank – had had a full-fledged ESMS at the bank level.
Existing ESMS policies were either developed based on ADB Safeguard Policy Statement
or contain the requirements set out by the ADB document/specific project. The existing
ESMS was introduced in these 6 PFIs during 2016-2019 and they regularly update/review
their policies. One more bank - Sanoat Qurilish Bank – developed its ESMS policy with IFC
assistance on the bank level on parallel with the approval of ESMS under UzMRC. The
last onboarded bank by ADB, OFB also implemented its ESMS at the late of December
2024 which was crucial to be in line with ADB and UzMRC requirements. Even though
Infinbank doesn’t use ADB resources to refinance its mortgage portfolio, based on the
UzMRC`s requirements, Infinbank also implemented its ESMS mechanism (September
2020). The reason behind is that UzMRC considers the ESMS as its core and strategic
tool regardless of the resource base.
Regarding the ADB resources, overall, all of the 10 PFIs have developed the ESMS and
Grievance Redress Mechanisms as applied to a specific type of sub-projects. All these PFIs
have appointed staff who is responsible for the implementation of ESMS requirements
(visiting objects, evaluating, monitoring, and reporting about the environment and social
safeguard indicators). The policies set out ESMS institutional structure and the banks’
staff (position) responsible for the implementation of the ESMS requirements. The PFIs
also adopted a screening mechanism for E&S risk assessment to mortgage loans
required by UzMRC’s ESMS and ADB’s SPS 2009 as of the date of assessment.
Implementation of ESMS


                                                                                       10
Since the partnership between ADB and UzMRC started, the ADB team has shown
technical assistance in many spheres to run the project effectively. For example, in
November 2024, under the close collaboration, ADB Safeguards Team along with
UzMRC side agreed to update UzMRC`s ESMS policy to enhance the system and made
Corrective action plan. On top of that, for further improvements in ESMS, ADB engaged
Mr. Sergey KIM as an Environmental and Safeguards Management Expert (Resource
Person) under TA9877-UZB: Mortgage Market Sector Development Program.
Based on that Corrective action plan some sections added related to prohibiting and
preventing child labor and forced labor along with discrimination. Additionally ensuring
legally permitted equal opportunity, fair treatment, non-discrimination with respect to their
workers, not restricting workers from accessing legally permitted grievance and dispute
resolution mechanisms related to employment and working conditions, plus ensuring that
their subcontracting agreements include provisions consistent with the above
requirements. Additionally, updates also include Annex 5 (Relevant laws and other
regulations of the Republic of Uzbekistan) regarding the legal and regulatory frameworks.
UzMRC updated its Policy on 25 April, 2025. Out of 10 PFIs, 9 updated their ESMS
policies during 2025. Asakabank had updates in January 2026. All the detailed
information regarding the updates are given in the Annex 7 of this report. All the approved
ESMS were submitted to UzMRC. At this, the ten onboarded banks - Hamkorbank,
Ipoteka-bank, Biznesni rivojlantirish banki, Sanoat Qurilish bank, Agrobank, Asakabank,
Turonbank, Xalq banki, NBU and the lastly OFB - introduced ESMS in the frame of the
implementation of this project.
In case of any change, PFIs informs UzMRC side on news regarding the ESMS policies.
In the beginning, the main task of UzMRC and consultants was, after assessment of
Environmental and Social Management Systems existing in the PFIs, get the ESMS
policy acceptable by the SPS 2009 of ADB approved internally by the PFIs. Besides,
during the latter period, UzMRC focused on training the employees of PFIs to apply
mortgage loans screening mechanism and reporting formats on compliance with the
ESMS in practice.
Following the banks’ ESMS assessment and based on discussions with ADB, the sample
ESMS document/policy (template, which each bank can adjust based on internal
structure/requirements) for banks on mortgage lending was drafted. In accordance with
the requirements, projects are categorized into A, B, or C in accordance with ADB’s 2009
SPS definitions. At this, a guideline for mortgage loans screening and monitoring
reporting forms for mortgage loans, which are considered as Category C (low risk) as per
ADB’s Safeguard Policy, were developed. The PFIs that formalized MRAs with UzMRC,
approved their internal ESMS (see details in Annex 8) and appointed staff to be
responsible for mortgage loans screening and overall ESMS implementation under
cooperation with UzMRC.
Accordingly, having accepted UzMRC adherence to environmental and social safeguard
standards, the PFIs were committed to sustainable finance in mortgage lending and set
the pace for suitable procedures which would ensure its compliance with applicable local
environmental, social, and regulatory requirements, as well as requirements set by
UzMRC that in turn represent the project related requirements of ADB’s Safeguard Policy
Statement. Management of the above-stated banks internally approved the ESMS policy


                                                                                          11
and screening mechanism for E&S risk assessment to mortgage loans initiated by
UzMRC.
Since September 2022, Mr. Mr. Umrbek Jumaniyazov of UzMRC has been in charge of
ESMS. Based on his Job Description as the Senior refinance analyst, Mr. Jumaniyazov
dedicates 30% of his working time for organization and proper functioning of ESMS. Since
then, all reports from all PFIs collected and minor issues regarding the ESMS were
completed on time.
For the last 5 years, due to the effective and successful cooperation with PFIs, the
environmental and social management system of UzMRC was implemented within all
10 PFIs onboarded by ADB. A total of 10 employees of PFIs were appointed to monitor
compliance of mortgage loans with their ESMS procedures (see Annex 8). During 2025,
responsible officers on ESMS of PFIs have changed in 5 PFIs, namely Asakabank,
Agrobank, SQB, BRB and Ipoteka. In order to hasten the adaptation period on ESMS
management, UzMRC side gave quick (still in detail) guidance and possible solutions on
the arising issues regarding the monitoring, screening and reporting. UzMRC is
continuing to work on addressing any questions or issues that arise from the PFIs through
carrying out training/workshops/calls for the employees of PFIs and providing
consultations via phone and email. Common challenges encountered by PFIs during
2025 included staff turnover among ESMS focal points and variable accuracy in initial
checklist completion. These challenges were addressed through targeted guidance and
refresher training. UzMRC has a plan to organize a refreshening training for the focal
points of ESMS in 2026 as well.
Overall quality of ESMS implementation across PFIs is assessed as satisfactory.
Screening mechanisms are operational, monitoring is ongoing, and corrective feedback
loops are functioning effectively.

                  V.     CAPACITY BUILDING AT PFIs and UzMRC
Capacity building is also considered an important part of ESMS. While introducing ESMS
policy and procedures for mortgage lending may not be difficult for the PFIs, integration
of those in practice might be challenging for banks, especially for those that have no
experience in cooperation with ADB in other projects.
As it was indicated above, in 2025, no onsite audits were conducted in PFIs on ESMS in
mortgage lending practices. Despite that fact, UzMRC team gave guidance on received
feedback and questions on the difficulties and challenges the PFIs had faced and
discussed potential aids to help the PFIs to fully employ ESMS in practice. In this way,
PFIs’ focal points identified the ways to overcome the possible or potential issues related
to the ESMS should they arise in the future. As mentioned earlier, for new ESMS
managers of Asakabank, Agrobank, BRB, SQB and Ipoteka-bank, UzMRC provided quick
but comprehensive direction and supervision to cope with the ESMS management via
phone calls and electronic communication. Obviously, during the initial days, newly
onboarded focal points, made some technical mistakes, but because of close
collaboration, they were able to exercise the job tasks properly.
Recently onboarded PFI, namely OFB by ADB and UzMRC, implemented ESMS
internally. For fast and smooth adaptation on a new system, UzMRC`s refinance team


                                                                                        12
hold an online training for retail officers and underwrites of the PFI on December 19, 2024.
During the meeting, general information, the importance of the system and frequently
asked questions were introduced and discussed. Following the meeting, UzMRC shared
brief notes to PFI representatives to use daily including the ESMS checklist fill out
techniques on the main matters. Currently, UzMRC is closely coordinating the OFB in
order to reduce/prevent the risks or misunderstandings to this new system.
On July 29, 2025, UzMRC held an annual training on capacity building with the assistance
of ADB and NBT consulting company. Training covered issues like Safeguard policy
statement, legal and regulatory framework, Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM),
Problem-solving. Conducted refresher training to officers of PFIs was really helpful and
officers had great chance to discuss and shared their practices. All the participants were
given Certificates on the successful completion. UzMRC conducted annual safeguards
training 13 PFIs (total participants 15 excluding UzMRC and NBT consulting firm
eployees). Additionally, targeted onboarding sessions were provided to newly appointed
ESMS focal points in five PFIs. For 2026–2027, UzMRC intends to formalize an annual
ESMS training plan focusing on: (i) improving checklist accuracy; (ii) strengthening
monitoring documentation; (iii) supporting newly appointed ESMS managers; and (iv)
reinforcing GRM oversight.
On top of that, ADB conducted a seminar entitled “Project Management and
Implementation Training for Uzbekistan” on 29–30 October 2025. The objective of the
seminar was to strengthen the capacity of staff responsible for project supervision and
implementation within Executing Agencies and Implementing Agencies.
The following topics were covered during the interactive training workshop:
   •     The ADB project cycle;
   •     Due diligence, including financial management and environmental and social
         safeguards;
   •     Gender mainstreaming in ADB operations;
   •     Procurement of goods, works, and consulting services;
   •     Readiness of ADB-financed projects;
   •     Project implementation management;
   •     Monitoring and evaluation of project implementation; and
   •     An overview of the ADB project portfolio in Uzbekistan.
Being as an invitee, UzMRC representative also took part in those workshops where, as
a result of, ESMS coordinator was able to raise awareness of those above mentioned
topics and critical elements such as mandate, structure, roles and responsibilities dealing
with GRM. It was followed by Problem-Solving and Retaliation training where participants
got deeper understanding and guidance through phases like analyzing the problem,
identifying its root causes, implementing potentials solutions using several tools and
techniques.

                    VI.    CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
       As of the reporting period, any kind of issues, complaints, sanctions, corrective


                                                                                           13
            measures were not identified/applied with respect to any sub-loan.

Overall, all partner PFIs have adopted ESMS actions properly which are currently in
active use. All the procedures are going smoothly and timely. All the refinanced sub-loans
are at satisfactory level with “C” category. Newly appointed ESMS managers of some
PFIs had a good adaptation period where they could easily tackle the possible issues
regarding the screening and monitoring process.
In line with the project requirements, the PFIs have successfully established grievance
redress mechanisms (GRM) for mortgage lending to enable people who are adversely
affected by the lending process to submit complaints. To ensure efficient monitoring of
complaints and their handling, the GRMs were designed in accordance with the national
law No. 378 on “Appeals of individual and legal persons” (dated 29 October 2014,
amended 11 September 2017).
Two levels of the population’s grievance redress mechanism were established within the
framework of the project by ADB. The first level is the PFI product level grievance redress
mechanism. The second level is the PFI bypass grievance redress mechanism
established through UzMRC’s corporate webpage and direct phone contacts of UzMRC
(see Annex 9). Up to the end of 2025, UzMRC has not received grievance applications
from people. Since the project started, UzMRC has established a means of
communication for citizens' complaints, and now these means work regularly. In
particular, the Company updated its web page and introduced a window for appeals on
the corporate website (https://uzmrc.uz/en/contacts/). On top of that citizens can appeal
via corporate phone number of UzMRC (+998 78 148-30-00) or send online messages
(info@uzmrc.uz). So far, no complaints were submitted by the citizens.

Forward-looking recommendations for 2026 include: (i) improving documentation of
renovation-related sub-loans; (ii) strengthening internal quality checks for checklist
completion; (iii) increasing randomization and coverage of site visits; (iv) targeted training
for newly appointed ESMS managers.

In general, UzMRC confirms that all refinanced sub-loans remain correctly classified as
Category C under ADB SPS 2009.

In addition, since the ESMS is considered a very important element for UzMRC, it is
planned to conduct training at least for analysts in the refinance department (expected to
cover all UzMRC team).




                                                                                           14
                                                                                               Annex 1

       SUBLOAN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING CHECKLIST
    Bank…………………………………………………………………………
    Branch, Banking service center………………………………………….
    Loan ID……………………………………………………………………..
    Borrower, co-borrower…………………………………………………….
    Loan purpose………….…………………………………………………...
    Type of financed property..……………………………………………….
    Address of financed property..……………………………………………
    Property acquired from:                  primary market                     secondary market


                        SCREENING QUESTIONS                                     Yes       No      REMARKS

       A. Compliance with laws and/or regulations
     Is the subloan activity in breach of any applicable
     government environmental, health, safety or social laws,
     regulations or guidelines?

       B. ADB’s Prohibited Investment Activity List
     Is the subloan activity included in ADB’s list of prohibited
     investment activities and extended list of excluded activities
     presented in Annex 3 and Annex 4)?

       C. Sub-loans environmental impact assessment:
     C.1. Does/will the subloan activity to be financed generate
     any of the following impacts:
     hazardous and nonhazardous wastes or release any
     hazardous materials3?
     use of hazardous substances and materials subject to
     international bans or phaseouts because of their high toxicity
     to living organisms, environmental persistence, potential for
     bioaccumulation, or potential for depletion of the ozone
     layer?
     hazards to public health due to ambient, household and
     occupational pollution, thermal inversion, and smog
     formation?


3
 The common hazardous materials are asbestos, CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) and halons, lead, mercury,
PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls). Some wastes, such as used or unused solvents, sanitizers, paint wastes,
chemical wastes, pharmaceuticals, gas cylinders, aerosol cans and pesticides, may be hazardous waste.




                                                                                                            15
             C.2. Does the subloan activity to be financed has minimal
             or no adverse environmental impacts?
             D. Site of the subloan activity
           Is the site for the subloan activity adjacent to or within any of
           the following environmentally sensitive areas:
           Specially Protected Nature Areas / Cultural heritage sites /
           legally protected area/ wet land/ mangrove/ estuarine/
           special area for protecting diversity
           Is the subloan area or location claimed, belongs to disputed
           areas?
            E. Potential Social Impacts

           E1. Is the owner in the possession of the site used for the
           subloan for at least three years? (if yes, skip E2)

           E2: If less than three years, will the subloan:
           use land that has been/is subject of ongoing or unresolved
           claims or disputes, particularly from involuntarily resettled
           peoples?
           result in the removal/displacement of renters/leaseholders
           or informal land-users (people without legal rights on the
           land/squatters)?
           cause people or any community to lose access to natural
           resources, traditional habitats, or communal facilities? 4



  SIGNATURE
  Name:                                         (    ) Designation:        (    )


  Notes:

      i)         The Remarks field can be used to comment on screening questions A, B, C
                 and D. Such comments can, for example, refer to the availability of clearance,
                 permits, or licenses currently being requested form concerned governmental
                 agency, or inform that subloan is located at XX km from a projected area.
      ii)        If the answer to questions A, B and D is “no”, and to question C.2 and E1 is
                 “yes” or E2 “no”, UZMRC may consider the subloan portfolio for financing.
      iii)       If the answer to any of the questions C1 and E2 a), b) or c) is “yes”, exclude
                 from financing.


One sample from PFI is given below

  4 Examples  of natural resources are springs, common pasture lands, and rivers. Examples of
  community facilities are irrigation canals, water supply system, community parks, rivers, clinics,
  places of worship, and markets.


                                                                                                       16
                                      Annex 2
COMPLETED CHECKLIST SAMPLES OF PFIs
                              Annex 3
SCREENING OF MORTGAGE LOANS




                                   18
                                                                                                    Annex 3
                              TEMPLATE MONITORING REPORT


Bank………………………………………………………………………
Branch, Banking service center………………………………………..
Loan ID……………………………………………………………………
Loan purpose……………………………………………………………..


                                           Is the               Is the
                             If Yes,
              Breaches                    breach     Action   borrower    Deadline       Next
                           description                                                               Recommen
Date   Type   identified                 might be    to be    agreed to       for      monitoring
                              of the                                                                   -dation
                (Y/N)                    corrected   taken     correct    correction     date
                            breach
                                           (Y/N)                (Y/N)




SIGNATURE
Name:                                         ( ) Designation:            ( ) Notes:




                                                                                                         19
                                                                         Annex 4.

           FORMAT FOR SAFEGUARDS REPORTING TO UZMRC
Please attach any additional documents for detailed information.
 Bank
 Filled out by (name)
 Position
 Reporting period/Date:

   1. Introduction (information about the project and safeguards requirements)

   2. List of sub-loans screened in line within requirements of ADB credit line
      in the reporting period per PFI
             Type of sub-loan
                                                   Category (as              Reasons for
   Sub- (existing apartment/ Term (in Loan                       Status of
                                                      per ADB                 rejection,
 loan ID        renovation      months) amount                   the loan
                                                        SPS)                     if any
                   loan)
                                                     EA     IR


      EA- Environmental assessment, IR – Involuntary resettlement

   3. Monitoring of outstanding subloan portfolio
   • Include info on monitoring conducted in the reporting period (to confirm the
      category C)
   • Include info on any key events or changes in E&S risk status of the
      sub-loans disbursed in previous reporting period (s) upon results of the
      monitoring, if any, and measures undertaken.
   4. Status of ESMS implementation at the Bank
   • Includes information on any gaps, incompliance in terms of ESMS and
      measures undertaken by the Bank to improve ESMS
   • The Bank identify any challenges in introduction/implementation of
      ESMS and actions undertaken.

   5. Capacity building at the Bank
   • Any information on trainings conducted during the reporting
      period by PFIs/UZMRC respectively, if any

   6. Additional information

 Provide information on any issues, complaints, sanctions, corrective measures
applied with respect to any subloan, their reasons and actions applied by PFIs to
address those.



                                                                                    20
                                               Annex 5.
SUBMITTED SAMPLES OF PFIS (cover pages only)
                                                                                       Annex 6.
    MONITORING REPORTS BY THE PFIS - SHORTCOMINGS IN DETAILS

                                Identified
#   Section of report                                       Required corrective actions
                              shortcomings

    Part 2. List of sub-                             It is not necessary to indicate the full names
                           Incorrect indication of
1   loans / Number of                                of the borrowers, since this is confidential
                           borrowers’ names
    sub-loans                                        information. Encoding can be used

    Part 3. Monitoring
                           Incomplete                Specify the methodology for monitoring the
    the outstanding
2                          description               outstanding portfolio of sub-loans
    sub-loan portfolio
    Part 4. Status of                                Indicate information about when exactly the
    implementation of      Incomplete                ESMS was established, its current status,
3   the ESMS in the        description               whether the Bank's employees issuing sub-
    Bank                                             loans undergo training on a regular basis
    Part 5. Capacity                                 Provide information on who participated
                           Incomplete
    Building of the                                  (positions of employees and how many
4                          description
    Bank                                             people in total participated in the trainings)




                                                                                                22
                                                                                            Annex 7.
                          STATUS OF ESMS IMPLEMENTATION IN PFIs


                                 Existence of
   #                             ESMS under        Does it apply to
        Name of the Bank                                                                Dates
                                 other ADB?        mortgage loans?
                                  (Yes/No)5           (Yes/No)


                                                                                 Sep10, 2020
   1    Ipoteka-bank                  Yes                 Yes
                                                                         (New approval on Nov 27, 2025)
                                                                                   Sep 11, 2020
                                                                           (1st update on Jun 11, 2021)
   2    Hamkorbank                    Yes                 Yes              (2nd update on Aug 11, 2023)
                                                                           (3rd update on Sep 18, 2025)
        Biznesni                                                                 Sep 14, 2020
   3    Rivojlantirish Banki          Yes                 Yes
                                                                          (New approval on Dec 1, 2025)
                                                                                  Sep 16, 2020
   4    Agrobank                      Yes                 Yes
                                                                         (New approval on Dec 25, 2025)

                                                                                 Sep 21, 2020
   5    Turonbank                     Yes                 Yes
                                                                         (New approval on Dec 26, 2025)
                                                                                   Sep 25, 2020
   6    NBU                           Yes                 Yes
                                                                          (New approval on Dec 9, 2025)
        Sanoat qurilish                                                            Sep 30, 2020
   7                                  Yes                 Yes
        bank                                                               (1st update on Nov 28, 2025)
                                                                                  Sep 30, 2020
   8    Asakabank                     Yes                 Yes
                                                                          (New approval on Jan 20, 2026)
                                                                                 Oct 25, 2020
   9    Xalq Banki                    Yes                 Yes
                                                                         (New approval on Dec 10, 2025)
                                                                                 Dec 17, 2024
  10    OFB                           Yes                 Yes
                                                                         (New approval on Dec 12, 2025)




5 Here ESMS include an existence of appropriate ESMS policy, projects categorization, grievance mechanism,

reporting, etc.


                                                                                                        23
                                                                                                    Annex 8.

                           RESPONSIBLE PERSONS OF PFIS FOR ESMS

       Name of        Full name of the        Contact information of the                  Position of the
#
          PFI           employees                       employees                           employee

                      Botirov Rustam      Tel: (+998 71) 202-80-08 (ext. 11191);      Head of Credit Products
1 Agrobank
                       Yuldashevich           Email: r.botirov@agrobank.uz                 Department
                        Anastasiya
                                          Tel: +998 78 147 65 65 (ext. 16 32)
2 Asakabank          Saidmakhmudova                                                       ESMS manager
                                          Email: Anastasiya.S@asakabank.uz
                        Leonidovna
                                               Tel: (+998 90) 939-56-19;            Director of Enterprise and
                     Yuldashev Azizjon
3 Ipoteka-bank                                          Email:                          sustainability risk
                        Asqarali ugli
                                          azizjon.Yuldashev@ipotekabank.uz          management directorate
    Biznesni
                     Qalandarov Alisher      (+998 78) 150-93-39 (ext. 547);       Manager in the green banking
4 rivojlantirish
                         Zokir o`g`li          Email: a.kalandarov@brb.uz                    division
      banki
                                                                                    Head of Retail Business
                                             Tel:(+998 71) 202-01-01;
                      Jurakulov Farrux                                                     Development
5     Turonbank                                       (ext.159);
                      Maxmadiyor ugli                                                (in the Retail business
                                           Email: jurakulov_f@turonbank.uz
                                                                                           Department)
                                                                                      Senior Manager of the
       Sanoat          Erkin Eshbaev      Tel: +998 78-120-45-00 (ext. 7628);
 6                                                                                  Environmental Climate and
     Qurilish Bank    Shamsiddinovich           Email: eeshbaev@sqb.uz                 Social Risks Service
                                                                                     Head of Department for
                                            Tel: (+9989 78) 298-19-01;
                      Fazliev Avazbek                                                    Coordination of
 7 Hamkorbank                                         (ext.1082);
                      Akhmarbek ugli                                                Environmental, Social and
                                           Email: a.fazliev@hamkorbank.uz
                                                                                   Corporate Governance (ESG)
                                               Tel: (+998978)150-88-11;
                      Juraev Rasul                                                  Head of retail loan products
8     Xalq banki                                       (ext.10335);
                     Raxmatullayevich                                                         division
                                              Email: rasul.jurayev@xb.uz
                                                                                      Chief specialist of the
                     Nazimova Dilnoza          Tel: (+998 78)147-15-22;
9        NBU                                                                        department of reporting and
                        Erkinovna             Email: dnazimova@nbu.uz
                                                                                       resource accounting
                                              Tel: (+9989 71) 205-55-55;
                     Marufov Axmadjon                                               Leading expert in the Retail
10       OFB                                          (ext. 5704);
                      Maxmudjon ugli                                                   business department
                                               Email: a.marufov@ofb.uz




                                                                                                            24
                                                        Annex 9

CONTACTING ONLINE WITH UZMRC ON QUESTIONS AND APPEALS
