                                                     LOAN NUMBER 4245-UZB
                                              [Additional to Loan No. 3870-UZB]




                       LOAN AGREEMENT
                      (Ordinary Operations)

(Mortgage Market Sector Development Project-Additional Financing)




                            between




                  REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN




                              and




                 ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                 DATED 14NOVEMBER2022




                                                                    UZB 51348
                                     LOAN AGREEMENT
                                    (Ordinary Operations)


           LOAN AGREEMENT dated f,!'/ NOVEMBER 2022 between REPUBLIC OF
UZBEKISTAN ("Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB").

              WHEREAS

                {A)    by a loan agreement dated 12 December 2019 between the Borrower and
ADB ("Initial Financing Agreement"), ADS provided a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary
capital resources in an amount of one hundred and fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000) for the
purposes of the project described in Schedule 1 to the Initial Financing Agreement ("Initial
Project'');

              (B)     the Borrower has applied to ADS for an additional loan for the purposes of
supporting the additional activities to the lnltial Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan
Agreement ("Project", and together with the "Initial Project", "Overall Project");

              (C)     the Project will be carried out by JSC Mortgage Refinancing Company of
Uzbekistan ("UzMRC"), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to UzMRC the
proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

               (D)    ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the Project Agreement [of
even date herewith] between ADB and UzMRC.

              NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:



                                          ARTICLE I

                                Loan Regulations; Definitions


              Section 1.01.         All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations Loan
Regulations, dated 1 January 2022 {"Loan Regulations"), are hereby made applicable to this Loan
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

               Section 1.02.          Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several terms
defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified
herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan Agreement have the
following meanings:

              (a)     "CBU" means the Central Bank of Uzbekistan or any successor thereto;

              (b)     "Eligible Green Product" means a product referred to in paragraph 3(b) of
                      Schedule 4 which satisfies the criteria for an Eligible Green Product as set
                      out in the PAM;
                               2


(c)   “ESMS” means the environmental and social management system
      prepared by the Borrower for the Project and cleared by ADB, which will
      provide guidance to the Project Executing Agency to ensure that Qualified
      Commercial Banks screen Qualified Mortgages in accordance with the
      Borrower’s laws and require: (i) the Project Executing Agency to verify that
      the screening process established by Qualified Commercial Banks is able
      to screen and confirm that a Qualified Mortgage is not classified as
      Category A or B for environmental, involuntary resettlement or indigenous
      peoples impacts pursuant to the SPS, including any updates thereto; and
      (ii) the Qualified Commercial Banks to undertake such screening and the
      Project Executing Agency to undertake periodic monitoring and reporting
      to ADB in accordance with the PAM;

(d)   “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including
      any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB.

(e)   “Green Renovation Mortgage” means a mortgage provided by a Qualified
      Commercial Bank to a Qualified Homebuyer, which satisfies the eligibility
      criteria set out in paragraph 3 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(f)   “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement
      Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g)   “MOF” means the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower;

(h)   “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 6
      September 2022 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated
      from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative
      procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(i)   “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of and within the meaning of
      the Loan Regulations means the UzMRC or any successor thereto
      acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project.

(j)   “Qualified Commercial Bank” means a commercial bank which satisfies the
      eligibility criteria set out in paragraph 5 of Schedule 4 to this Loan
      Agreement;

(k)   “Qualified Homebuyer” means a borrower who satisfies the eligibility
      criteria set out in paragraph 2(a) of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(l)   “Qualified Mortgage” means a mortgage provided by a Qualified
      Commercial Bank to a Qualified Homebuyer, which satisfies the eligibility
      criteria set out in paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(m)   “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(n)   “Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means the agreement between the Borrower
      and the Project Executing Agency pursuant to which the Borrower shall
      relend the proceeds of the Loan to the Project Executing Agency as
      referred to in Section 3.01(a) of this Loan Agreement;
                                               3



              (o)     “SUM” means the Sum, the lawful currency of the Republic of Uzbekistan;

              (p)     “Total Loan Proceeds” means the sum of the proceeds of this Loan (as
                      defined in this Loan Agreement) and the proceeds of the “Loan” (as that
                      term is defined in the Initial Financing Agreement);

              (q)     “Total Qualified Homebuyers” means all of the Qualified Homebuyers (as
                      defined in this Loan Agreement) and the “Qualified Homebuyers” (as that
                      term is defined in the Initial Financing Agreement); and

              (r)     “UzMRC” means JSC Mortgage Refinancing Company of Uzbekistan
                      established as a joint stock company under the laws and regulations of the
                      Borrower.



                                          ARTICLE II

                                           The Loan


                Section 2.01.         (a)     ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred and fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000), as
such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

               (b)    The Loan has a principal repayment period of 15 years, and a grace period
as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

                (c)      The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means the
period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization schedule set
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

               Section 2.02.       The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest Period
equal to the sum of:

              (a)     SOFR; and

              (b)     0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit of
                      0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

                Section 2.03.      The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% per
annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn from
time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

              Section 2.04.       Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable
semiannually on 15 February and 15 August in each year.
                                                  4


              Section 2.05.        The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the Loan
withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan
Agreement.

              Section 2.06.          (a)    The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

                       (i)     a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the principal
                               amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and outstanding or
                               unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

                       (ii)    a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion of
                               the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from a
                               Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

                       (iii)   the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any
                               portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
                               outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or Interest
                               Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

              (b)    Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that is
accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(e) of the Loan
Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Loan
Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.



                                            ARTICLE III

                                  Use of Proceeds of the Loan


                Section 3.01.    The Borrower shall relend the proceeds of the Loan to the
Project Executing Agency under a Subsidiary Loan Agreement upon terms and conditions
satisfactory to ADB.

               Section 3.02.        The Project for which the Loan is made, and relent to the
Project Executing Agency, is the financing or re-financing by the Project Executing Agency of
Qualified Mortgages made, or to be made, by Qualified Commercial Banks.

                Section 3.03.         Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the
Loan relent to the Project Executing Agency shall be used for financing or re-financing of Qualified
Mortgages made by Qualified Commercial Banks to Qualified Homebuyers.

                Section 3.04.         The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be
applied exclusively to the financing or re-financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance
with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

              Section 3.05.          The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and withdrawn
in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such Schedule may
be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.
                                                 5



               Section 3.06.         Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of
the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

             Section 3.07.         The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 of
the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time be
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.



                                           ARTICLE IV

                                      Particular Covenants


                Section 4.01.        In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project
facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in
Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

               Section 4.02.         The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to inspect
the Project and any relevant records and documents.

                Section 4.03.        The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be necessary
on its part to enable the Project Executing Agency to perform its obligations under the Project
Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the performance of
such obligations.

              Section 4.04.         (a)    The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB
and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

             (b)    No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be
assigned, amended, abrogated or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.



                                           ARTICLE V

                             Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity


              Section 5.01.         The following are specified as additional events for
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the
purposes of Section 9.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

               (a)     Write down. The Borrower shall have written down any portion of the
                       principal of the loan outstanding under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement to
                       the Project Executing Agency, or any accrued interest and other charges
                       thereon;
                                                 6


              (b)     Repudiation. The Project Executing Agency shall have repudiated the
                      Subsidiary Loan Agreement or evidenced an intention to repudiate the
                      Subsidiary Loan Agreement; and

              (c)     Status.

                      (i)       The Project Executing Agency is not, or shall have ceased to be,
                                authorized to conduct its business by the CBU or any other
                                competent authority; or

                      (ii)      The Project Executing Agency shall have failed to obtain or effect
                                (as appropriate) any authorization required to carry on its business
                                or any such authorization ceases to be in full force and effect.

               Section 5.02.          The following is specified as an additional event for
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: any of
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



                                            ARTICLE VI

                                           Effectiveness


                Section 6.01.          A date 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the
Loan Regulations.



                                           ARTICLE VII

                                      Delegation of Authority


               Section 7.01.         The Borrower hereby designates the Project Executing
Agency as its agent for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required
or permitted under Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.04 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 6.01,
6.02, 6.03 and 6.04 of the Loan Regulations.

              Section 7.02.          Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the
Project Executing Agency pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan
Agreement shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if
taken by the Borrower.

              Section 7.03.         The authority conferred on the Project Executing Agency
under Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between
the Borrower and ADB.
                                               7


                                         ARTICLE VIII

                                       Miscellaneous


               Section 8.01.          The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

              Section 8.02.         The following addresses are specified for the purposes of
Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

              For the Borrower

                     Ministry of Finance
                     29, Istiqlol Street
                     Tashkent, 10017
                     Republic of Uzbekistan

                     Facsimile Number:

                            (998-71) 239-1259

              For ADB

                     Asian Development Bank
                     6 ADB Avenue
                     Mandaluyong City
                     1550 Metro Manila
                     Philippines

                     Facsimile Numbers:

                            (632) 8636-2444
                            (632) 8636-2424.
                                                 8


              IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their representatives
thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in their respective
names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the principal office of ADB.



                                                     REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN



                                                     By

                                                              -    TIMUR ISHMETOV
                                                                   Minister of Finance




                                                     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                                          7
                                                                     ENRICO PINALI
                                                                     Officer-in-Charge
                                               9


                                        SCHEDULE 1

                                  Description of the Project


1.           The objective of the Project is increased availability of affordable residential
mortgage credit in the territory of the Borrower.

2.            The Project shall further augment the Initial Project and shall comprise:

              a)     the financing or re-financing of Qualified Mortgages made by Qualified
                     Commercial Banks to Qualified Homebuyers; and

              b)     the financing of Green Renovation Mortgages made by Qualified
                     Commercial Banks to Qualified Homebuyers to purchase Eligible Green
                     Products.

3.            The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.
                                               10


                                         SCHEDULE 2

                                    Amortization Schedule


1.             The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal amount
of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) the
Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be adjusted, as
necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to which a Currency
Conversion applies.

                 Payment Due                                   Installment Share
                                                             [(Expressed as a %)]

              15 February 2028                                     3.333333
                15 August 2028                                     3.333333
              15 February 2029                                     3.333333
                15 August 2029                                     3.333333
              15 February 2030                                     3.333333
                15 August 2030                                     3.333333
              15 February 2031                                     3.333333
                15 August 2031                                     3.333333
              15 February 2032                                     3.333333
                15 August 2032                                     3.333333
              15 February 2033                                     3.333333
                15 August 2033                                     3.333333
              15 February 2034                                     3.333333
                15 August 2034                                     3.333333
              15 February 2035                                     3.333333
                15 August 2035                                     3.333333
              15 February 2036                                     3.333333
                15 August 2036                                     3.333333
              15 February 2037                                     3.333333
                15 August 2037                                     3.333333
              15 February 2038                                     3.333333
                15 August 2038                                     3.333333
              15 February 2039                                     3.333333
                15 August 2039                                     3.333333
              15 February 2040                                     3.333333
                15 August 2040                                     3.333333
              15 February 2041                                     3.333333
                15 August 2041                                     3.333333
              15 February 2042                                     3.333333
                15 August 2042                                     3.333343
                          Total                                  100.000000
                                               11
                                                                                      Schedule 2


2.            If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

               (a)    to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn as
                      of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount
                      withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph
                      1 of this Schedule; and

               (b)    any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be repaid
                      on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in
                      amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such
                      withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the original
                      Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this Schedule for
                      said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the
                      denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment
                      Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such
                      repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts
                      referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion
                      applies.

3.             Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment Date
shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment Date
following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.

4.            Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be repayable
on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be determined by
ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately prior to said
Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal in said Approved
Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to said Conversion; or
(b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines, the exchange rate
component of the Screen Rate.

5.             If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall apply
separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a separate
amortization schedule for each such amount.
                                                 12


                                           SCHEDULE 3

                          Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds


General

1.             The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan proceeds
to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a Category or
Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2.             Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated
to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of
expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3.               Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal percentages
set forth in the Table:

               (a)      if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
                        insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may,
                        by notice to the Borrower: (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent
                        required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have
                        been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of ADB, are not
                        needed to meet other expenditures; and (ii) if such reallocation cannot fully
                        meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable
                        to such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category
                        may continue until all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

               (b)      if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed all
                        agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower,
                        reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4.            Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5.             Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible expenditures
incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 months before the
date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Qualified Mortgages, subject to a maximum
amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.
                                              13
                                                                                    Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6.            Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals shall
be made from the Loan Account until the Subsidiary Loan Agreement has been duly executed
and delivered and shall have become legally binding.

7.           Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals shall
be made from the Loan Account for Green Renovation Mortgages until:

              (a)    the loan eligibility criteria for Green Renovation Mortgages in the PAM has
                     been finalized and updated to ADB’s satisfaction; and

              (b)    ADB has completed all legal, financial and other due diligence on the Green
                     Renovation Mortgages and any issues have been addressed to ADB’s
                     satisfaction.
                                                         14
                                                                                      Attachment to Schedule 3

                                                      TABLE


                         ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
                                                Total Amount Allocated
                                                  for ADB Financing
                                                                                    Basis for Withdrawal from the
 Number                   Item
                                                              ($)                           Loan Account
                                                         Category
      1       Credit Line to UzMRC*                    150,000,000                100% of total expenditure claimed
              TOTAL                                    150,000,000
* Subject to the conditions for withdrawal described in paragraph 7 and 8 of Schedule 3.
                                                 15


                                           SCHEDULE 4

                              Execution of Project; Financial Matters


Implementation Arrangements

1.              The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure, that
the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM.
Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change
by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Eligibility Criteria for Qualified Homebuyers and Qualified Mortgages

2.            The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
Qualified Mortgage meets the following criteria and is reflected in the relevant loan appraisal
and/or mortgage lending agreement between Qualified Commercial Bank and Qualified
Homebuyer:

              (a)     is reserved for a Qualified Homebuyer and any coborrower or guarantor
                      living in the same household, whose combined monthly income falls below
                      the maximum monthly household income specified in the PAM, is a natural
                      person of minimum 18 years, has a stable source of income and who is a
                      civil servant, self-employed or a salaried employee;

              (b)     will be used to:

                      (i)       purchase an existing residential property to be occupied by the
                                Qualified Homebuyer;

                      (ii)      purchase of fully commissioned residential property to be occupied
                                by the Qualified Homebuyer; or

                      (iii)     renovate a residential property occupied by a Qualified Homebuyer
                                and which does not involve structural alterations or expansion;

                      in each case, consisting of a single house or apartment in a multi-unit
                      building and is not a second loan for the same property, or a mortgage for
                      a second residential property, or a mortgage for an investment property
                      and further provided that:

                      (iv)      where it is used to finance or re-finance expenditures for such
                                purchases, incurred prior to the Effective Date, such expenditures
                                shall not have been incurred earlier than 12 months before the date
                                of this Loan Agreement; and

                      (v)       such expenditures shall not, in aggregate exceed 20% of the Loan
                                amount;
                                                 16
                                                                                         Schedule 4

               (c)     (i) is in SUM; (ii) is in respect of a mortgage over owner-occupied residential
                       property to be occupied by the Qualified Homebuyer or renovation loan for
                       residential property occupied by a Qualified Homebuyer and which does
                       not involve structural alterations or expansion, for which the value of the
                       property does not exceed the maximum value specified in the PAM for such
                       mortgages and renovation loans respectively; (iii) requires a 25% down
                       payment from the Qualified Homebuyer; (iv) has a loan to value ratio
                       specified in the PAM; (v) the monthly repayments as a percentage of the
                       Qualified Homebuyer’s net monthly household income is as specified in the
                       PAM; (vi) is not in delinquent status and all repayments are up to date as
                       at the date of financing or re-financing of the Qualified Mortgage by the
                       Project Executing Agency; and (vii) is secured by good legal title to the
                       residential property free from encumbrances, and by property insurance
                       equal to 100% of the value of the property;

               (d)     is for activities that have minimal or no adverse environmental or social
                       impacts under the SPS and the Qualified Commercial Bank has screened
                       the Qualified Mortgage and confirmed that it is not classified as Category
                       A or B for environmental, involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples
                       impact pursuant to the SPS (for the avoidance of doubt, activities with
                       environmental, involuntary resettlement or indigenous peoples impact and
                       classified as Category A or B pursuant to the SPS are excluded from the
                       Project); and

               (e)     does not entail any activities that are included in the list of prohibited
                       activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Eligibility Criteria for Green Renovation Mortgages

3.           The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each Green
Renovation Mortgage meets the following criteria and is reflected in the relevant loan appraisal
and/or mortgage lending agreement between Qualified Commercial Bank and Qualified
Homebuyer:

               (a)     meets the criteria set forth in paragraph 2 above for a Qualified Mortgage
                       and to a Qualified Homebuyer;

               (b)     is used to finance eligible heating and/or cooling systems, solar roofing,
                       water heaters, insulated doors, insulated windows and other eligible
                       products, each of which meets ADB’s eligibility criteria for Eligible Green
                       Product as set out in the PAM; and

               (c)     satisfies ADB’s requirements for legal, financial, integrity and other due
                       diligence to ADB’s satisfaction.

Eligibility Criteria for Qualified Commercial Banks

4.          The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure each Qualified
Commercial Bank:

               (a)     is a licensed bank under the applicable laws of the Borrower;
                                                 17
                                                                                          Schedule 4


               (b)     meets ADB’s eligibility criteria as set out in Table 7 of the PAM;

               (c)     satisfies ADB’s due diligence requirements for integrity, anti-money
                       laundering and counter-financing of terrorism, and has put in place controls
                       and measures to prevent such risks;

               (d)     has no past due obligations with the CBU or adverse audit findings by
                       external auditors;

               (e)     has an adequately maintained financial management system including
                       accounting records, procedures and internal as well as risk management
                       controls systems acceptable to ADB; and

               (f)     is compliant with prudential requirements of the CBU such as minimum
                       capital to risk weighted assets ratio, legal and liquidity reserve
                       requirements and general loan loss and provisioning requirements for the
                       most recent six consecutive months.

5.              The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall prepare and submit to
ADB: (a) for prior review and clearance, a due diligence report on each Qualified Commercial
Bank demonstrating how it satisfies the eligibility criteria set forth above; and (b) an annual report
showing that the proceeds of the Loan have been used by the Qualified Commercial Banks to
finance or re-finance Qualified Mortgages meeting the eligibility criteria set forth in paragraph 2
above.

Safeguards

6.             The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the Project
does not have any environmental, involuntary resettlement or indigenous peoples impacts, all
within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the Project does have any such impact, the
Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws
and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

7.            The Borrower shall ensure that all necessary budgetary and human resources are
made available to fully implement the ESMS.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8.             The Borrower shall do the following:

               (a)     submit annual safeguards monitoring reports to ADB;

               (b)     if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise
                       during Project implementation, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of
                       such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and proposed
                       corrective action plan; and
                                                18
                                                                                          Schedule 4

              (c)     report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures and
                      requirements set forth in the ESMS promptly after becoming aware of the
                      breach.

Gender and Development

9.            The Borrower shall ensure that:

              (a)     the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms;

              (b)     adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP;

              (c)     progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress toward
                      achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored
                      and reported quarterly to ADB; and

              (d)     key gender outcome and output targets include ensuring that at least: (i)
                      4,225 of the Total Qualified Homebuyers under the Overall Project are
                      women; and (ii) 32.5% of total of the Total Loan Proceeds under the Overall
                      Project are provided to women.

Financial Covenants

10.          Unless ADB otherwise agrees, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project
Executing Agency:

              (a)     is profitable as of its last annual audited financial statements;

              (b)     complies at all times with the regulatory requirements imposed by CBU
                      including the following prudential standards set out in the regulations
                      applicable to UzMRC: (i) minimum amount of paid-up equity capital; (ii)
                      capital adequacy ratio; (iii) liquidity coverage ratio; and (iv) net stable
                      funding ratio; and

              (c)     its net non-performing loan ratio is 5.0% or less as of its last annual audited
                      financial statements.

11.             The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency’s obligations under
the Subsidiary Loan Agreement rank and will rank pari passu with all its other present and future
unsecured and subordinated obligations, except those expressed to rank junior to it and except
for obligations mandatorily preferred by the law of the Borrower applying to companies generally.

12.             The Borrower shall ensure that the Subsidiary Loan Agreement contains terms and
that obligations of the Borrower under or arising from the Subsidiary Loan Agreement constitute
unsecured and subordinated obligations of the Project Executing Agency and that the Project
Executing Agency shall ensure that its obligations under the Subordinated Loan Agreement rank
and will rank pari passu with all its other present and future unsecured and subordinated
obligations, except those expressed to rank junior to it and except for obligations mandatorily
preferred by the law of the Borrower applying to companies generally.
                                              19
                                                                                     Schedule 4

Changes in Ownership of the Project Executing Agency

13.             (a)     The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the Project Executing Agency to
ensure, that any change in the ownership in the Project Executing Agency or any sale, transfer
or assignment of the Borrower’s interest in the Project Executing Agency (such events both
individually and collectively, “Change in Ownership”) shall be formally approved and implemented
only after consultation with ADB at least 6 months prior to the Change in Ownership.

               (b)     The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to promptly notify
ADB of any plan to undertake a Change in Ownership and discuss the plan with ADB. As part of
the discussions, the Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to submit to ADB periodic
updates on the progress of the plan and allow ADB sufficient opportunity and information to
consider the plan. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure that ADB’s
consent is obtained prior to any transfer of the business and assets of the Project Executing
Agency, as a result of the Change in Ownership.

                (c)    In case the business and assets of the Project Executing Agency are
transferred as a result of a Change in Ownership, the Borrower and Project Executing Agency
shall cause the transferee to enter into a project agreement with the ADB and ensure that the
proceeds of the Loan are made available to the transferee on terms and conditions that are
satisfactory to ADB.

Governance and Anticorruption

14.           The Borrower shall, and shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency:

              (a)     complies with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and
                      acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through
                      its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice
                      relating to the Project; and

              (b)     cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance
                      for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism

15.           The Borrower shall, and shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency:

              (a)     complies with applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower on
                      combating money laundering and financing of terrorism and ensure that
                      Loan proceeds are not used, directly or indirectly, in money laundering or
                      financing of terrorism;

              (b)     formulate and implement internal control procedures, including customer
                      due diligence procedures, to prevent violation of sub-paragraph (a)
                      hereinabove; and

              (c)     promptly inform ADB if there is any violation or potential violation of
                      subparagraph (a) hereinabove. In the event that ADB informs the Borrower
                      of its concern that there has been such an alleged violation, the Borrower
                      shall: (i) cooperate in good faith with ADB and its representatives so that
                         20
                                                                Schedule 4

ADB can determine whether such a violation has occurred, (ii) respond
promptly and in reasonable detail to any query from ADB; and (iii) furnishes
documentary supports for such response upon ADB’s request.
