 Report and Recommendation of the President to
 the Board of Directors




Project Number: 52334-001
October 2019




Proposed Loan and Technical Assistance Grant
Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan
Promoting Gender Equality in Housing Finance
Project
(Guaranteed by the Republic of Kazakhstan)




Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB’s
Access to Information Policy after excluding information that is subject to exceptions to disclosure
set forth in the policy.
                                 CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                                  (as of 1 September 2019)

                        Currency unit     –    tenge (T)
                               T1.00      =    $0.0026
                               $1.00      =    T387.46


                                        ABBREVIATIONS

              ADB            –     Asian Development Bank
              Damu           –     Damu Entrepreneurship Development Fund
              FIL            –     financial intermediation loan
              GAP            –     gender action plan
              HCSBK          –     Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan
              LTV            –     loan-to-value
              m2             –     square meter
              MSMEs          –     micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises
              NPL            –     nonperforming loan
              PAM            –     project administration manual
              TA             –     technical assistance


                                              NOTE

                            In this report, "$" refers to United States dollars.

 Vice-President      Shixin Chen, Operations 1
 Director General    Werner E. Liepach, Central and West Asia Department (CWRD)
 Director            Tariq H. Niazi, Public Management, Financial Sector, and Trade Division,
                     CWRD
 Team leaders        Mirzo Iskandar Gulamov, Country Specialist, Kazakhstan Resident
                     Mission (KARM), CWRD
                     Peter Marro, Principal Financial Sector Specialist, CWRD
 Team members        Marian Therese Bartolome, Senior Operations Assistant, CWRD
                     Catherine Debalucos, Associate Project Analyst, CWRD
                     Elmira Izmaganova, Associate Project Officer, KARM, CWRD
                     Stephanie Kamal, Public Management Specialist, CWRD
                     Baurzhan Konysbayev, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                     Ruslan Kurmanbekov, Financial Sector Specialist, CWRD
 Peer reviewer       Vivek Rao, Principal Financial Sector Specialist, Southeast Asia
                     Department



In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                         CONTENTS

                                                                 Page

PROJECT AT A GLANCE
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                1
II.    THE PROJECT                                                 1
       A.   Rationale                                              1
       B.   Project Description                                    6
       C.   Value Added by ADB                                     7
       D.   Summary Financing Plan                                 8
       E.   Implementation Arrangements                            8
III.   ATTACHED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE                               9
IV.    DUE DILIGENCE                                               9
       A.    Economic and Financial Viabillity                     9
       B.    Sustainability                                       10
       C.    Governance                                           11
       D.    Poverty, Social, and Gender                          11
       E.    Safeguards                                           11
       F.    Summary of Risk Assement and Risk Management Plan    11
V.     ASSURANCES                                                 12
VI.    RECOMMENDATION                                             12

APPENDIXES
1.     Design and Monitoring Framework                            13
2.     List of Linked Documents                                   15
                                                                                                 Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                                         PROJECT AT A GLANCE

    1. Basic Data                                                                                             Project Number: 52334-001
       Project Name                      Promoting Gender Equality in Housing                Department/Division CWRD/CWPF
                                         Finance Project
       Country                           Kazakhstan                                          Executing Agency           Housing Construction
       Borrower                          Housing Construction Savings Bank of                                           Savings Bank of
                                         Kazakhstan (HCSBK)                                                             Kazakhstan

       Country Economic                  https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/
       Indicators                        ?id=52334-001-CEI
       Portfolio at a Glance             https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/
                                         ?id=52334-001-PortAtaGlance

    2. Sector                            Subsector(s)                                                             ADB Financing ($ million)
       Finance                           Housing finance                                                                           100.00
                                                                                                              Total                100.00
    3. Operational Priorities                                                                Climate Change Information
       Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities                                Climate Change impact on the                        Low
       Accelerating progress in gender equality                                              Project
       Strengthening governance and institutional capacity
       Sustainable Development Goals                                                         Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
       SDG 1.4                                                                               Gender Equity (GEN)
       SDG 8.10
       SDG 11.1                                                                              Poverty Targeting
                                                                                             Geographic Targeting
    4. Risk Categorization:              Low
.


    5. Safeguard Categorization                      Environment: FI-C Involuntary Resettlement: FI-C Indigenous Peoples: FI-C
.


    6. Financing
        Modality and Sources                                                                        Amount ($ million)
        ADB                                                                                                                             100.00
           Sovereign Project (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources                                                                 100.00
        Cofinancing                                                                                                                       0.00
           None                                                                                                                           0.00
        Counterpart                                                                                                                       0.00
           None                                                                                                                           0.00
        Total                                                                                                                           100.00
        Note: An attached technical assistance will be financed on a grant basis by the Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF-OTHERS) in the
        amount of $620,000.

       Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar




Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.         02102019181402485179                                Generated Date: 02-Oct-2019 18:15:32 PM
                                         I.       THE PROPOSAL

1.      I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan to
Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan (HCSBK), to be guaranteed by the Republic
of Kazakhstan, for the Promoting Gender Equality in Housing Finance Project. The report also
describes the proposed technical assistance (TA) for Supporting the Promoting Gender Equality
in Housing Finance Project, and if the Board approves the proposed loan, I, acting under the
authority delegated to me by the Board, approve the TA.

2.     The proposed financial intermediation loan (FIL) of up to $100 million equivalent will
provide local currency credit to promote the provision of affordable residential mortgage loans to
women borrowers in primarily rural areas of Kazakhstan. The TA will strengthen credit origination
and product offerings of HCSBK to better serve its existing and new women borrowers.

                                          II.      THE PROJECT

A.      Rationale

3.      Constraints in the Kazakhstan housing market. As of 1 January 2018, the total housing
stock in Kazakhstan consisted of 5,129,743 housing units, of which 66.4% were located in urban
areas and 33.6% in rural areas. In 2007–2018, the overall floor space per capita improved from
17.5 square meters (m2) to 21.4 m2 (an increase of 22% per annum).1 However, despite these
improvements, demand for housing remains high because of the following factors:
        (i)   Rising income. Kazakhstan benefited from higher prices for its commodity exports
              during a series of resource booms. In 2000-2019, country’s per capita income
              has more than quintupled during the same period, from $1,349 to $8,840.2
        (ii)  Household growth. The number of households in Kazakhstan increased from 4.6
              million in 2013 to more than 5.0 million in 2017 as the total population grew while
              the average household size remained unchanged. The growth was particularly
              prominent in cities because of ongoing urbanization.
        (iii) Ongoing urbanization. During 1996–2019, the urban population increased by 1.5
              million, or 19.5%, to 10.7 million persons (58.1% of the total population). This
              migration from rural to urban areas is expected to continue.
        (iv)  Inadequate housing stock. Almost half of the current housing stock was built
              prior to 1980 and has not been substantially upgraded or modernized. Further,
              about 10% of all families in Kazakhstan live in one-room accommodation and there
              is an unmet demand for larger housing units. The average floor area per capita of
              21.4 m2 (in 2017) is well below international standards.3 In southern Kazakhstan,
              the available housing space is even smaller, averaging 18 m2 per person.

4.      Low supply of affordable housing with adequate building standards. Although most
of the households in Kazakhstan live in their own housing units, affordable quality housing is in
low supply, since real house prices rose almost sixfold from 2001 to 2016, for both newly built

1 Government of Kazakhstan, Ministry of National Economy, Statistics Committee. 2017. Report on the housing stock
  of Kazakhstan. Astana.
2 Although per capita income has declined in 2016-2018 stemming from the recent financial crisis and resulting

  currency devaluation, it was still relatively high at $8,840 as of 2018.
3 Average floor area per capita is 30 m2–35 m2 per person in low-income countries and 45 m2–50 m2 per person in

  upper middle-income countries. R. Anker and M. Anker. 2017. Living Wages Around the World: Manual for
  Measurement. Cheltenham, United Kingdom: Edward Elgar Publishing. Chapter 5.
2


and existing dwellings.4 The 2016 economic slowdown has negatively affected the prices and
sales volumes of large, expensive housing units, while the demand for modest housing has not
slowed down, particularly in the regions located outside the major cities. Although the number of
new housing units increased by 67% during 2007–2017 to cover 11.2 million m2 in 2017, this
growth accounted for only 3.3% of the total housing stock.5 Kazakhstan’s rental market is also
underdeveloped because of a high homeownership rate: 97% of all residents live in a housing
unit owned by a household member (however there are cases where 2-3 families live in the same
housing unit) and only 3% rent their current housing units.

5.       Expensive housing. Prior to the 2008–2009 crisis, the real estate market in Kazakhstan
overheated as evidenced by an extremely high housing affordability index of 28.4 years in 2007.6
After the 2008 market crash, property prices dropped, improving affordability. Since 2011, the
housing affordability index has stabilized at about 13 years for new real estate, but for existing
housing it has deteriorated from 9.7 years to 10.6 years.7 As a result, the real estate market in
Kazakhstan remains expensive by international standards: it currently ranks as the 13th most
expensive country in the world, according to an international property prices index—well ahead
of neighboring countries such as Azerbaijan (23rd), Georgia (25th), and the Russian Federation
(28th).8

6.     Factors for the low housing affordability in Kazakhstan. The main reasons are (i)
sharp devaluation of the local currency in 2014 and 2015, and continued depreciation of the tenge
as compared with the United States dollar since 2017 which has substantially increased the cost
of house construction since much of the raw material is imported; (ii) persistent inflationary
pressures, as evidenced by the consumer price index reaching 5.3% in May 2019; (iii) a
concurrent increase in housing prices, which rose by 14% for primary market housing units and
18% for secondary market housing units in 2018; (iv) declining purchasing power of consumer
wages since 2015; and (v) inadequate supply of mortgage financing by commercial banks, which
experienced high levels of nonperforming loans (NPLs) during the last two financial crises in
Kazakhstan because of lending to non-creditworthy borrowers and issuing United States dollar-
denominated mortgage loans to borrowers whose earnings were in tenge.9

7.       Shallow mortgage finance sector. The mortgage finance sector in Kazakhstan is
underdeveloped, with mortgage loans comprising 2.2% of gross domestic product in 2018.10 This
level is substantially lower than in neighboring countries, e.g., 12.1% in Georgia and 5.6% in the
Russian Federation. Similarly, residential mortgage loans amounted to only T1.4 billion,
representing 11% of the total loan portfolio of Kazakhstan’s banks as of 31 December 201811—
again, a very modest level when compared with other countries in the region such as Georgia



4  W. Seitz. 2018. Urbanization in Kazakhstan. Desirable Cities, Unaffordable Housing, and the Missing Rental Market.
   Poverty and Equity Global Practice Working Paper Series. No. 160. Washington, DC: World Bank.
5 Government of Kazakhstan, Ministry of National Economy, Statistics Committee. 2017. Report on the housing stock

   of Kazakhstan. Astana.
6
   The housing affordability index indicates the number of years that a family of three (two adults and one child with two
   salaries) should work to afford the down payment for a 54 m2 apartment.
7 Samruk-Kazyna. 2016. Kazakhstan’s Real Estate Market. Astana.
8 Numbeo. Property Prices Index for Country 2019 (accessed 1 July 2019).
9 Ranking.kz. 2017. Kazakhstan housing market assessment. Almaty.
10 Government of Kazakhstan, Ministry of National Economy, Statistics Committee. Dynamics of basic socio-economic

   indicators of the Republic of Kazakhstan (accessed 3 July 2019).
11
   National Bank of Kazakhstan. 2019. Report of current condition of the banking sector (as of 1 January 2019). Almaty.
                                                                                                                 3


(24.5%) or the Russian Federation (42.4%).12 In terms of loan currency, 97.2% of all outstanding
mortgages were in tenge as of April 2019. In addition to being underdeveloped, mortgages in
Kazakhstan are also expensive by international standards, with average mortgage payments
comprising 203% of net disposable family income in 2019, well above the 164% in Georgia or
150% in the Russian Federation (footnote 12).

8.       Low access to mortgage finance for women, in particular in rural areas. Apart from
government-led social housing programs, the present mortgage lending market in Kazakhstan is
mainly geared toward higher-income groups. Although 4.4 million out of the 9.1 million women in
Kazakhstan (51% of the total population) are considered to be economically active, they face a
significant gender pay gap of 32%.13 Furthermore, 50.9% of all Kazakh households are headed
by a woman and 15.1% are single mothers (over twice that of single fathers).14 However, women,
more often than men, face lower access to affordable mortgage finance (although women’s
educational levels in Kazakhstan are at par or higher than those of men) due to major constraints
such as accessing bank financial services, prolonged and complicated procedures for commercial
loan approval, and excessive paperwork and terms and conditions. In rural areas, potential female
borrowers are even more disadvantaged in accessing mortgage financing, as the majority of rural
women are occupied in informal self-employed activities (such as the food, agriculture, and trade
industries). With lower income levels, they face higher collateral requirements for obtaining
mortgage loans. Enabling such female borrowers to acquire a housing unit will help strengthen
their access to credit given that real estate remains a preferred type of collateral for most banks.
This is particularly relevant for homebound and small business women entrepreneurs (prevalent
in rural areas) who face challenges in accessing finance because of the informal and/or irregular
nature of their income and their higher credit risk categorization by banks.

9.     Government’s strategy. Since 2005, the Government of Kazakhstan has initiated various
programs to improve access to housing, including housing rental schemes, savings plans, interest
rate subsidies, and support to private housing developers. The first such program is the 2017–
2021 Nurly Zher housing development program, which was approved on 31 December 2016 with
a budget of T800 billion.15 More recently, the government launched the 7-20-25 housing program,
which aims to provide housing to 1.5 million people by the end of 2020. The program is the largest
government housing initiative to date, with an indicative financing envelope of T1.0 trillion.16

10.    Unaffordable housing for a growing number of the population. Despite the
achievements made under these state housing programs, owning a modern and well-built housing
unit remains unaffordable for many households, in particular young families and young
professionals. According to the Ministry of National Economy, about 71.4% of the economically
active population could not afford to buy a housing unit. As a consequence, about 2.5 million
people in Kazakhstan are currently on the various wait lists for housing and the number continues
to grow.17 The sharp local currency devaluation in 2015 severely affected the ability of households


12 Housing        Finance      Information     Network.      Selected     comparative  country     data      2019.
   http://hofinet.org/countries/index.aspx#visualizing (accessed 1 July 2019).
13
   Government of Kazakhstan, Ministry of National Economy, Statistics Committee. 2017. Economic activity indicators
   by gender. Astana.
14 EuroPlus Consulting and Management Report. 2017. Gender Study for Central Asia. Astana.
15
   Government of Kazakhstan. 2015. The State Program of Infrastructure Development Nurly Zhol for 2015–2019. Nur-
   Sultan.
16 Government of Kazakhstan. 2018.7-20-25 State mortgage program. Astana.
17
   United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. 2018. Country Profiles on the Housing Sector: Republic of
   Kazakhstan. Geneva.
4


to save for a down payment to obtain a mortgage loan, and it increased the debt burden because
of the weakened purchasing power of consumer wages.

11.     Consistency with the Asian Development Bank’s Strategy 2030 and country
strategy. The proposed intervention is aligned with the following key operational priorities of
Strategy 2030 of the Asian Development Bank (ADB): (i) increasing support for banks to help
improve their capacity, quality, and reach, particularly for low-income populations, to address
remaining poverty and reduce inequalities; (ii) promoting rural development; (iii) improving
progress in gender equality through financial inclusion; and (iv) supporting innovative financial
products.18 The project is also consistent with ADB’s country partnership strategy for Kazakhstan,
2017–2021, which supports inclusive economic growth through infrastructure development,
financial inclusion, and enhanced gender equity. 19 The loan is included in ADB’s country
operations business plan, 2019–2021.20 Finally, the ADB loan is aligned with the core objectives
and goals of the government, in particular, with the Nurly Zher program (para. 9).

12.     ADB’s sector experience and assistance program. While ADB has no previous
experience in the housing finance sector in Kazakhstan,21 the bank has relevant experience in
designing and implementing financial intermediary interventions with substantial gender elements
in the country. In 2010, ADB approved the $500 million multitranche financing facility to the Damu
Entrepreneurship Development Fund (Damu), which was categorized as effective gender
mainstreaming.22 The project proved that gender action plans (GAPs) are an effective instrument
to promote gender equality outcomes and influence government counterparts to build ownership
during implementation. 23 In 2016, ADB approved an FIL of $200 million equivalent to Damu to
support the resilience of micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs).24 The project,
which is ongoing, provides local currency credit to sustain operations of, and employment by,
MSMEs and helped strengthen the credit origination and management of selected participating
financial institutions to better serve their MSME clients. It aims to fund at least $50 million
equivalent to businesses owned by women, with one-third of the total number of sub-borrowers
being women.

13.    Development partner coordination. The European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, the International Finance Corporation, the United Nations, and the World Bank
support the housing sector and housing finance in Kazakhstan through various initiatives and
programs, which include (i) economic, social, and environmental assessments of the country’s
housing policies and programs; (ii) reviews of the legal and regulatory framework and

18 ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030. Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific.

    Manila.
19 ADB. 2017. Country Partnership Strategy: Kazakhstan, 2017–2021—Promoting Economic Diversification, Inclusive

    Development, and Sustainable Growth. Manila.
20 ADB. 2018. Country Operations Business Plan: Kazakhstan, 2019–2021. Manila.
21 However, ADB has substantial experience in implementing housing finance projects in many developing member

   countries, including Armenia, India, Indonesia, Mongolia, Sri Lanka, Uzbekistan, and Viet Nam. Lessons learned
   from these interventions include the following: (i) having a strong implementing agency with substantial lending
   experience in the sector is crucial; (ii) targeting lower-income households can strengthen the development impact of
   the project; (iii) having transparent and fair eligibility criteria for beneficiary selection is critical; and (iv) using
   subsidies, in particular, interest rate subsidies, should ideally be avoided, as they crowd out the private sector.
22
   ADB. 2010. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
   Financing Facility to the Republic of Kazakhstan for the Small and Medium Enterprise Investment Program. Manila.
23
   ADB. 2018. Kazakhstan Country Gender Assessment. Manila.
24 ADB. 2016. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and

   Administration of Technical Assistance Grant to the Damu Entrepreneurship Development Fund for the Supporting
   Resilience of Micro, Small, and Medium-Sized Enterprises Finance Project (Guaranteed by the Republic of
   Kazakhstan). Manila.
                                                                                                                       5


implementing agencies in the housing finance sector; (iii) business development services; and
(iv) assistance in improving the lending technologies and loan products of some of the banks
involved in housing finance. ADB closely coordinates with these institutions to avoid any
duplication of efforts and build on the lessons learned and achievements made by the other
developments partners. For instance, the proposed ADB intervention takes into account the
recommendations made by a recent International Finance Corporation review of HCSBK’s
operations, which suggested that HCSBK should (i) diversify its product range; (ii) introduce more
commercially oriented mortgage lending instruments; (iii) diversify its funding sources; (iv)
enhance its customer focus by analyzing consumer trends and preferences; and (v) expand its
client base by focusing on self-employed persons located in rural areas, of which women account
for more than 60%.

14.     HCSBK’s mandate and market share. HCSBK is one of the major financial institutions
supporting the development of the mortgage finance market in the country and is the main actor
implementing government housing programs. Founded in 2003, it follows the German system of
contractual savings for housing (the Bausparkassen model), wherein a housing loan is linked to
a savings deposit. HCSBK typically targets the low- to middle-income borrower segment as
evidenced by the fact that HCSBK’s average mortgage size is only T6.2 million. HCSBK provides
services to about 12% of the economically active population, or about 1.05 million households.
As of 31 December 2018, HCSBK had 1.30 million saving accounts, and it had issued 172,685
loans totaling T1.14 trillion. HCSBK follows prudent onlending practices as evidenced by its
satisfactory financial standing and an NPL ratio of less than 1%. As of the end of 2018, HCSBK
was the market leader in mortgage lending, with 49% market share in the banking sector’s
mortgage loan sector. Its 17 branches cover all regions of the country.25

15.     Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan’s gender focus. The bank
maintains a strong focus on serving the needs of women, who comprised 55.5% of its borrowers
at the end of 2018. However, women still represent a largely untapped borrower segment in
Kazakhstan even though they have proven to be more disciplined than men in making loan
repayments: only 0.2% of all female borrowers have overdue payments of more than 90 days,
compared with 0.4% for men. The main obstacle for HCSBK to expand its lending business to
women borrowers is the shortage of long-term funding.26 Further, HCSBK is constrained in its
growth and outreach by its business model, which stipulates that sub-borrowers must first
accumulate savings that account for at least 50% of the cost of the housing unit before they can
qualify for a low-interest mortgage loan from the bank. The financing provided by ADB will be
used by HCSBK to provide preliminary loans27 as an interim solution, as these loans will require
the accumulation of savings of only 15%–20% before a mortgage loan can be granted (i.e.,
women borrowers with a monthly household income below T200,000 will be granted lower down

25 Overview of Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan’s Operations (accessible from the list of linked

   documents in Appendix 2).
26 As  a systematically important financial institution, and given its role in the government’s mandate to provide
   affordable housing, HCSBK has received support from the government in the form of subsidized funding and capital
   injections. However, in view of the precarious monetary position of the government, this financial support can no
   longer be taken for granted.
27 The preliminary loan product is available to depositors who have either accumulated 20% savings (in relation to their

   housing unit cost) or had deposited this amount up front. It has a loan ceiling of T5 million, has an interest rate of
   7%, has a loan term of 8 years, and is secured by the related real estate and savings deposit. The mortgagor pays
   only interest, with no amortization on the principal amount, and will continue to accumulate savings until 50% of the
   housing unit cost is saved and the 3-year minimum savings accumulation period has passed. Upon realization of
   these two requirements, savings will then be used to pay off half of the loan and the balance will be converted into a
   standard housing loan with a lower interest rate of 3.5%–5.0%.
6


payment requirements).28 Once the sub-borrowers have accumulated the required 50% savings
rate, the preliminary loan will be converted into a regular housing loan with a lower interest rate.

16.      Demand for the proposed loan. The proposed loan from ADB to HCSBK will help the
bank address the unmet demand among female borrowers for longer-term, fixed-rate, local
currency-denominated mortgage credit, in particular in the rural areas. Of Kazakhstan’s
population, 9.1 million, or 51%, are women and 4.4 million are considered economically active.
Over 60,000 of HCSBK’s borrowers are women, of which 64% are located outside of the largest
two cities of Nur-Sultan and Almaty. Although the government has various social support
programs for women in place,29 HCSBK currently has 30,000 female account holders who have
accumulated more than T2 million (qualifying them for a preliminary housing loan subject to
meeting other underwriting criteria) who have not yet received a housing loan.30 In April 2019 as
part of the project preparatory activities, HCSBK call centers carried out a survey, which showed
that 53% of the female depositors contacted expressed interest in receiving more information on
the ADB-funded mortgage product, and 40% would consider applying for a mortgage loan with
such a reduced savings requirement.

B.         Project Description

17.    The project is aligned with the following impact: gender equity promotion and sustainable
economic growth achieved. 31 The project will have the following outcome: acquisition and
renovation of housing units by women increased.32

18.     The project will deliver the following outputs: Output 1: Long-term affordable mortgage
financing for eligible women borrowers made available. Through the ADB loan HCSBK will
provide mortgage loans exclusively targeted at women borrowers to finance at least 3,000
women; Output 2: Accessibility to HCSBK’s lending products for eligible women borrowers
improved; HCSBK will adopt a gender policy and will conduct at least three nationwide public
awareness campaigns on housing finance products for women; Output 3: Gender inclusiveness
of the banking sector’s housing finance assessed. This output will be delivered by conducting a
nationwide study on women’s access to housing and finance products which will have to be
endorsed by the government.

19.   ADB will provide HCSBK with an FIL of $100 million equivalent. HCSBK will use the tenge
proceeds from ADB to offer affordable residential mortgage finance 33 exclusively to women


28 At present, although HCSBK has ample liquidity on its balance sheet, most of these funds come from the savings

   that depositors accumulate in anticipation of receiving a traditional housing loan after a period of 3–5 years. By law,
   HCSBK is not allowed to use these funds to provide preliminary loans. Based on the HCSBK average loan size to
   women in 2018 of T8.7 million, it is expected that the ADB loan will fund at least 3,000 loans for the acquisition of
   housing units for a total of $80 million equivalent and 2,000 renovation loans for a total of $20 million equivalent.
29 These include one-time maternity and birth allowances, a monthly childcare allowance, and an unemployment

   allowance for nonworking mothers.
30
   HCSBK data. Preliminary loans, with a 20% down payment, would require deposit savings of T2.2 million and above
   (based on the average loan size to women in 2018 [footnote 30]).
31 Government of Kazakhstan. 2017. Strategic Plan for the Development of Kazakhstan until 2025. Nur-Sultan.
32 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
33 It is expected that the preliminary loans funded under the ADB project will be offered by HCSBK at the rate of 7%.

   HCSBK intends to use part of its equity capital to bring down the interest rate since the ADB loan is expected to be
   provided to the bank at an interest rate of about 9%–9.5% (depending on market conditions). The preliminary loans
   will have a down payment requirement as low as 15% (in the case of low-income female borrowers), which compares
   favorably with the current market rates for commercial mortgage loans of 15%–21% with a minimum 30% down
                                                                                                                      7


customers, each acting as the sole borrower and bearer of the legal title to a residential housing
unit.34 The mortgage subloans provided by HCSBK will be used for the acquisition of residential
housing units or the renovation of existing homes.35 A minimum of 60% of the proceeds from the
ADB loan will be allocated to provide mortgage loans to female borrowers located in rural regions,
i.e., those outside of the four large cities with the lowest poverty rates: Aktau, Almaty, Atyrau and
Nur-Sultan.36 While the maximum monthly income level per household has been set at T320,000,
at least 20% of all mortgage loans financed by the ADB loan will be to low-income female
borrowers with a monthly household income of less than T200,000.37 A price ceiling of T30 million
will apply for housing units that can be financed under the ADB project, as well as a ceiling of
T3.7 million for renovation loans.

C.       Value Added by ADB

20.      There will be five ADB value additions associated with this project:
         (i)    The ADB funding will provide HCSBK with much-needed liquidity to expand its
                lending to women, particularly in rural areas.
         (ii)   The loan will be the first external borrowing that HCSBK undertakes, as it has relied
                solely on government funding as well as customer saving deposits.38 While the
                ADB loan will be more expensive for HCSBK compared to its existing funding, as
                it will be based on market pricing principles, it will enable HCSBK to diversify its
                funding sources, develop new loan products, and enhance its standing and
                reputation in the mortgage finance sector of Kazakhstan as the premier housing
                finance institution. To this end, the loan will help HCSBK eventually graduate from
                relying on government support after it has undergone thorough due diligence from
                ADB. This will help prepare the bank for accessing pure commercial funding from
                private sector institutions and private sector arms of bilateral or multilateral banks,
                and raising financing from the international capital markets in the near future.
         (iii)  This will be one of ADB’s first sovereign local currency interventions where funding
                has been raised through bonds issued by ADB in the domestic capital market. The
                ADB bonds will have a highly tailored structure adopted to mirror the terms of the
                underlying loan that is to be funded with the proceeds. It is expected that this
                innovative structure will have a substantial developmental impact on the promotion
                of the domestic bond market as it will enable some of the institutional investors, in
                particular the state-owned pension funds, to use part of their excess liquidity to
                invest in bond instruments with long tenors. It will also provide a new currency risk
                mitigation solution for ADB’s future sovereign and quasi-sovereign borrowers in
                Kazakhstan.

   payment. Further, the preliminary loans will be converted to standard housing loans priced at 3.5%–5% once the
   mortgagor has accumulated sufficient savings.
34 HCSBK will provide an option for prospective women borrowers who do not fully meet the 55% monthly installment-

   to-monthly income ratio by allowing the addition of a co-borrower. This measure will expand the outreach of the
   program without compromising its financial soundness. Co-borrowers will have joint responsibility for the fulfillment
   of obligations under the mortgage contract. At the same time, the ownership of the housing unit will remain with the
   woman borrower.
35
   A housing unit can be a house or an apartment in a single-story or multistory building that provides living space for
   occupants making up a single household.
36 World Bank. 2018. A New Growth Model for Building a Secure Middle Class: Kazakhstan Systematic Country

   Diagnostic. Washington, DC.
37
   54% of HCSBK’s borrowers are in the low-income segment with a monthly household income of less than T200,000.
38 On 28 December 2018, HCSBK placed bonds for T57.7 billion through the Astana International Financial Center in

   Nur-Sultan. The maturity date of these bonds is 28 December 2033 and the coupon rate is 9.6% per annum, paid
   semiannually. However, these bonds did not really represent market-based fund-raising efforts, as they were fully
   placed with HCSBK’s parent company, Baiterek.
8


         (iv)     The accompanying TA will strengthen the operational capacity, quality, and reach
                  of HCSBK in relation to the low- to middle-income female population in Kazakhstan.
                  Financial inclusion is closely correlated with reduced poverty, and HCSBK plays a
                  unique role in the banking system in Kazakhstan by promoting financial inclusion
                  in the housing finance sector among rural low-income female populations that no
                  other bank or nonbank financial institution can match.
         (v)      ADB played a key role in the project design. In April 2017, ADB identified HCSBK
                  as a potential partner for expanding access to finance for women and entered into
                  initial discussions with the bank to address its funding shortage for preliminary
                  loans. After consulting with HCSBK and the government, ADB prepared a detailed
                  feasibility study on the concept and structure of possible ADB assistance and
                  identified the need for TA support. This analytical work has led HCSBK and the
                  Government of Kazakhstan to request a sovereign loan from ADB and serves as
                  the foundation for the project.

D.       Summary Financing Plan

21.     HCSBK has requested a regular loan of up to T38,000,000,000 ($100 million equivalent)
from ADB’s ordinary capital resources to help finance the project. The loan, to be guaranteed by
the Republic of Kazakhstan, will have (i) a term of up to 11 years, (ii) an interest rate equal to the
sum of ADB’s cost of funding and the contractual spread for sovereign guaranteed loans, (iii) a
commitment charge of 0.15% per year on the undisbursed loan amount, and (iv) such other
terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan and guarantee agreements. Subject to market
conditions, ADB will provide local currency financing to fund the loan by issuing disbursement-
linked bullet bonds of up to 10-year maturity, not exceeding the final loan maturity of 31
December 2030. Otherwise, ADB will also be able to provide financing in United States dollars.
The loan is expected to be disbursed in two tranches, each of $20 million minimum in tenge
equivalent with a bullet repayment structure. This will provide HCSBK with a more stable source
of funding as it will match the ADB bond issuance in maturity. This structure would be a new and
innovative feature for an ADB public sector loan. No maturity premium is payable to ADB
because the average loan maturity will not exceed 13 years. Based on the requirement that
female sub-borrowers will contribute either 15% or 20% (depending on the income level) of the
individual housing unit cost in the form of equity, the contribution of the mortgagors amounts to
a total of $24 million.

                                         Table 1: Summary Financing Plan
                                                                             Amount              Share of Total
 Source                                                                     ($ million)               (%)
 Asian Development Bank
     Ordinary capital resources (regular loan)                                100.0                 100.0%
                            Total                                             100.0                 100.0%
 Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

E.       Implementation Arrangements

22.    The implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 2 and described in detail in
the project administration manual (PAM). 39 HCSBK will onlend to female sub-borrowers at a
market-determined interest rate.



39 Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                 9


                                       Table 2: Implementation Arrangements
 Aspects                                                          Arrangements
 Implementation period              January 2020–December 2022
 Estimated completion date          31 December 2022
 Loan closing date                  30 June 2023
 Management
 (i) Executing agency         HCSBK
 (ii) Implementing agency     HCSBK
 (iii) Implementation unit    HCSBK
 Procurement                  Procurement of goods, works, and non-consultancy services will follow the ADB
                              Procurement Policy and the Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers (2017,
                              as amended from time to time). Procurement will be undertaken by the individual
                              beneficiary; fitness for purpose can be achieved by using established private sector
                              and commercial practices.
 Retroactive financing        Retroactive financing will be allowed for up to 20% of the loan amount for eligible
                              mortgage subloans, incurred prior to loan effectiveness but no earlier than 12
                              months before the signing of the loan agreement.
 Disbursement                 The loan proceeds will be disbursed following ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook
                              (2017, as amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements agreed between
                              the government and ADB. The ADB loan will be disbursed in two tranches, each of
                              $20 million minimum, in tenge equivalent during the implementation period, which
                              have to be liquidated within 12 months from the date of receipt of funds. ADB will
                              disburse these advances to a dedicated HCSBK bank account.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, HCSBK = Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan.
Source: ADB.

                             III.      ATTACHED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

23.     The ADB loan will be accompanied by a $620,000 transaction TA funded on a grant basis
by ADB’s Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF–other resources). 40 The TA will provide
capacity building services primarily involving the following actions: (i) improve financial literacy
among potential women borrowers in Kazakhstan, (ii) raise awareness for gender-related lending
aspects in HCSBK’s operations by hiring and training employees to become experts in gender
related financing aspects in its head office and some of its larger branches, (iii) assist in the
implementation of a comprehensive GAP in HCSBK, 41 and (iv) enhance HCSBK’s customer
targeting by designing lending programs and products specific to women. ADB will engage
consultants in accordance with the ADB Procurement Policy (2017, as amended from time to
time) and the associated staff instructions. Disbursements under the TA will be done in
accordance with ADB's Technical Assistance Disbursement Handbook (2010, as amended from
time to time).

                                           IV.     DUE DILIGENCE

A.      Economic and Financial Viability

24.    HCSBK’s housing savings model presents a viable model to address higher-risk market
segments as demonstrated by the bank’s low rate of NPLs compared with its peers (i.e., 0.2%
versus a market average of 7.4% in 2018 in the mortgage sector).42 HCSBK’s preliminary lending
product is well suited to the lending profile of lower-income earners with less access to collateral,

40
   The Government of Kazakhstan has contributed $120,000 to ADB’s Technical Assistance Special Fund in part to
   finance the transaction TA.
41 Gender Action Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
42 The average monthly income of women borrowers financed by HCSBK under the existing government housing

   program is T170,000.
10


but this product requires diversification of the bank’s funding base to expand its product offering
and developmental impact.43 The ADB funding will provide HCSBK with the liquidity required to
develop a new product line (under the preliminary lending segment) targeting underserved women
borrowers, who face higher requirements (on average) for obtaining mortgage loans. 44 The
project will thereby help the bank to adjust its operating model and help it prepare for its eventual
transition to commercial financing. Such a transition will enhance the sustainability of its housing
finance business.

25.     The financial viability derives from HCSBK’s strong financial performance and profitable
operations. From 2015 to 2018, HCSBK experienced strong organic growth in assets, loans,
deposits, and equity, with compound annual growth rates of 28% in 2015, 34% in 2016, 30% in
2017, and 23% in 2018. It also has high profitability, with a return on equity of 15.0% and a return
on assets of 3.0% as of the end of 2018. HCSBK has good portfolio quality, with a 90 days overdue
ratio of less than 1%, because of the following factors: (i) adequate policies, procedures, and
controls in relation to loan portfolio management, including protocols on instances of default; (ii)
a good management information system that promptly provides information regarding the status
of lending operations and the financial performance of the bank; (iii) good payment discipline
among borrowers given the savings accumulation-based business model; and (iv) a prudent
collateral policy with 90% of the loan portfolio having a loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of not more than
75% (36% of loans outstanding have a LTV ratio of less than 50%). In addition to these factors,
the timely payment of mortgage amortizations is considered a top priority for any home owner
given the motivation of a person to eventually own their housing unit. Likewise, mortgagors have
much more to lose in case of a default considering the collateral (housing unit and savings) and
the low LTV ratio. HCSBK has sufficient liquidity given its long-term deposit base and low volatility
brought by the peculiarity of the business model, as well as an ample capital buffer.

26.      Per statistics from the National Bank of Kazakhstan as of the end of 2018, of the 28 banks
regulated and supervised by the national bank, HCSBK was ranked 9th in terms of assets (T998
billion) and deposits (T665 billion), 8th in terms of loan portfolio size (T664 billion), 10th in terms
of interest spread (5.3%), 13th in terms of net interest margin (5.9%), 9th in terms of capital (with
a capital adequacy ratio of 54.6%), 4th in terms of liquidity (with a liquidity coefficient of 5.0), and
1st in terms of having the lowest 90 days overdue loan ratio (0.18% compared with the industry
average of 7.38%).45 The bank’s good industry rankings are further corroborated by its rating from
Moody’s Investors Service of Baa3 stable, similar with that of its parent, National Management
Holding Baiterek JSC, and the sovereign rating of Kazakhstan.

B.      Sustainability

27.    The ADB project is sustainable, as it will expand the number of women in Kazakhstan with
lower to middle-income levels who become homeowners through the acquisition of residential
properties by accessing mortgage finance on reasonable, predictable, and transparent lending
terms. The intervention will also reduce HCSBK’s overreliance on government funding and will
therefore contribute to fiscal sustainability. Finally, the TA attached to the project will demonstrate
to HCSBK (and other banks in Kazakhstan) that women represent a promising and creditworthy
borrower segment that can be targeted through tailor-made financial instruments and programs.


43
   The law governing HCSBK prohibits the use of its deposit funds to finance its preliminary lending business, which
   carries more risk. To date, the bank has relied on government funding to expand this business line.
44 These higher requirements are because of a significant gender pay gap of 69% and the higher proportion of women

   relying on self-employment (particularly in rural areas).
45 PWC. 2019. HCSBK JSC Financial Statements and Independent Auditor’s Report. (as of 31 December 2018).
                                                                                                            11


C.      Governance

28.    The overall integrity risk is low and the assessed pre-mitigation financial management risk
is moderate mainly because the bank has extensive experience in housing finance and has
successfully implemented many government housing programs. Integrity due diligence was
conducted. No significant integrity risks were identified. HCSBK’s capabilities are considered
adequate. ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and
discussed with the government and HCSBK. The specific policy requirements and supplementary
measures are described in the PAM (footnote 38).

D.      Poverty, Social, and Gender

29.      The project is anticipated to have a strong development impact in supporting broader
poverty reduction and welfare objectives prioritized by the government. Homeownership
complements the country’s welfare system by strengthening household security and financial
stability. Further, it eases access to credit, given that real estate remains a preferred type of
collateral in banking sector lending. Lastly, housing standards have a direct impact on human
welfare and help attain better health and education outcomes for occupants. It is also shown to
enhance maintenance of properties to a higher standard. The GAP describes the steps that will
be taken under the project to ensure that it fosters women’s economic empowerment and
supports gender equity objectives as described in the design and monitoring framework
(Appendix 1).

E.      Safeguards

30.      The project is categorized FI-C for environment, involuntary resettlement, and indigenous
peoples. Given the nature of the intervention, the project will have minimal or no adverse
environmental impacts and no impacts on involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples.
HCSBK’s loans will not finance real estate development or mass housing construction, but will be
used to provide residential mortgage loans to women borrowers to purchase existing or
constructed residential housing units that meet standard requirements and/or to make renovations
to such housing units. ADB has assessed the borrower’s commitment and capacity for
environmental and social management. HCSBK has adequate staff capacity to effectively carry
out the assessment and oversight of the progress of the environmental (including climate change)
and social risks screening and monitoring. HCSBK will (i) apply ADB's prohibited investment
activities list; (ii) exclude funding by ADB of activities falling under categories A and B for
environment and social safeguard impacts; (iii) ensure that investments using ADB funds comply
with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009) and abide by applicable national laws and
regulations, including labor laws, pursuant to ADB’s Social Protection Strategy; and (iv) take
measures to comply with internationally recognized core labor standards. HCSBK will confirm this
in its periodic reports to ADB and does not need to apply any other specific safeguard or social
requirements.46

F.      Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan

31.      Significant risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 3 and described in
detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.47 Some significant risks are related to

46 Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy, and Safeguards and Social Dimensions Summary (accessible

  from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2.)
47 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
12


the volatile economic operating environment and can only be partly mitigated through the project
as described. However, ADB’s position is protected by the strong credit of the sovereign, which
guarantees the loan. The project is categorized low risk because (i) the size of the ADB loan
amount does not exceed $200 million; (ii) ADB has relevant experience in the banking sector as
it has been lending to various banks in Kazakhstan in 2011-2018 (iii) HCSBK has adequate
mechanisms to administer and monitor the disbursement of the mortgage loans to women
borrowers; (iv) HCSBK has extensive experience in housing finance in Kazakhstan; and (v)
HCSBK has substantial experience in implementing this type of intervention.48

                         Table 3: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
 Risks                                                             Mitigation Measures
 The demand for preliminary loans
                                        The ADB team carried out detailed analysis as part of its due diligence to
 offered by HCSBK is substantially less
                                        ensure that the interest shown by prospective female borrowers in the loan
 than anticipated, which might lead to
                                        product offered by HCSBK reflects actual demand.
 slow disbursements.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, HCSBK = Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan.
Source: ADB.

                                               V.      ASSURANCES

32.     The government and HCSBK have assured ADB that implementation of the project shall
conform to all applicable ADB requirements, including those concerning anticorruption measures,
safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, and disbursement as described in detail
in the PAM and loan documents. The government and HCSBK have agreed with ADB on certain
covenants for the project, which are set forth in the draft loan and guarantee agreements.

                                         VI.        RECOMMENDATION

33.     I am satisfied that the proposed loan would comply with the Articles of Agreement of the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve the loan of up to
T38,000,000,000 to Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan, to be guaranteed by the
Republic of Kazakhstan, for the Promoting Gender Equality in Housing Finance Project, from
ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in regular terms, with an annual interest rate equal to the sum
of ADB’s cost of tenge funding and the contractual spread for sovereign guaranteed loans; for a
term of up to 11 years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance
with those set forth in the draft loan and guarantee agreements presented to the Board.


                                                                          Takehiko Nakao
                                                                          President

2 October 2019




48 To ensure full compliance with all ADB policies and safeguard requirements, ADB will closely supervise HCSBK in

  its operations and will require it to provide ADB with a quarterly monitoring report and compliance letter.
                                                                                             Appendix 1          13


                               DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK
Impact the Project is Aligned with
Gender equity promotion and sustainable economic growth achieveda
                            Performance Indicators with            Data Sources and
Results Chain                   Targets and Baselines            Reporting Mechanisms              Risks
Outcome                  By the end of 2022:
Acquisition and           a. 8% annual growth rate in the        a–b. HCSBK monitoring    HCBSK’s ability to
renovation of                 lending portfolio to women         reports                  develop affordable
housing units by              (2019–2022), reaching at least                              mortgage finance for
women increased               28,000 mortgage loans issued                                women is not
                              by HCSBK to women                                           sustained
                              borrowers (2018 baseline:
                              20,622)                                                     National Bank of
                          b. 1% annual growth rate in the                                 Kazakhstan’s
                              size of the lending portfolio to                            unsuccessful
                              women as a proportion of the                                macroprudential policy
                              overall portfolio (2019–2022),                              framework to manage
                              reaching at least 59% (2018                                 potential housing crisis
                              baseline: 55%)                                              in 2020-2031

Outputs                  By the end of 2022:
1. Long-term             1a. Number of housing units owned       1a–d. HCSBK monitoring   Insufficient demand for
affordable mortgage      by women funded by the ADB loan         reports                  mortgage loans from
financing for eligible   increased to at least 3,000 (2019                                female customers
women borrowers          baseline: NA)
made available                                                                            Deterioration of
                         1b. Number of renovations of                                     HCSBK’s credit
                         housing units owned by women                                     standing and,
                         funded by the ADB loan increased                                 therefore, adverse
                         to 2,000 (2019 baseline: NA)                                     impact on the bank’s
                                                                                          financial standing as
                         1c. At least 60% of the mortgage                                 result of the additional
                         loans funded by the ADB loan                                     mortgage lending
                         disbursed by HCSBK for the                                       under the ADB project
                         acquisition and/or renovation of
                         housing units owned by women in
                         rural areas, i.e., outside of Aktau,
                         Almaty, Atyrau and Nur-Sultan
                         (2019 baseline: NA)

                         1d. At least 20% of all mortgage
                         loans financed by the ADB loan
                         disbursed to low-income women
                         borrowers with a monthly household
                         income of less than T200,000
                         (about $530) (2019 baseline: NA)

2. Accessibility to      2a. HCSBK develops at least one         2a–c. HCSBK’s internal
HCSBK’s lending          financial product exclusively           and monitoring reports
products for eligible    targeted at women borrowers
women borrowers          (2019 baseline:NA)
improved
                         2b. HCSBK adopts a gender policy
                         (2019 baseline: NA)

                         2c. HCSBK conducts at least three
                         nationwide public awareness
                         campaigns on housing finance
                         products for women (2019
                         baseline: NA)
14       Appendix 1


 3. Gender               3. Results of a nationwide study on     3. Study report, seminar      Declining buy-in and
 inclusiveness of the    women’s access to housing and           agenda, and seminar           interest from HCSBK
 banking sector’s        finance products disseminated and       report                        and the government to
 housing finance         endorsed by the government (2019                                      carry out the study
 assessed                baseline: NA)                                                         with presentation on
                                                                                               the subsequent
                                                                                               seminar
 Key Activities with Milestones
 Output 1: Long-term affordable mortgage financing for eligible women borrowers made available.
 1.1 ADB provides up to $100 million for qualified subloans issued by HCSBK (2019: $0 million; 2020: $30 million;
 and 2021: $70 million)
 Output 2: Greater accessibility to HCSBK’s lending products for eligible women borrowers.
 2.1 HCSBK develops at least one lending product exclusively targeted at women borrowers (by March 2020)
 2.2 HCSBK adopts a gender policy (by March 2020)
 2.3 HCSBK conducts at least three nationwide public awareness campaigns on housing finance products for
 women (by March 2020)
 Output 3: Gender inclusiveness of the banking sector’s housing finance assessed.
 3.1 HCSBK’s financial skills training program focused on women becomes fully operational (by December 2020)

 Inputs
 ADB: $100 million equivalent (loan), $500,000 Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF–other sources)
 Assumptions for Partner Financing
 Contribution of $120,000 to the technical assistance funded by the Government of Kazakhstan from its Knowledge
 and Experience Exchange Programb with ADB
ADB = Asian Development Bank, HCSBK = Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan.
a Government of Kazakhstan. 2017. Strategic Plan for the Development of Kazakhstan until 2025. Nur-Sultan.
b Already transferred to TASF–other sources.

Contribution to ADB Results Framework:
RFI A: HCSBK estimates an 8% compound annual growth rate on its loan portfolio for women borrowers during
        2019–2022.
RFI B: 1% annual growth in the size of the lending portfolio to women as a proportion of the overall portfolio (i.e., men
        and women borrowers combined), projected based on recent historical performance (2016–2018).
Source: ADB.
                                                                        Appendix 2   15


                             LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS
                  http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=52334-001-3

1.    Loan Agreement
2.    Guarantee Agreement
3.    Sector Assessment (Summary): Finance (Housing Finance)
4.    Project Administration Manual
5.    Financial Analysis
6.    Economic Analysis
7.    Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
8.    Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
9.    Attached Technical Assistance Report
10.   Gender Action Plan

Supplementary Documents

11.   Country Economic Indicators
12.   Overview of Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan’s Operations
13.   Financial Management Assessment of Housing Construction Savings Bank of
      Kazakhstan
14.   Development Coordination
