3 December 2021


Yeru lan Kenzhebekov1ch Zhamaubayev
Minister of Finance
Ministry of Finance
8 Mangilik El Avenue, Entrance 4
Nur-Sultan 010000
Republic of Kazakh stan

Lyazzat Yerkenovna lbragimova
Chairperson of the Management Board
Otbasy Bank JSC
Abylay Khan Avenue, 91
Almaty A05A2XO
Republic of Kazakhstan

Dear Mr. Zhamaubayev,
Dear Ms lbragimova:


Subject:              Loan No. 3841-KAZ: Promoting Gender Equality in Housing Finance
                      Project-Amendment to Loan Agreement


1.     We refer to the Loan Agreement dated 15 November 201 9 between Otbasy Bank JSC
(formerly Housing Construction Savings Bank of Kazakhstan) ("Borrower") and Asian
Development Bank ("ADB") fo r the captioned project ("Loan Agreement") and the Guarantee
Agreement dated 23 October 2020 between the Republic of Kazakhstan ("Guarantor") and
ADB for the captioned project ("Guarantee Agreement"). All capitalized terms used but not
defined herein shall have the meaning given th ereto in th e Loan Agreement, unless the context
requires otherwise.

2.        Following a request from the Borrower dated 28 May 2021, ADB approved, on 03
December 2021 , changes in the Project concerning the level of monthly household income for
eligibility of sub-borrowers. To give effect to the changes, ADB proposes that the Loan
Agreement be amended as follows:

          (a)         Section 4.01(d) shall be deleted and replaced by:

                      "(d)  at least 20% of Qualified Mortgages (in aggregate) are to the Qualified
                      Sub-borrowers whose net monthly household income is less than KZT550,000;"

          {b)         Section 4.02(c) shall be deleted and replaced by:

                      "(c)      her net monthly household income is less than KZT640,000; and".


ASIAN DEVELO PMENT BA NK
6 ADB Avenu e, Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila,Ph,l,pplncs
Tel +632 8632 4444
Fax +63 2 8636 2444
www.adb.org
2




3.     Save and except to the extent set out above, the Loan Agreement and the Guarantee
Agreement remain unchanged. For the avoidance of doubt, references to the "Loan Agreement•
in the Guarantee Agreement shall be construed as references to the Loan Agreement as
amended by this letter agreement

4.      The Guarantor confirms that its obligations under the Guarantee Agreement will continue
with respect to the Loan Agreement, as amended hereby.

5.     Pursuant to ADB's Access to Information Policy (2018) ("AIP"), the amendments to the
Loan Agreement will be posted on ADB's website within 2 weeks from the date that the
amendments become effective , after removing any information that falls within the AIP exceptions
as specified by the Borrower.

6.     Please indicate the Borrower's and Guarantor's concurrence to the amendments set out
in paragraph 2 of this letter agreement and to the terms of this letter agreement by countersigning
each of the two originals of this letter agreement in the space indicated below. Please retain one
signed original of this letter agreement for your records and return the other to ADB. The proposed
amendments shall take effect on the date of receipt by ADB of a signed original of this letter
agreement.


Yours sincerely ,



   Zhukov
Yevgeniy
Director General
Central and West Asia Department



A.        Accepted and agreed.

B.       Confirmed that the amendments to the Loan Agreement does not contain information
falling within the AIP exceptions.


    For and on behalf of                          Endorsed f       d o behalf of
    OTBAS                                         REPU                         N as Guarantor

    Name:                                          Name:

                                                               .




cc:       Director, D. Song , CWPF; B. Konysbayev, OGC
