Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




Project Number: 53067-004
August 2021




Proposed Loan and Technical Assistance Grant
India: Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Housing
for Urban Poor Sector Project in Tamil Nadu




Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB's
Access to Information Policy.
                          CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                             (as of 22 July 2021)

                       Currency unit     –     Indian rupee/s (₹)
                             ₹1.00       =     $0.01343
                             $1.00       =     ₹74.4460




                               ABBREVIATIONS

ADB              –   Asian Development Bank
COVID-19         –   coronavirus disease
DTCP             –   Directorate of Town and Country Planning
EMP              –   environmental management plan
ESMS             –   environmental and social management system
EWS              –   economically weaker section
GESI             –   gender equality and social inclusion
GOTN             –   Government of Tamil Nadu
IEE              –   initial environmental examination
LIG              –   lower-income group
O&M              –   operation and maintenance
PAM              –   project administration manual
PMAY-HFA         –   Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Housing for All
PMU              –   project management unit
TA               –   technical assistance
TNIFMC           –   Tamil Nadu Infrastructure Fund Management Corporation
TNSCB            –   Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board
TNSF             –   Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund
WWH              –   working women’s hostel




                                       NOTES

 (i)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of India, Government of Tamil Nadu,
        and its agencies ends on 31 March. “FY” before a calendar year denotes
        the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2021 ends on 31 March 2021.
 (ii)   In this report, "$" refers to United States dollars.
Vice-President             Shixin Chen, Operations 1
Director General           Kenichi Yokoyama, South Asia Department (SARD)
Deputy Director General    Manmohan Parkash, SARD
Director                   Norio Saito, Urban Development and Water Division (SAUW), SARD

Team leaders               Ricardo Carlos Barba, Principal Safeguards Specialist, Office of the
                              Director General (SAOD), SARD
                           Sourav Majumder, Senior Project Officer (Urban), India Resident
                              Mission, SARD
Team members               Mikael Andersson, Financial Management Specialist, SAOD, SARD
                           Saswati Belliappa, Safeguards Specialist, SAUW, SARD
                           Rose Buenaventura, Senior Operations Assistant, SAOD, SARD
                           Dharmesh Mahendra Dawda; Procurement Specialist; Procurement
                              Division 1; Procurement, Portfolio, and Financial Management
                              Department
                           Takuya Hoshino; Financial Sector Specialist; Public Management,
                              Financial Sector, and Trade Division; SARD
                           Charlene Liau, Urban Development Specialist, SAUW, SARD
                           Irina Novikova, Senior Social Development Specialist (Safeguards),
                              Safeguards Division, Sustainable Development and Climate
                              Change Department (SDCC)
                           Douglas Perkins, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                           Santosh Pokharel, Urban Economist, SAUW, SARD
                           Srinivas Sampath, Chief of Public–Private Partnership Thematic
                              Group, Office of Public–Private Partnership
Peer reviewer              Hong Soo Lee, Senior Urban Specialist (Smart Cities), Sector
                              Advisory Service Cluster Urban Sector Group, SDCC




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                     CONTENTS

                                                                   Page
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
MAP
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                   1
II.    THE PROJECT                                                    1
       A.   Rationale                                                 1
       B.   Project Description                                       4
       C.   Value Added by ADB                                        5
       D.   Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan                 6
       E.   Implementation Arrangements                               7
III.   ATTACHED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE                                  8
IV.    DUE DILIGENCE                                                  8
       A.    Technical                                                9
       B.    Economic and Financial Viability                         9
       C.    Sustainability                                          10
       D.    Governance                                              11
       E.    Poverty, Social, and Gender                             12
       F.    Safeguards                                              12
       G.    Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan     14
V.     ASSURANCES                                                    15
VI.    RECOMMENDATION                                                15

APPENDIXES
       1. Design and Monitoring Framework                            16
       2. List of Linked Documents                                   20
                                                                                                      Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                                            PROJECT AT A GLANCE

    1. Basic Data                                                                                                  Project Number: 53067-004
       Project Name                       Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Housing           Department/Division SARD/SAUW
                                          for Urban Poor Sector Project in Tamil Nadu
       Country                            India                                                   Executing Agency            Housing and Urban
       Borrower                           India                                                                               Development
                                                                                                                              Department, Government
       Country Economic                   https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/                                           of Tamil Nadu
       Indicators                         ?id=53067-004-CEI
       Portfolio at a Glance              https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/
                                          ?id=53067-004-PortAtaGlance

    2. Sector                             Subsector(s)                                                                    ADB Financing ($ million)
       Water and other urban              Urban housing                                                                                    150.00
       infrastructure and services
                                                                                                                    Total                        150.00
    3. Operational Priorities                                                                     Climate Change Information1
       Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities                                     GHG reductions (tons per annum)                 0.208
       Accelerating progress in gender equality                                                   Climate Change impact on the                   Medium
       Tackling climate change, building climate and disaster resilience, and                     Project
       enhancing environmental sustainability
       Making cities more livable                                                                 ADB Financing
       Strengthening governance and institutional capacity                                        Adaptation ($ million)                            48.87
                                                                                                  Mitigation ($ million)                             1.30

                                                                                                  Cofinancing
                                                                                                  Adaptation ($ million)                             0.00
                                                                                                  Mitigation ($ million)                             0.00
       Sustainable Development Goals                                                              Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
       SDG 1.5                                                                                    Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
       SDG 10.2
       SDG 11.1                                                                                   Poverty Targeting
       SDG 13.a                                                                                   Household Targeting

    4. Risk Categorization:               Complex
.


    5. Safeguard Categorization                        Environment: B Involuntary Resettlement: A Indigenous Peoples: C
.


    6. Financing
        Modality and Sources                                                                             Amount ($ million)
        ADB                                                                                                                                     150.00
           Sovereign Sector (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources                                                                          150.00
        Cofinancing                                                                                                                               0.00
           None                                                                                                                                   0.00
        Counterpart                                                                                                                              65.00
           Government                                                                                                                            65.00
        Total                                                                                                                                   215.00
        Note: An attached technical assistance will be financed on a grant basis by the Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF-OTHERS) in the
        amount of $1,500,000.

       Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar

1 The project reduces greenhouse gas emissions. However, it does not fall under the eligibility criteria for climate mitigation finance as defined by the

joint multilateral development bank methodology on tracking climate finance, which notes that not all activities that reduce greenhouse gases in the short
term are eligible to be counted towards climate mitigation finance. Accordingly, greenfield fossil fuel projects are excluded, and climate mitigation finance
is considered zero.




Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.           06082021151421618427                                   Generated Date: 06-Aug-2021 15:16:00 PM
                                                ° ′E                                                                                                    ° ′E
                                                                                    INDIA
                                         INCLUSIVE, RESILIENT, AND SUSTAINABLE HOUSING
                                                FOR URBAN POOR SECTOR PROJECT
                                                          IN TAMIL NADU
                                                                                                            ANDHRA
                                                                                                            PRADESH




° ′N
                                                                                                                                                                       Chennai               ° ′N
                        KARNATAKA




                                                                             Mettur
                                                                                                                                                       PUDUCHERRY

                                                                                       Salem


                                                       Pallipalayam
                                                                                     Namakkal




                                                                                        TAMIL NADU                                                      Karaikkal
                                                                                                                                                      (Puducherry)
                                                                                                                               Vallam

                                                                         Odukkam
                                                                  Dindigul                                               Thanjavur
                                                                                                        Kalanivasal


                                             Thappukundu                          Uchappatti

                                                                        Madurai                 Sivaganga
                                                          Theni


                                  KERALA



                                           Kadayanallur
° ′N                                                                                                                                                                                        ° ’N



                                                          Tirunelveli
                                                                                  Reddiarpatti



                                                                                                                                            Project Location
                                                                                                                                            State Capital
                                                                                                                                            District Boundary
                                                                                                                                            State or Union Territory Boundary

                   N                                                                                                            Boundaries are not necessarily authoritative.

                                                                                                             This map was produced by the cartography unit of the Asian Development Bank.
       0   25      50        75    100                                                                       The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on this
                                                                                                             map do not imply, on the part of the Asian Development Bank, any judgment on the
                                                                                                             legal status of any territory, or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries,
                Kilometers                                                                                   colors, denominations, or information.
                                                ° ′E                                                                                                       ° ′E

                                                                                                                                                                                      201125 ABV
                                         I.       THE PROPOSAL

1.      I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan to
India for the Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Housing for Urban Poor Sector Project in Tamil
Nadu. The report also describes proposed technical assistance (TA) for Supporting Capacity for
Affordable Housing Delivery, and if the Board approves the proposed loan, I, acting under the
authority delegated to me by the Board, approve the TA.

2.      The project will promote access to inclusive, resilient, and sustainable housing and urban
development in Tamil Nadu by supporting the state in (i) relocating vulnerable communities living
in areas exposed to natural hazards to newly constructed housing units in safe locations, which
will be implemented using a sector loan approach; (ii) mobilizing private sector financing to
construct affordable housing units for poor urban households, migrant workers from the
economically weaker section (EWS), lower-income group (LIG), and other populations that are
underserved by the housing market, which will be implemented following an approach similar to
a financial intermediation loan; and (iii) supporting the state in regional development planning.1

                                          II.      THE PROJECT
A.      Rationale

3.      Urban sector challenges. Tamil Nadu is the sixth most populous state in India with a
population of more than 72 million. The state contributes 8.54% of India’s gross domestic product,
with strong economic growth accompanied by increased rural–urban migration.2 Tamil Nadu has
one of the highest rates of urbanization in India, with 48% of the population living in urban areas.
Sharp increases in urban populations and rapid urbanization have not been well-managed, and
the supply of urban infrastructure and services does not meet the high and increasing demand.

4.        Housing shortage in urban Tamil Nadu. Tamil Nadu is among India’s large states with
an acute housing shortage. Issues affecting the demand for housing include (i) the poor lacks
access to existing housing programs because these are unaffordable, and have stringent
qualification requirements; (ii) designs are not culturally and gender-sensitive; and (iii) housing
projects experience low demand and occupancy because they are located far from city centers.
Factors affecting the housing supply include (i) inadequate public resources for urban housing,
(ii) difficulty in attracting private investment because of low investment returns and lack of
incentives, (iii) mismatch between housing policies and procedures of central and state
government and capacity of the poor, and (iv) weaknesses in regional planning resulting in areas
that are strong economically but lacking a supply of affordable housing. The state’s housing deficit
accounts for 6.66% of the national housing shortfall.3 National data shows that, when the housing
shortage is mapped against income levels, EWS households account for 56% of the total shortage,
and LIG households for 39%. Only 4% of the national housing shortage is borne by households
in the middle-income group or those with higher income, as current housing stocks cater to
middle- and higher-income groups.

1 The Government of India defines EWS as those households with annual household income of ₹300,000 ($4,050),
  and LIG as households with an annual household income of ₹600,000 ($8,100); Government of India, Ministry of
  Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (MHUPA). 2016. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Housing for All (Urban)
  Scheme Guidelines (PMAY-HFA). Delhi.
2 Reserve Bank of India. 2020. Handbook of Statistics on Indian States. Mumbai (Table
                                                                                       17. Gross State Domestic
  Product, Current Prices).
3 Government of India, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, National Buildings Organization. 2012.

  Report of the Technical Group on Urban Housing Shortage (TG-12) (2012-2017). Delhi. The figure is based on 2011
  census data. New census scheduled in 2021 but was postponed due to COVID-19 outbreak.
2



5.        In Tamil Nadu, the large shortage of housing for EWS and LIG households results in
limited housing options for the urban poor. Where housing is available, it fails to meet the needs
of the urban poor including access to jobs and urban services. Unplanned urbanization and
housing deficits have contributed to informal settlements and intensification of slums. Tamil Nadu
is among five states that host 62% of the India’s slum population. The state has 5.8 million slum
residents, accounting for 17% of the urban population, and 8.9% of India’s total slum population.4
The incomes of most slum residents place them in the EWS and LIG. Informal settlements and
slums are often situated in hazard-exposed areas, are congested, and lack appropriate services
(i.e., electricity, piped water supply, and sanitation or waste facilities). Slum areas are exposed to
natural hazards with impacts that are exacerbated by climate change, environmental degradation,
and health risks.

6.       Providing housing for the urban poor is critical to ensure that growth in cities is sustainable
and not accompanied by increased inequity. Many housing units built to relocate slum households
were not planned with beneficiary input; in addition to being located far from economic
opportunities and infrastructure, they also suffer from inadequate operation and maintenance
(O&M). The result is that limited resources are wasted on units that are unoccupied. These failures
result from a combination of designs that did not adequately consider the environmental, social,
and economic context, and inadequate urban and regional planning, which is central to sustained
growth and equitable cities.

7.       Government housing strategy. Housing programs have long been a fundamental
component of central government development plans and priorities, but their impact has been
diluted by shifting perspectives, divergent approaches, and lack of clear policies.5 In 2007, the
National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy6 was created to set a clear direction for the housing
sector. The policy acknowledged the nexus between urbanization, poverty, and slums, and is
centered on integrating the needs of disadvantaged EWS and LIG communities who struggle to
afford proper shelter. In line with the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy, several
comprehensive urban initiatives have been undertaken. The most recent initiative is the Pradhan
Mantri Awas Yojana-Housing for All (PMAY-HFA). 7 This mission targets rural areas through
PMAY (Gramin), and urban areas through PMAY (Urban). It aims to provide every family with
permanent shelter that comes with electricity, water supply, and sanitation facilities by 2022. It is
partially funded by the central government and implemented through state-level nodal agencies.

8.      In Tamil Nadu, TNSCB is the entity responsible for implementing PMAY (Urban). In its
demand survey presented at the 51st Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee meeting,
TNSCB estimated the total demand for affordable housing at 1.4 million units. However, only 0.76
million (54.76%) have been approved to date. Addressing this gap should prioritize slum
communities at risk of hazards that require relocation. Affordable housing also needs to be made
accessible to low-income migrant workers, working women, and low-income households headed
by women to ensure sustainable urban development. The state government is constrained to

4 Government of India, MHUPA, National Buildings Organisation. 2015. Slums in India: A Statistical Compendium
  2015. Delhi. The figure is based on 2011 census data. New census scheduled in 2021 but was postponed due to
  COVID-19 outbreak.
5 The central and state government sector strategy, and overview of the sector are discussed in the Sector Assessment

  (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services (Urban Housing) (accessible from the list of linked
  documents in Appendix 2).
6 Government of India, MHUPA. 2007. National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy.
7 Government of India, MHUPA. 2016. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Housing for All (Urban) Scheme Guidelines

  (PMAY-HFA). Delhi.
                                                                                                                           3


provide the needed affordable housing, and thus the private sector should be enabled to
increasingly take on this role.

9.       Alignment with government and ADB priorities and strategies. The project aligns with
pillar 2 of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) country partnership strategy for India, 2018–2022,
which promotes inclusive access to infrastructure networks and services; it is also included in
ADB’s country operations business plan for India, 2021–2023.8 It is aligned with the Government
of India’s development priorities and policies on urban sector development, ADB Strategy 2030,9
and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals that focus on making cities more
inclusive, resilient, and livable. 10 It directly supports the current comprehensive urban
development mission, PMAY-HFA.

10.    Lessons. The project builds on lessons from previous urban development projects and
housing finance programs of ADB and the Government of India. In designing affordable housing,
there is a need to (i) balance socioeconomic priorities, (ii) integrate regional and spatial
perspectives in development and economic planning, (iii) craft and implement appropriate policies
and strategies, and (iv) ensure inclusivity.11

11.     Project design. The Government of Tamil Nadu (GOTN) has plans to meet the housing
sector’s needs and institutional capacity to implement such plans. For output 1, which will
construct affordable and improved housing for vulnerable communities, GOTN has identified nine
separate affordable housing subprojects in different locations throughout the state. However,
because of differences in risk profiles, variations in relocation sites vis-à-vis original household
locations, unique design requirements based on beneficiary needs and site conditions, and other
factors, the preparation status of these subprojects differ. Therefore, the sector lending approach
is considered suitable as it will enable GOTN to carry out affordable housing projects under output
1 based on their readiness. 12 The approach will also allow successive subprojects to adopt
successful changes from previous subprojects as well as introduce incremental changes and
redesign less-successful elements.

12.     For output 2, which will increase affordable housing for the urban poor and migrant
workers, ADB will follow an approach similar to a financial intermediation loan. ADB loan proceeds
for output 2 will be invested as GOTN’s equity into the Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund (TNSF), an
alternative investment fund established by GOTN to make investments in affordable housing



8  ADB. 2017. Country Partnership Strategy: India, 2018–2022—Accelerating Inclusive Economic Transformation.
   Manila; and ADB. 2020. Country Operations Business Plan: India, 2021–2023. Manila.
9 ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific.

   Manila. Affordable housing for the EWS and LIG contributes to key operational priorities (OPs) of ADB Strategy 2030,
   including addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities (OP 1); accelerating progress in gender equality
   (OP2); tackling climate change, building climate and disaster resilience, and enhancing environmental sustainability
   (OP 3); making cities more livable (OP 4); and strengthening governance and institutional capacity (OP 6).
10 United Nations. 2015. A/RES/70/1 – Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
11 ADB’s previous urban development and housing finance programs are discussed in Sector Assessment Summary

   (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
12 In addition to the existence of a large number of subprojects, output 1 of the project meets the other sector loan

   modality criteria: (i) GOTN has a sector development plan; (ii) institutional capacity is sufficient to implement the
   sector development plan; the executing agency has a long history of planning and implementing affordable housing
   projects, and further support will be provided under the project; and (iii) supporting policies are in place and are being
   strengthened through a World Bank project and this project.; World Bank. 2020. First Tamil Nadu Housing Sector
   Strengthening Program Development Policy Loan.; World Bank. 2020. Tamil Nadu Housing and Habitat
   Development Project.
4


infrastructure.13 It is expected that the GOTN’s investment of equity into TNSF will help catalyze
private sector financing for TNSF. The combined proceeds of the GOTN and private sector
financing will be channeled by TNSF, as the financial intermediary, to support multiple affordable
housing subprojects currently under development, including those to be carried out under public–
private partnership deal structures.

13.      Coronavirus disease. The rationale for the project is stronger in view of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is more difficult to address in slum areas, given the
deficiencies in water, sanitation, drainage, and waste collection, and the space constraints that
make social distancing and self-quarantine almost impossible. A Mumbai case study has shown
that slums are being disproportionally impacted by COVID-19 pandemic. 14 Slum conditions
exacerbate existing health issues in slum populations, and efforts to contain the pandemic
prevents slum dwellers from earning income. Providing affordable housing and urban services to
the urban poor and migrant workers will increase their resilience to pandemics. The graduation
program to be implemented in project housing sites will increase the resilience of beneficiaries’
livelihoods, and promote behavioral change to maximize benefits from sanitation and other urban
services. 15 The project will build in required health and safety procedures in project design,
particularly because it involves extensive consultation and engagement with beneficiaries. The
project is aligned with the recently announced special economic and comprehensive package,
which includes support for housing for migrant workers and the urban poor affected by the
pandemic.16

B.       Project Description

14.     The project is aligned with the following impact: permanent shelter with appropriate
housing infrastructures and services provided for every affected household (footnote 7). The
project will have the following outcome: access to inclusive, safe, and affordable housing
infrastructure and services for vulnerable and disadvantaged communities in Tamil Nadu
increased.17

15.     Output 1: Affordable and improved housing for vulnerable communities
constructed. The output will construct housing units in nine separate locations throughout the
state, and relocate an estimated 6,000 slum households vulnerable to natural hazards to safer
locations. Subprojects under this output will be prepared based on location, and the selection
criteria will include technical, economic, financial, safeguards, and sustainability criteria as

13 TNSF is registered with the Securities Exchange Board of India as a social venture fund; consequently, it has a

   socially responsible investment mandate to increase the supply of affordable housing through planned financial
   approaches, including the promotion of public–private partnership deal structures. TNSF is managed by the GOTN-
   promoted TNIFMC. In 2017, ADB’s Private Sector Operations Department provided TA to the TNIFMC (the fund
   manager of the Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund) for its Tamil Nadu Infrastructure Fund.; ADB. India: Tamil Nadu
   Infrastructure Fund Management Company Limited.
14 Patranbis, Ghandi, and Tandel. 2020. Are slums more vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic: Evidence from

   Mumbai. Brookings Institute. 16 April.
15 The graduation program is a holistic, time-bound, and carefully sequenced set of interventions to lift households from

   poverty through (i) social assistance to support immediate needs, such as subsistence and health services during
   transition in the relocation site; (ii) livelihood promotion through localized market assessment and household-level
   enterprise and/or employment matching; (iii) financial inclusion through financial literacy and improved access to
   savings and financial services to promote economic resilience; and (iv) social empowerment by improving social
   dynamics, including gender relations, in families and communities.
16 Press Information Bureau, Government of India. 2020. Finance Minister announces short-term and long-term

   measures for supporting the poor, including migrants, farmers, tiny businesses and street vendors. Press Information
   Bureau’s Daily Bulletin on COVID-19. 15 May.
17 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
                                                                                                                      5


detailed in the project administration manual (PAM).18 The project will introduce gradual changes
in the delivery of affordable housing to the urban poor by (i) improving design and implementation
with robust O&M mechanisms, ensuring housing infrastructures are climate resilient, and
increasing consultation and participation of beneficiaries (including women) in design; (ii)
implementing a graduation program to lift vulnerable relocated households from poverty (footnote
15); and (iii) building the capacity of TNSCB, HUDD, and urban local bodies in affordable,
inclusive and sustainable urban housing. The output will include protection of cleared waterways
to prevent re-encroachment, and restoration of ecological functions in two pilot sites.

16.     Output 2: Affordable housing for urban poor and migrant workers increased. ADB
financing for this output will be deployed as GOTN’s equity into the TNSF, which in turn will be
leveraged to catalyze private sector investment in TNSF.19 Utilizing such financing, TNSF will
provide risk capital, such as in the form of equity investment or participating instruments
investment, to specific special purpose vehicles or other entities undertaking affordable housing
subprojects that benefit populations underserved by the housing market. Examples of such
subprojects include industrial housing and working women’s hostels (WWHs) for low-income and
migrant workers, resulting in an anticipated additional 500 beds for working women and 5,000
beds for industrial workers. To be eligible for financing, subprojects must be financially and
economically viable affordable housing projects that increase the supply of housing for
households within EWS and LIG segments and other segments of the population that are
currently underserved by the housing market. Additional eligibility criteria cover safeguards,
gender, and sustainability, as detailed in the PAM (footnote 18). Output 2 will also be
complemented by capacity development of TNIFMC and the private sector.

17.     Output 3: Regional plan development supported. The project will support DTCP in
regional planning that integrates existing and proposed development plans.20 It will develop one
model integrated regional plan from which subsequent plans will be developed to cover the state’s
30 districts. It will include provisions for economic development and affordable housing to balance
growth throughout Tamil Nadu with regard to infrastructure development, environmental
protection, disaster risk management, and gender.21

C.         Value Added by ADB

18.     The project incorporates improvements in the current process of affordable housing
delivery as a result of ADB’s dialogue with implementing agencies and other stakeholders. It will
improve TNSCB’s delivery process through design changes that address O&M and beneficiary
needs, ensuring social protection, livelihood promotion, financial inclusion, and social
empowerment. The project will also improve TNSCB’s financial sustainability by introducing
maintenance planning and asset management, piloting long-term maintenance contracts and

18   Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
19 GOTN’s equity investment in TNSF will take the form of a first loss capital instrument (class B shares). GOTN plans

   to mobilize a total of $300 million private sector funding to TNSF by leveraging the issuance of $92 million class B
   shares, out of which ADB will finance $35 million and the World Bank will finance $35 million, both through GOTN.
   The balance of $22 million will be borne by GOTN.
20 Through the Tamil Nadu Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1978, agencies—including DTCP and Chennai

   Metropolitan Development Authority—regulate urban land development. Although master plans and new town
   development plans were prepared for most of the urban centers in Tamil Nadu, integrated regional plans for the eight
   regions in Tamil Nadu have not been prepared by DTCP.
21 Land use regulation plays an important part in determining the pattern of service, land, and housing occupation in

   urban areas. Ensuring that housing is provided where it is needed, rather than supporting segregation (for example
   at the periphery of cities) is a critical aspect of policy, which should provide housing diversity in terms of scale,
   typology, and price.
6


schemes, and involving beneficiaries in O&M. Because affordable housing demand cannot be
solely supplied by TNSCB, ADB’s financial support to TNSF will catalyze private sector financing
for affordable housing projects by bringing estate management expertise at the subproject level.
From a regional development perspective, ADB’s assistance will result in the preparation of
functional regional plans; these will support regional economic development with resource
mobilization, and through a development framework, make provisions for affordable housing
taking into account regional disparities, infrastructure development, environmental protection, and
disaster risk management.22 Two World Bank loans were approved in May 2020: a development
policy loan to strengthen the housing sector, and investment project financing to enable private
sector participation in affordable housing (footnote 12). To maximize complementarity with the
World Bank loans, the project will expand investments in housing, with a focus on addressing
vulnerability and promoting resilience.

19.     Replication strategy. The GOTN has indicated its intention to approach ADB for
additional financing to further expand affordable housing, based on satisfactory performance and
lessons from project implementation. Successful approaches for improved affordable housing
delivery will be replicated in other cities in Tamil Nadu where TNSCB will provide affordable
housing, and further equity can be provided to TNSF to increase the supply of affordable housing
projects. The attached TA will document O&M and asset management approaches, and
methodologies for improved affordable housing delivery such as the graduation program for
vulnerable relocated beneficiaries. These, including improved regional planning, will be widely
disseminated within Tamil Nadu and to other states in India (through the Capacity Development
Resource Center of the India Resident Mission). There is also potential to replicate this model to
other countries.

D.        Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan

20.    The project is estimated to cost $215 million (Table 1). Detailed cost estimates by
expenditure category and by financier are included in the PAM (footnote 18). The contingency will
cover possible cost increases because of COVID-19 pandemic. For output 2, ADB loan
assistance would be invested as GOTN’s equity contribution in TNSF.

                                    Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates
                                                ($ million)
 Item                                                                                                     Amounta
                  b
 A. Base Cost
      1. Affordable and improved housing for vulnerable communities constructed                                 157.2
      2. Affordable housing for urban poor and migrant workers increased c                                        35.0
      3. Regional plan development supported                                                                       2.7
                                               Subtotal (A)                                                     194.9
 B. Contingenciesd                                                                                                17.2
 C. Financing Chargese                                                                                             2.9
                                           Total (A+B+C)                                                        215.0
a In end-2020 prices using an exchange rate of $1 = ₹74.0.
b Includes taxes and duties of $15.4 million to be financed from government resources by cash contribution.
c The affordable housing for urban poor and migrant workers component is proposed to be implemented through the

  Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund, through a modality similar to financial intermediation. Hence, contingencies and financing
  charges are not included in the cost estimate. Under output 2, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) contribution of
  $35 million is intended to mobilize additional investment of $300 million to the Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund for a total
  fund size of $392 million, which is expected to leverage additional financing to support affordable housing projects.


22 With respect to affordable housing for migrant workers and working women in the Madurai and Thoothukudi district

    nodes, the regional plans will be informed by ADB’s ongoing master planning study (ADB. India: Supporting the
    Preparation of a Comprehensive Master Plan for the Chennai–Kanyakumari Industrial Corridor).
                                                                                                                        7

d Physical contingencies are computed at 5.0% for civil works and equipment. Price contingencies are computed at
  0.5%–1.8% on foreign exchange costs and at 3.0%–4.0% on local currency costs; includes provision for potential
  exchange rate fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
e Includes interest and commitment charges. Interest during construction for the ADB loan has been computed at the

  5-year United States dollar fixed-swap rate plus a spread of 0.5%. Commitment charges for an ADB loan are 0.15%
  per year to be charged on the undisbursed loan amount.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

21.     The government has requested a regular loan of $150 million from ADB’s ordinary capital
resources to help finance the project. The loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period
of 5 years; an annual interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s London interbank offered
rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility; a commitment charge of 0.15% per year; and such other
terms and conditions set forth in the loan and project agreements. Based on the custom-tailored
repayment method, the average maturity is 12.96 years, and there is no maturity premium payable
to ADB.

22.       The summary financing plan is in Table 2. ADB will finance the expenditures in relation to
(i) civil works, (ii) consulting services, (iii) O&M, and (iv) incremental recurrent costs. The GOTN
will provide $65 million to the investment costs of the project to finance (i) taxes and duties;
(ii) financing charges during implementation; (iii) part of the civil works; (iv) O&M; (v) incremental
recurrent costs; (vi) resettlement costs; and (vii) contingencies; and will provide the loan and
counterpart funds to the project as a grant for outputs 1 and 3, and as equity for output 2.

                                      Table 2: Summary Financing Plan
                                                                                   Amount              Share of Total
Source                                                                            ($ million)               (%)
Asian Development Bank
    Ordinary capital resources (regular loan)                                        150.0                   69.8
Government                                                                            65.0                   30.2
                                 Total                                               215.0                  100.0
Source: Asian Development Banks estimates.

23.     Climate mitigation is estimated to cost $1.3 million and climate adaptation is estimated to
cost $48.9 million. ADB will finance 100% of both mitigation and adaptation costs. A climate risk
and vulnerability assessment was undertaken with the estimated adaptation and mitigation costs
calculated through a review of the project’s climate adaptation and mitigation activities.23

E.         Implementation Arrangements

24.   The implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in
the PAM (footnote 18).

                                   Table 3: Implementation Arrangements
    Aspects                                                            Arrangements
    Implementation period                      September 2021–August 2028
    Estimated completion date                  31 August 2028
    Estimated loan closing date                28 February 2029
    Management
      (i) Oversight body                       Steering Committee
                                               Principal Secretary, HUDD (chair)

23 Adaptation measures are introduced in sustainable building features to reduce climate risk, slum clearance (which

    will clear waterways to reduce flood risks), and regional planning (which can enable improved spatial planning and
    climate-resilient guidelines). Mitigation includes reducing energy use through daylighting and solar lights, LEDs for
    reduced energy use, and public transport-accessible locations to reduce vehicle use. Details are in Climate Change
    Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
8


 Aspects                                                                      Arrangements
                                               CMDA, HUDD, Finance Department, TNSCB, DTCP, TNHB, TNIFMC,
                                               TNSF, Industries Department, Social Welfare and Nutritious Meals
                                               Programme Department (members)
   (ii) Executing agencies                     GOTN’s Housing and Urban Development Department acting through
                                               TNSCB (output 1), TNIFMC (output 2) and DTCP (output 3)
   (iii) Key implementing agencies             TNSCB (output 1), TNIFMC (output 2), and DTCP (output 3)
   (iv) Implementation unit                    PMU within TNSCB for overall project management, comprising 29
                                               staff; and separate PIUs within each implementing agency, comprising
                                               87 total staff. Qualified staff have been assigned to the respective
                                               PIUs to ensure compliance with ADB requirements, including
                                               procurement and financial management.
 Procurement                                   Open competitive           13 contracts               $142.63 million
                                               bidding (nationally
                                               advertised)
 Consulting services                           QCBS (90:10)               241 person-months          $3.32 million
                                               CQS
 Retroactive financing and/or advance          Retroactive financing will be up to 20% of the ADB loan amount for
 contracting                                   eligible expenditures incurred no more than 12 months before signing
                                               of the loan agreement.
 Disbursement                                  Disbursement of the loan and grant proceeds will follow ADB's Loan
                                               Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time) and
                                               detailed arrangements agreed between the government and ADB.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CMDA = Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority, CQS = consultants’
qualification selection, DTCP = Directorate of Town and Country Planning, GOTN = Government of Tamil Nadu, HUDD
= Housing and Urban Development Department, PIU = project implementation unit, PMU = project management unit,
QCBS = quality- and cost-based selection, TNHB = Tamil Nadu Housing Board, TNIFMC = Tamil Nadu Infrastructure
Fund Management Corporation, TNSCB = Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board, TNSF = Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                             III.     ATTACHED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

25.     The TA attached to the project will build capacity in the three implementing agencies to
deliver affordable housing and undertake regional planning. 24 The TA aims to support
sustainability by assisting in the development of O&M contracts and modalities, an asset
management system, and pipeline development for TNSF; and building regional planning and
financial management capacity. In addition, specific support will be provided (i) to build capacity
in survey and data management, (ii) for graduation program implementation, and (iii) to plan for
different models for restoration of cleared waterways, which are key value additions in the delivery
of affordable housing. Documentation of methodologies and processes will be important in the
planned replication of affordable housing in Tamil Nadu and in other states.

26.    The TA is estimated to cost $1.65 million, of which $1.50 million will be financed on a grant
basis by ADB’s Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF-other sources). The TA will provide
advisory services of loan-funded outputs, and the government will also provide counterpart
support in the form of staff, office space, and other in-kind contributions. GOTN, through the
Housing and Urban Development Department, will be the executing agency and TNSCB, TNIFMC,
and DTCP will be the implementing agencies for the TA, which will be implemented over 4 years.
The TA will be administered by ADB.

                                           IV.      DUE DILIGENCE

27.     Appraisal of subprojects. Output 1 has nine proposed subprojects. ADB supported the
concept design for five subprojects of which the detailed designs of three were reviewed. Of these,
two affordable housing subprojects in Kalanivasal and Reddiarpatti were fully appraised by ADB
24 Attached TA Report (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                       9


and found to meet all the agreed criteria. For output 2, TNIFMC will propose subprojects for ADB
financing following the subproject eligibility criteria. 25 The executing agencies for outputs 1 and 2
are primarily responsible for finalizing appraisal reports and sharing these with ADB for review.
ADB will review the appraisal reports for all subprojects. ADB clearance of all safeguards
documents is required.

A.       Technical

28.      For output 1, technical due diligence included a comprehensive review of how TNSCB’s
detailed engineering designs were developed from the concept design, cost estimates, and site
investigations. The housing unit design and site layout adopt improvements to the current housing
units constructed by TNSCB. The design minimized the carbon footprint by prioritizing pedestrian
networks over vehicular circulation in layout design; ensuring appropriate orientation of buildings
to maximize natural ventilation, sunlight, and enhanced privacy; promoting landscapes that
prioritize native vegetation and green spaces; improving visual quality and amenity through
convenient access of onsite social infrastructure, such as ration shops and community hall
livelihood centers; promoting diversity through design elevations and creation of nodes;
incorporating safety by adopting the principles of crime prevention through environmental design;
and enhancing the functionality of housing design for occupants, including by incorporating
storage lofts and maximizing living areas within space constraints. For output 2, TNIFMC will carry
out technical due diligence with individual project sponsors of affordable housing subprojects and
confirm their validity through its internal appraisal process. The climate change risk and
vulnerability assessment analyzed current and future climate impacts on the project, which were
the basis for planning appropriate adaptation and mitigation measures.26

B.       Economic and Financial Viability

29.     Economic analysis. The economic rationale for the government’s intervention is sound,
as the project aims to provide inclusive, resilient, and sustainable housing in Tamil Nadu by
supporting relocation of vulnerable communities living in areas exposed to natural hazards to safe
shelter; providing affordable, proper housing for migrant workers from the EWS and LIG; and
supporting the state in regional development planning. The project is a sector project with output
2 structured to follow an approach similar to a financial intermediation loan (para. 12). The
estimated economic internal rates of return of the sample subprojects are 8.4%–11.7%, 27
exceeding the minimum required economic opportunity cost of capital of 6% 28 indicating
significant economic returns. The sensitivity analysis has revealed that the results are satisfactory
except for the combined worst-case scenarios for all sample subprojects. At completion, the
sample subprojects will address (i) affordable and improved housing for vulnerable communities
in Reddiarpatti and Kalanivasal from 2025; and (ii) affordable housing for urban poor and migrant
workers in Vallam industrial housing and four WWHs from 2023. The estimated poverty impact




25 The subproject selection and eligibility criteria are in the PAM (footnote 18). For the economic analysis, four sample

   subprojects (Kalanivasal, Reddiarpatti, industrial housing at Vallam, and WWHs at four locations) were appraised.
   The appraisal methodology will be followed by the executing agency for the selection of the remaining subprojects
   under the program; these will need to have an economic internal rate of return of at least 6%. Safeguards due
   diligence considered three sample subprojects (Kalanivasal, Reddiarpatti, and Vallam).
26 Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
27 Economic Analysis and Financial Analysis (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
28 ADB. 2017.
                Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects. Manila. For social sector projects, the minimum
   required economic opportunity cost of capital is 6%.
10


ratio of the sample subprojects is 23.0%–55.8%. Given Tamil Nadu’s overall urban poverty
headcount ratio (20.3%), the project is expected to benefit the poor considerably.29

30.     Financial analysis. For output 1, financial analysis was conducted for the sample
subprojects for which detailed engineering designs and cost estimates are available. Maintenance
charges from households and rental income from allied commercial activities are the main
sources of income for the subprojects. The income generated from the subprojects covers only
about 15%–33% of the O&M expenses. A review of TNSCB’s financial performance shows that
TNSCB has been generating an operating surplus in the past 5 years. However, when the impact
of the subprojects is taken into account, TNSCB is likely to have an operating deficit. To address
these challenges, measures to address sustainability (para. 32) have been agreed. Over the
medium- to long-term, TNSCB will (i) regularly revise maintenance charges until full O&M
recovery, (ii) shift responsibility for municipal charges from TNSCB to the households,30 and (iii)
improve collection efficiency to 90% during the early years of the operation period. Overall, the
financial sustainability risk is categorized substantial.

31.     For output 2, financial due diligence in accordance with financial intermediation loans was
conducted. TNIFMC has a well-defined institutional governance structure and investment process
based on the Securities and Exchange Board of India’s Alternative Investment Funds regulations
for alternative investment funds, which are considered to ensure sound risk management
practices. Both TNSF and TNIFMC are new and lack an investment track record; measuring
performance based on assessment of a financial intermediary is thus not possible.31 However,
TNSF is in the advanced stages of getting investment committee approval for two subprojects.
The subprojects include WWHs and industrial housing. Financial analyses of these two
subprojects were conducted as samples. Financial internal rates of return for these subprojects
are 13.0% for the WWH and 12.9% for industrial housing and exceed the TNSF hurdle rate of 6%
and target rate of 12%. Key risks identified in the analysis are (i) exit risk: TNSF is planning to
invest in WWH and industrial housing via non-convertible debenture with tenor of 25 years, while
the fund life is 10 years (which can be extended by 2 more years); and (ii) lack of track record:
TNSF is a new fund established in 2018 and the fund manager, TNIFMC, also lacks a long track
record (it was established in 2015 and is currently managing another fund, the Tamil Nadu
Infrastructure Fund).

C.       Sustainability

32.     Ensuring appropriate O&M for the affordable housing units that are constructed is
essential. GOTN and ADB agreed that (i) O&M is required beyond project completion to ensure
long-term sustainability of subproject facilities; (ii) ADB and the project will finance O&M during
the loan implementation period (until 2028); (iii) TNSCB, which will remain the asset owner, is
party to the O&M contracts with O&M service providers in the first 5 years and arranges O&M for
the succeeding 5-year period, and adequate funds towards O&M are provided to TNSCB after


29 The poverty data is based on state-level figures, which constitute the most recent reliable poverty data (Government

   of India, Planning Commission. Report of the Expert Group to Review the Methodology for Measurement of Poverty.
   June 2014). The poverty level among beneficiaries is from a primary survey of beneficiary households conducted in
   2020, presented in the Poverty and Social Analysis (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
30 In addition to the O&M expenses incurred for maintaining common facilities, TNSCB is also making payment to the

   urban local bodies and utilities towards the municipal charges, such as property tax, solid waste management
   charges, and water and sewer charges.
31 Financial performance of a financial intermediary will be assessed based on capital adequacy, asset quality, earnings

   quality, and liquidity. These parameters are assessed based on historical data of the financial intermediary.
                                                                                                                    11


the project completion;32 (iv) loan covenants will cover (i) and (iii); and (v) for medium- to long-
term sustainability and to improve financials, TNSCB will increase maintenance charges, shift
municipal charges to residents, and improve collection efficiency early.

33.      GOTN and ADB will agree on O&M arrangements for the second 5-year period (years 6–
10) after the first 3 years O&M implementation.33 The O&M model will be informed by data on
collection of maintenance charges and other key financial information. It will also be informed by
studies undertaken through the TA on O&M modalities. As the asset owner, TNSCB needs to
play a key role (including, at a minimum, supervision and monitoring) in O&M, ensuring that there
is sufficient financing for O&M to achieve sustainability. To mitigate the sustainability risk after the
first 5-year O&M period, TNSCB will, by the end of the third year of implementation, develop a
time-bound action plan to ensure an efficient handover of the O&M responsibilities.

D.       Governance

34.     A financial management assessment has been conducted for the respective implementing
agencies, in accordance with ADB’s guidelines. 34 The assessed pre-mitigation financial
management risk is substantial mainly because of (i) the complex financial management
arrangements involving three implementing agencies; (ii) some accounts staff positions in TNSCB
are vacant; (iii) the implementing agencies lack experience in ADB’s financial management
requirements and disbursement procedures; (iv) TNSF and TNIFMC have been only recently
established, and have a limited financial track record; and (v) TNSCB and DTCP have no internal
audit function in place and use manual accounting systems. These risks will be mitigated by (i)
setting up a nodal project management unit (PMU) in TNSCB to coordinate and consolidate the
financial information, (ii) filling the vacant accounts officer positions, (iii) providing ongoing training
in ADB’s financial management requirements and disbursement procedures, (iv) including
comprehensive financial information in the quarterly project progress reports submitted to ADB,
and (v) adopting the use of accounting software to record project transactions in TNSCB.
Moreover, the project financial statements will be audited annually by an auditor acceptable to
ADB, following auditing standards acceptable to ADB. The achievement of value for money will
be based on noncomplex works packages that do not require innovative technical solutions. The
construction contract modality with conformance-based specification will provide a high degree of
cost certainty by adopting least-cost evaluation criteria. The O&M contracts are proposed to be
procured separately to target specialized O&M companies operating in this market segment.

35.      Integrity due diligence was conducted for TNIFMC. No significant integrity risks were
identified. ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and


32 TNSCB will collect from beneficiaries upon their relocation to the housing sites, and funds collected while ADB and

   the project finance O&M can be used to finance subsequent O&M by placing these in a fund (e.g., a sinking fund) to
   be used for O&M after the initial 5-year period. To strengthen reporting and monitoring of the collection of
   maintenance charges from allottees and/or residents, TNSCB will ensure that (i) its financial statements include a
   detailed breakdown of the maintenance charges billed and collected during the fiscal year as a notes disclosure, (ii)
   financial statement audits are completed within the timelines prescribed in the statutory requirements, and (iii) the
   audited financial statements are submitted to ADB within 1 month after the approval by the relevant authority.
33 ADB recommends retendering the contract to continue implementation of the O&M arrangements that apply during

   the initial 5 years. However, on the basis of financial information and TA outcomes, ADB and the government can
   agree, in year 3, to a system of piloting alternative O&M arrangements in year 6. This can include O&M management
   through housing societies, provided (i) ownership of the units has been transferred to beneficiaries before the
   alternative O&M system is piloted, (ii) TNSCB and the O&M contractor have undertaken sufficient capacity building
   of the housing society, and (iii) TNSCB and/or GOTN commits to ensure sustainability for O&M payments.
34 ADB. 2015.
                 Financial Due Diligence: A Methodology Note. Manila.
12


discussed with GOTN. The specific policy requirements and supplementary measures are
described in the PAM (footnote 18).

E.       Poverty, Social, and Gender

36.     The proportion of poor among targeted beneficiaries is 31.1% in 2020, compared to the
overall urban poverty headcount ratio of 20.3% for Tamil Nadu (footnote 29). The latest census
data (2011) indicates that 16.6% of the state’s urban population lives in slums. 35 The lack of
affordable housing has resulted in (i) a lack of tenure security for many of the urban poor who
have no option but to live in slums that are vulnerable to flooding or other hazards, and have
limited or no urban services; and (ii) increasing numbers of poor migrant workers in cities and
industrial estates who live in substandard housing, or commute considerable distances. The
project directly targets urban poor households in flood-prone and high-risk areas who lack security
of tenure, and industrial and migrant workers, as beneficiaries. Sustainable livelihoods for the
relocated households is a key focus area. A graduation program will be piloted to ensure that
vulnerable beneficiaries will thrive in their new location.

37.     The project is classified effective gender mainstreaming. The project design addresses
problems faced by women and vulnerable groups, including housing unit design that is gender-
insensitive and culturally inadequate, a non-participatory and non-transparent relocation process,
loss of employment and of access to basic services and government schemes, and inadequate
housing for low-income female migrant workers. A gender equality and social inclusion (GESI)
action plan has been agreed and developed with GOTN. The GESI action plan ensures (i) gender
responsive design features are used for housing units, common areas, and sites;36 features to
prevent crime through environmental design will benefit the elderly, women, children, and
disabled; (ii) there is increased discussion and sharing of designs with beneficiaries (including
40% women); (iii) the use of a sensitive and participatory relocation process that ensures women’s
participation in pre-relocation meetings and visits to the site; (iv) women’s property rights are
upheld by ensuring that at least 70% of titles of housing units are awarded to households headed
by women or jointly to spouses; (v) the participation of women, transgenders, and men in the
graduation program, with at least 50% women beneficiaries; (vi) 50% of those recruited as paid
animators are women; (vii) the adoption of a monitoring and evaluation framework that includes
GESI indicators and data disaggregated by gender identity; and (viii) the construction and
maintenance of WWHs for low-income female migrant workers and industrial housing for low-
income migrant workers. The GESI action plan also provides for gender mainstreaming training
for implementing agency project staff, targeting training 80% of women staff.

F.       Safeguards

38.    In compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the project’s safeguard
categories are as follows.37


35 Ministry of Home Affairs.    Census of India. Slum Census 2011. The figure is based on 2011 census data; the next
   census is in March 2021. Due to COVID-19 outbreak, the 2021 census survey has been postponed.
36 Gender-responsive housing units include the following design features: (i) rooms that provide privacy to women and

   girls, instead of one multipurpose hall; (ii) individual bath and toilet room with water supply; (iii) kitchen with adequate
   ventilation; (iv) piped water connection; (v) dedicated spaces for laundry washing and drying; (vi) community gardens;
   (vii) community halls; (viii) livelihood centers; and (ix) adequate street lights and key elements of Crime Prevention
   Through Environmental Design in design of resettlement sites. International Crime Prevention Through
   Environmental Design Association. CPTED in Brief. https://www.cpted.net/Primer-in-CPTED.
37 ADB. Safeguards Categories.
                                                                                                                          13


39.      Environment (category B). For output 1, an environmental assessment and review
framework has been prepared in accordance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement and
applicable laws and regulations that will guide subproject selection, screening, and categorization;
environmental assessment; and the implementation of potential subprojects. Subprojects
classified as category A will not be considered under the project. Results of the initial
environmental examinations (IEEs) conducted in accordance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy
Statement adequately identify project impacts and risks for the three sample subprojects (footnote
25), and indicate that the project is unlikely to have any significant adverse environmental impacts
that are irreversible, diverse, or unprecedented.38 Potential impacts are site-specific, and localized
in nature (such as increased noise and dust levels, vibration, traffic congestion, potential
interruption to existing utilities, and waste generation) with the exception of the land use change
that will result in direct and irreversible impact because of the conversion of unused land to
residential use. IEEs and environmental management plans (EMPs) have been prepared for the
initial subprojects and are included in bid and contract documents. Further consultations will be
held along with the completion of the social census survey, and the environment safeguards
documentation will be updated prior to contract award. Grievances will be handled following the
project grievance redress mechanism. The PMU will prepare environmental monitoring reports
(quarterly during construction and annually during operation) and submit these to ADB. TNSCB
will be supported by loan consultants and the TA for environment safeguard implementation,
monitoring, and required capacity building. All IEEs and EMPs will be disclosed on ADB’s website
and TNSCB’s website.

40.     For output 2, the TNIFMC environmental and social management system (ESMS) outlines
the screening, categorization, and due diligence (including identification of environmental impacts
and mitigation) for potential investments under TNSF. Category A subprojects will not be
considered for investment.39 In addition to the ESMS, an action plan, contained in the PAM, has
been agreed with TNIFMC that applies to ADB-funded investments under the TNSF to ensure
compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement. Reporting on the ESMS and the agreed
action plan implementation will be submitted to ADB on a semiannual basis during project
implementation, and will also be publicly disclosed. Screening and categorization will be reflected
in the subproject appraisal reports prepared by TNIFMC for the TNSF and submitted to ADB for
clearing subprojects.40 TNIFMC capacity will be supported by hiring a senior environment expert
under the TA. The TA will support further capacity building on environment safeguards
compliance and implementation.

41.     Involuntary resettlement (category A). For output 1, a resettlement framework has been
prepared in accordance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement and applicable laws and
regulations that will guide subproject selection, screening, and categorization; resettlement
planning; and the implementation of future subprojects. Draft resettlement plans prepared for
three sample subprojects indicate physical displacement of 2,745 families, loss of income-
generating assets and/or businesses, potential loss of employment, and temporary economic

38 There are no internationally or nationally important biodiversity areas in the project area of influence. Physical cultural

   resources were identified near the Vallam encroachment sites but no significant adverse impact is envisioned.
   Appropriate mitigation measures will be adopted including manual demolition and a heritage impact assessment to
   be undertaken in consultation with Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) prior to commencement of any works. Any
   ASI mitigation recommendations will be incorporated into the IEE and EMP and adopted by the respective contractor.
39 The action plan requires the ESMS categorization definitions to be in line with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement.
40 For ADB-funded subprojects, screening and categorization shall be undertaken using ADB screening categorization

   forms for involuntary settlement, indigenous peoples, and environment, including the Environment Social and
   Governance screening checklist. These will be appended to the subproject appraisal report submitted to ADB, which
   will also include due diligence as per the ESMS, including the agreed action plan, on environment and land
   procurement.
14


impacts to businesses and its employees as well as loss of common property resources and trees
for some families due to pipelaying.41 The proposed mitigation measures and safeguard planning
documents are adequate to address the assessed impacts. The involuntary resettlement impacts
will be further assessed during the census survey, and the resettlement plans will be updated
prior to contract award. TNSCB will disclose the draft resettlement plans by bid invitation stage
and the updated resettlement plans prior to contract award on its official website; the documents
will be available in the local language (Tamil) to be disclosed to affected persons.42 The PMU will
prepare quarterly social safeguards monitoring reports for ADB review and disclosure, and an
external monitor will undertake independent monitoring. The grievance redress mechanism is
adequate and commensurate to the project risks and impacts. This will be the first externally aided
project to be implemented by TNSCB, although it has prior experience in supporting the
Commissionerate of Revenue Administration of Tamil Nadu in the screening, categorization, and
preparation of social safeguards documents for the World Bank-funded Emergency Tsunami
Reconstruction Project. TNSCB staff, including its Community Development Wing, will require
capacity building on ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement requirements. ADB has conducted
training workshops on ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement requirements and ADB accountability
mechanism for TNSCB staff. The TA will support capacity building and on-the-job training of
TNSCB staff on resettlement planning, implementation and monitoring, livelihood restoration, and
the graduation program on an ongoing basis.

42.     For output 2, an ESMS is in place for TNIFMC (para. 40). Category A projects will not be
considered for investment (footnote 37). The action plan contained in the PAM has been agreed
to with TNFMIC for ADB-funded investments to comply with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement,
screening, reporting, and disclosure (para. 40). The TA will support further capacity building on
involuntary resettlement.

43.    Indigenous peoples (category C). The project will have no impacts on indigenous
peoples within the definition of ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement.43

G.        Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan

44.      Substantial risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 4 and described in
detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.44

                          Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures

                Risks                                            Mitigation Measures
     Sustainability risk: O&M and     For output 1, O&M will be contracted to the private sector to ensure adequate

41 The draft resettlement plans for Reddiarpatti and Kalanivasal are based on sample surveys; sample size varies (29%

   for Reddiarpatti and 79% for Kalanivasal), depending on survey permissions received from GOTN. The draft
   resettlement plan for Vallam is based on the census survey. Consultations during project preparation were conducted
   with individual households; consultations with groups of affected persons could not be undertaken because of
   COVID-19 restrictions. The consultations began early and will continue throughout the project cycle. Information was
   shared in Tamil; the one-on-one consultations were undertaken in an atmosphere free of intimidation or coercion,
   and were gender inclusive and participatory, including participation of the vulnerable. The need for intensive,
   continued consultations is recognized and addressed through the detailed consultation and participation plan
   prepared for the project. ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement requirements on meaningful consultations will be
   followed.
42 In accordance with Safeguards Requirements 2 (para. 15) of ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement, updated

   resettlement plans will be prepared based on a census of displaced persons and the detailed measurement survey.
43 The three sample subprojects under output 1 do not involve impacts to any person belonging to a scheduled tribe.

   There are no particularly vulnerable tribal groups in the settlements proposed for relocation.
44 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                         15


  Risks                                                                Mitigation Measures
 asset     management          are    O&M from the time of commissioning, and the project will provide financing for
 inadequate.                          the initial years of operation. For outputs 1 and 2, TA will be provided to assist in
                                      developing O&M contracts and O&M models for the different housing products.
                                      The TA will also support the development of an e-asset registry for TNSCB.
 Sustainability risk: Government      If it is unable to attract private sector investment directly into the project SPVs,
 of Tamil Nadu’s equity in class B    under the SPV structure that TNIFMC is developing, the private sector can be
 shares may not leverage private      involved in other ways—for example through O&M operators, who are critical to
 sector investments.                  the long-term sustainability of the assets being developed. Even where TNSF is
                                      unable to deliver privately promoted projects, the funds will promote affordable
                                      housing executed in partnership with private parties.
 Financial management risk: The       The mitigation measures include (i) setting up a nodal project management unit
 complex financial management         in TNSCB to coordinate and consolidate the financial information, (ii) filling the
 arrangements       with   several    vacant accounts officer positions, (iii) providing continuous training in ADB’s
 implementing agencies and lack       financial management requirements and disbursement procedures, (iv) including
 of past experience with ADB          comprehensive financial information in the quarterly project progress reports
 financed projects may result in      submitted to ADB, and (v) adopting an accounting software to record project
 fragmented and incomplete            transactions in TNSCB.
 financial      reports,      non-
 compliance with ADB’s financial
 requirements, as well as delays
 in disbursements.
 Resettlement risk: Resettled   The required services are ensured at the housing sites. The project is piloting the
 families may not be able to thrive
                                graduation program (footnote 15) within resettlement implementation to ensure
 at the housing sites and return to
                                properly sequenced livelihood promotion, social protection, financial inclusion,
 informal settlements.          and social empowerment. Key graduation interventions will be tailored to the
                                needs of households and the local context. The development of the graduation
                                program was initiated in the early stages of the project design, and further capacity
                                will be built in the implementing agency through TA. Hazard-prone locations that
                                were previously occupied by resettled families will be secured to prevent re-
                                encroachment, and restore the previous ecological functions.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, O&M = operation and maintenance, SPV = special purpose vehicle, TA = technical
assistance, TNIFMC = Tamil Nadu Infrastructure Fund Management Corporation, TNSCB = Tamil Nadu Slum
Clearance Board, TNSF = Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                                 V.     ASSURANCES

45.     The Government of India, GOTN, TNSCB, and TNIFMC have assured ADB that
implementation of the project shall conform to all applicable ADB requirements, including those
concerning anticorruption measures, safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services,
financial management, and disbursement as described in detail in the PAM and loan documents.
The Government of India and GOTN have agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the project,
which are set forth in the draft loan agreement and project agreement.

                                           VI.        RECOMMENDATION

46.     I am satisfied that the proposed loan would comply with the Articles of Agreement of the
Asian Development Bank and recommend that the Board approve the loan of $150,000,000 to
India for the Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Housing for Urban Poor Sector Project in Tamil
Nadu from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in regular terms, with interest to be determined in
accordance with ADB’s London interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility; for a term
of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years; and such other terms and conditions as are
substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft loan and project agreements presented
to the Board.
                                                                Masatsugu Asakawa
                                                                President
12 August 2021
16    Appendix 1



                              DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK

Impact the Project is Aligned with
Permanent shelter with appropriate housing infrastructures and services provided for every affected
household (Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Housing for All (Urban) Scheme Guidelines)a
                                                             Data Sources and
                                                                  Reporting                  Risks and
Results Chain                Performance Indicators             Mechanisms             Critical Assumptions
Outcome                 By 2029:
Access to inclusive,    a. At least 6,000 EWS and LIG       a. Signed allotment      R: Economic activities in
safe, and affordable    households allotted affordable      documents provided       relocation sites and
housing infrastructure housing units (2020 baseline: 0)     to EWS and LIG           industrial zones in the
and services for        (OP1.1, OP1.3, OP2.1.4)             households (TNSCB, state are below
vulnerable and                                              TNIFMC, and DTCP         projected level, resulting
disadvantaged                                               records)                 in the target
communities in Tamil                                                                 beneficiaries working
Nadu increased                                                                       outside the project sites
                        b. Housing unit occupancy rate of b. Beneficiary MIS         and, consequently, low
                        at least 60% in project-built       annual report of         housing occupancy.
                        affordable housing for EWS and      TNSCB
                        LIG households achieved (2020
                        baseline: 0%) (OP1.1, OP1.3)

                        c. Total occupancy of project-built   c. TNIFMC annual
                        or renovated industrial housing       report
                        and women’s hostels for low-
                        income migrant women and
                        industrial workers increased by at
                        least 4,400 (including 400
                        occupied by women) (2020
                        baseline: 0) (OP1.1, OP1.3,
                        OP2.1.4)
Outputs                 By 2028:
1. Affordable and       1a. At least 6,000 affordable         1a. TNSCB housing       R: Extended impact of
improved housing for    housing units constructed in nine     unit inventory,         the global pandemic on
vulnerable              project sites with climate- and       geographic              movement of people,
communities             disaster-resilient and gender-        information system,     goods, and services
constructed             responsive features,b and             and survey (annual      could delay project
                        provisions for basic urban            reports)                completion.
                        services and amenities
                        (2020 baseline: 0)
                        (OP1.1.3, OP1.3.1, OP 2.4.1, OP
                        3.2.5, OP 4.1.2, OP4.3)

                        1b. 60% of relocated vulnerable       1b. Beneficiary MIS
                        households registered in the          annual reports of
                        graduation program in pilot           TNSCB
                        locations (including 50% female
                        registrants and all transgenders)
                        (2020 baseline: 0) (OP1.1,
                        OP1.1.3, OP1.3.2, OP2.1.1)
                                                                                             Appendix 1     17


                                                                Data Sources and
                                                                    Reporting                 Risks and
Results Chain                Performance Indicators                Mechanisms           Critical Assumptions
                        1c. Improved O&M schemes for           1c. Shelter design
                        safe gender-responsive shelter         plans and asset
                        piloted in five housing sites (2020    maintenance system
                        baseline: 0)                           (annual reports)

                        1d. Cleared waterways protected        1d. List of protected
                        and ecological restoration piloted     and rehabilitated
                        in two sitesc (2020 baseline: 0)       waterways
                        (OP3.3.3, OP 3.3.4, OP4.3)

                        To be funded by the TA:
                        By 2025:
                        1e. Housing delivery                   1e. TA progress and
                        methodologies and systems for          final reports
                        the urban poor, including O&M
                        modalities, asset management,
                        beneficiary survey and data
                        management, and ecological
                        restoration alternatives,
                        developed.
                        (2020 baseline: 0) (OP4.3.1)

                        1f. At least 100 eligible staff from   1f. Participants’
                        HUDD, TNSCB, and urban local           feedback survey
                        bodies (including at least 80% of
                        eligible women staff) reported
                        awareness on good practices and
                        lessons on urban poor housing
                        O&M modalities, asset
                        management, beneficiary data
                        management, and ecological
                        restoration (2020 baseline: NA)
                        (OP6.1.1)

2. Affordable housing   By 2028:                                                       R: The global pandemic
for urban poor and      2a. Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund total      2a.–c. TNIFMC           and resulting economic
migrant workers         fund size increased to at least        annual report           slowdown could
increased               $200 million (2020 baseline: $57                               discourage private
                        million) (OP 6.1.2)                                            sector participation.

                        2b. Total bed capacity of
                        women’s hostel for low-income
                        female migrant workers increased
                        by 500 (2020 baseline: 0)
                        (OP1.1.3, OP 1.3.1, OP2.4.1)

                        2c. Total bed capacity of
                        industrial housing for low-income
                        migrant workers increased by
                        5,000 (2020 baseline: 0)
                        (OP 1.1.3, OP1.3.1)
18    Appendix 1


                                                          Data Sources and
                                                             Reporting             Risks and
Results Chain          Performance Indicators               Mechanisms       Critical Assumptions
                   To be funded by the TA:
                   By 2025:
                   2d. O&M modalities and model          2d.–e. TA final
                   contracts developed (2020             reports
                   baseline: NA) (OP6.1.2)

                   2e. Future pipeline of affordable
                   housing projects with private
                   sector involvement for migrant
                   EWS, LIG, and other vulnerable
                   groups developed (2020 baseline:
                   NA)

                   2f. At least 50 eligible TNIFMC       2f. Participants’
                   staff, investee special purpose       feedback survey
                   vehicle staff, and O&M staff of
                   private sector projects (including
                   at least 80% of eligible women
                   staff) reported awareness on
                   good practices and lessons on
                   O&M modalities, private sector
                   engagement, and delivery of
                   affordable housing for migrant
                   EWS, LIG, and other vulnerable
                   groups (2020 baseline: NA)
                   (OP6.1.1)

3. Regional plan   By 2028:                              3a.–b. DTCP
development        3a. One model integrated              regional plans
supported          regional plan for Tamil Nadu’s
                   industrial corridor (i.e., Chennai–
                   Kanyakumari Industrial Corridor)
                   that includes affordable housing,
                   environmental management and
                   disaster resilience, and gender
                   mainstreaming formulated and
                   submitted to the government for
                   approval (2020 baseline: No
                   regional plan)

                   3b. Subsequent integrated
                   regional plans for 30 Districts
                   following the model in 3a
                   completed (2020 baseline: No
                   regional plan)
                                                                                                     Appendix 1        19


 Key Activities with Milestones
 1. Affordable and improved housing for vulnerable communities constructed
 1.1 Prepare detailed design and cost estimates for five subproject sites (June 2021).
 1.2 Conduct procurement process for five subprojects (ongoing until December 2021).
 1.3 Construct five subprojects (September 2021–February 2024).
 1.4 Conduct relocation to five subproject sites (February 2024–February 2025).
 1.5 Implement graduation program pilots (February 2024–February 2025).
 1.6 Conduct protection of five vacated sites and ecological restoration of two sites (June 2025–February
      2026).
 1.7 Develop process for remaining subprojects sites (January 2021–2028).
 1.8 Implement consultation and participation plan (January 2021–2028).
 2. Affordable housing for urban poor and migrant workers increased
 2.1 Establish an environmental and social management system and adopt an action plan (September
      2021).
 2.2 Process disbursement of equity to the Tamil Nadu Shelter Fund (September 2021–2028).
 3. Regional plan development supported
 3.1 Prepare plan for one region (September 2021–August 2022).
 3.2 Review of the first plan by stakeholders (August 2022–February 2023).
 3.3 Finalize the first plan (March 2023).
 3.4 Develop remaining regional plans on the basis of the refined methodology for the first plan (March
      2023–March 2024).
 Project Management Activities
 Baseline information survey, MIS establishment
 Monitoring, reporting, and evaluation
 Coordination meetings with TNSCB, TNIFMC, DTCP
 Review missions
 Inputs
 Asian Development Bank: $150 million (regular OCR loan)
 Government: $65 million
 TA (TASF-Others): $1.5 million
DTCP = Directorate of Town and Country Planning, EWS = economically weaker section, HUDD = Housing and Urban
Development Department, LIG = lower-income group, MIS = management information system, NA = not applicable,
O&M = operation and maintenance, OCR = ordinary capital resources, OP = operational priority, R = risk, TA = technical
assistance, TASF = Technical Assistance Special Fund, TNIFMC = Tamil Nadu Infrastructure Fund Management
Corporation, TNSCB = Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board.
a Government of India, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 2016. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana–Housing

  for All (Urban) Scheme Guidelines (PMAY-HFA). Delhi.
b Gender-responsive housing units include the following design features: (i) elderly, women, children, and disabled

  friendly (e.g. rooms that provide privacy to women and girls, instead of one multipurpose hall); (ii) individual bath and
  toilet room with water supply; (iii) kitchen with adequate ventilation; (iv) piped water connection; (v) dedicated spaces
  for laundry washing and drying; (vi) community gardens; (vii) community halls; (viii) livelihood centers, and (ix)
  adequate street lights and key elements of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) in design of
  resettlement sites (footnote d in GESI action plan).
c Cleared areas will be fenced to prevent re-encroachment. Examples of ecological restoration include revegetation,

  erosion control, and waterway embankment.
 Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities
 Expected values and methodological details for all OP indicators to which this operation will contribute results are
 detailed in Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix
 2 of the report and recommendation of the President).
Source: Asian Development Bank.
20     Appendix 2


                               LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS
                    http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=53067-004-3

 1.     Loan Agreement
 2.     Project Agreement
 3.     Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban
        Infrastructure and Services (Urban Housing)
 4.     Project Administration Manual
 5.     Financial Analysis
 6.     Economic Analysis
 7.     Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
 8.     Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
 9.     Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities
 10.    Attached Technical Assistance Report
 11.    Climate Change Assessment
 12.    Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Action Plan
 13.    Initial Environmental Examination: Kalanivasal
 14.    Initial Environmental Examination: Reddiarpatti
 15.    Initial Environmental Examination: Vallam
 16.    Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
 17.    Resettlement Plan: Kalanivasal
 18.    Resettlement Plan: Reddiarpatti
 19.    Resettlement Plan: Vallam
 20.    Resettlement Framework
 21.    Financial Intermediary: Environmental and Social
        Management System Arrangement

Supplementary Documents
 22.  Supplementary Financial Analysis
 23.  Supplementary Economic Analysis
 24.  Financial Management Assessment
 25.  Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment
 26.  Consultation and Participation Plan
 27.  Graduation Program
 28.  Poverty and Social Analysis
