 Environmental Monitoring Report



PUBLIC


# 5 Semestral Report (July–December 2025)
March 2026




People’s Republic of China: Heilongjiang Green
Transformation Demonstration Project and Program
(for RBL Loan)




Prepared by Heilongjiang Provincial Government (HPG) for the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project              RBL EMR No.5


                              CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                                (as of 5 January 2026)

                         Currency Unit      –    Chinese Yuan (CNY)
                                                 US Dollar ($)

                              CNY1.00       =    $0.1433
                                $1.00       =    CNY 6.9787


                                    ABBREVIATIONS
          ADB       Asian Development Bank
          CNY       Chinese Yuan
          DEIA      Domestic environmental impact assessment
          EA        Executing Agency
          EHS       Environment, Health and Safety
          EIA       Environmental Impact Assessment
          EIR       Environmental Impact Report
          EIT       Environmental Impact Table
          EMoP      Environmental Monitoring Plan
          EMP       Environmental Management Plan
          EMA       Environmental Monitoring Agency
          EEB       Ecology and Environment Bureau
          EED       Ecology and Environment Department
          GRM       Grievance Redress Mechanism
          HPDRC     Heilongjiang Provincial Development and Reform Commission
          HMG       Heihe Municipal Government
          HPG       Heilongjiang Provincial Government
          HURDB     Heihe Housing and Urban and Rural Development Bureau
          IA        Implementing Agency
          IEE       Initial Environmental Examination
          LA        Loan Agreement
          LIEC      loan implementation environmental consultant
          PA        Project Agreement
          PAM       Project Administration Manual
          PIU       Project Implementation Unit
          PM        Particulate Matter
          PM10      Particulate Matter with diameter ≤ 10 micrometers
          PM2.5     Particulate Matter with diameter ≤ 2.5 micrometers
          PMO       Project Management Office
          PRC       People’s Republic of China
          PSSA      Program Safeguard Systems Assessment
          RBL       results-based lending
          RP        Resettlement Plan
          SME       Small- and medium-sized enterprises
          SPMO      Sub-Project Management Office
          SPS       Safeguard Policy Statement
          TSP       Total Suspended Particulates
  ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project               RBL EMR No.5



                                WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
                   dB(A)          A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels
                   ha             hectare
                   km             kilometer
                   m              meter
                   m2             square meter
                   m³             cubic meters
                   mg/l           milligrams per liter
                   mg/m3          milligrams per cubic meter
                   0
                    C             degrees Celsius




This environmental monitoring report is a document of the borrower. The views
expressed herein do not necessarily represent those of ADB's Board of Directors,
Management, or Staff, and may be preliminary in nature. Your attention is directed to the
“terms of use” section of ADB’s website.

In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document,
ADB does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                                                RBL EMR No.5


                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.   INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 1
        A.      Report Purpose and Rationale ........................................................................... 1
        B.      Project Objective and Components .................................................................... 1
        C.      Project Implementation Progress ....................................................................... 2
II. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR EMP IMPLEMENTATION ........................ 3
III. COMPLIANCE WITH COVENANTS AND EMP IMPLEMENTATION ......................... 5
IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF EMP...................................................................................... 7
        A.      Assessment of Project Readiness and EMP Implementation ............................. 7
        B.      Implementation of Mitigation Measures for EMP ................................................ 8
V. ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING ........................................................................... 15
VI. PUBLIC CONSULTATION AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM ................. 16
VII. CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING ................................................................... 19
VIII.        CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................................. 20
ANNEX 1. ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING IN THE 2ND HALF OF 2025 FOR THE RBL
     PROGRAM ............................................................................................................... 21
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                 RBL EMR No.5


                                    I.    INTRODUCTION

    A. Report Purpose and Rationale

1.     This is the 5th Environmental Monitoring Report (EMR) for the results-based lending
(RBL) program of the Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project and
Program (the project) financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The EMR covers
the period from July to December 2025. The EMR is prepared by the project management
consultant (PMC) with the support from Heihe Project Management Office (PMO) and
Suifenhe PMO under the guidance of Heilongjiang Provincial PMO. Data and information
in this EMR are provided by the PMOs, the PMC also collected additional information during
the site visit and testing data offered by EMA.

2.    The purpose of EMR is to document the environmental management activities and
compliance with the environmental management plan (EMP) of the RBL program. This
report presents project implementation progress; institutional arrangements for EMP
implementation and supervision; capacity development and training; public consultation
and the grievance redress mechanism (GRM).

    B. Project Objective and Components

3.    The total investment of the project is 484.35 million euros, of which 187.4 million
euros (equivalent to $193 million) will be financed by ADB loans. The loan agreements
were signed on 1 December 2022, and became effective on 27 February 2023. The closing
date for the 4215-PRC investment loan is 31 March 2029 and the closing date for 4216-
PRC RBL program loan is 31 December 2025. The summary of the project information is
shown in Table 1.

                        Table 1: Basic Information of the Program
 Loan No.                         4216-PRC
                                  Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration
 Project Name
                                  Project and Program
 Borrower                         People’s Republic of China (PRC)
 Loan Agreement Signing Date      1 December 2022
 Loan Effective Date              27 February 2023
 Loan Closing Date                31 December 2025
 Last ADB Mission Review Date 8-17 December 2025
 Executing Agency                 HPG through HPDRC
 Project Implementing Agency      Municipal Government of Heihe through Heihe Housing
                                  and Urban- Rural Development Bureau
Source: Program Implementation Document

4.     Outputs. The outputs of the project and program includes (i) infrastructure and
services to enhance climate resilience and livability of Heihe and Suifenhe urban and rural
areas implemented; (ii) sustainable and efficient logistics facilities and technologies
demonstrated; (iii) aging residential buildings and public facilities refurbished; (iv)
environmentally sustainable infrastructure and natural resources management in Heihe
and Suifenhe cities improved; and (v) knowledge of and institutional capacity on green
transformation enhanced. The RBL program will be output 3, which is described in more
detail below.


                                              1
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project               RBL EMR No.5


5.     Output 3: Aging residential buildings and public facilities refurbished. This
output will be delivered through a results-based lending (RBL) program to support the
Heihe Old Residential Communities Renovation Plan (2021–2025). The program will
address the refurbishment of 220 old residential buildings in Heihe, improving thermal
insulation to reduce energy loss, reduce waste, increasing green space and upgrading
drainage and sanitation facilities to improve climate mitigation, climate resilience, and
livability. The program will also include behavior change communications and awareness
campaigns to encourage improvements in energy efficiency within private residences.
Capacity development activities, including improving stakeholder engagement and
environmental and social safeguards, have been included in the program action plan.

6.    Outcome and impact. The outputs will contribute to the following outcome:
environmentally sustainable transportation and urban and regional development enhanced.
The project and program will be aligned with the following impact: environmental
improvement in Heilongjiang achieved. The RBL program will complement the larger
project objectives of green transformation in Heihe and the overall project and program.

    C. Project Implementation Progress

7.   According to the RBL program arrangement and the Five-Year-Plan for Urban Old
Residential Area Renovation in Heihe (2021-2025), the old residential communities in the
urban area of Heihe are approved in batches year by year for renovation. The specific
implementation situation is as follows:

      i)   28 residential complexes refurbishment was organized and implemented by the
           Heihe Housing and Urban Rural Development Bureau (HURDB) in 2021. The
           renovation has been completed. Settlement review is being carried out.

      ii) 21 residential complexes refurbishment was organized and implemented by
          Heihe HURDB in 2022. The renovation has been completed. Settlement review
          is being carried out.

      iii) 12 residential complexes refurbishment approved, organized and implemented
           by Aihui District in 2023.

      iv) 7 residential complexes refurbishment was approved and implemented in Aihui
          District in 2024.

      v) Acceptance was carried out in 2025.

8.    During the period from 2022 to 2025, the PIU completed 68 complexes renovations,
which exceeds the original target of 49 by 19. The newly added complexes are all under
the original designed scope.




                                             2
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                  RBL EMR No.5


        II.   INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR EMP IMPLEMENTATION

9.    The Heilongjiang Provincial Government through the Heilongjiang Provincial
Development and Reform Commission (HPDRC) as the executing agency (EA) of the
project. The HPDRC established a provincial level project management office (PPMO). The
PPMO is responsible for providing policy guidance during project implementation. The EA
is responsible for communication with the ADB, lending and repayment, as well as
supervision and guidance of the Heihe PMO and implementation agencies (IAs) during the
project implementation period. The PPMO is responsible for daily management of the
project implementation on behalf of the EA and under the guidance of the EA.

10. Implementing Agency. The Municipal Government of Heihe (HMG) through Heihe
HURDB is the IA for the RBL program under output 3. HURBD is responsible for managing
the implementation of the RBL program, and designates staff to ensure the effective
implementation of the EMP.

11. Environmental Management Staff. The PPMO designates a qualified
environmental officer, who has the overall responsibility for supervising the implementation
of the EMP, and updates of the IEE and EMP if required after the detailed designs are
completed. The environmental management officer’s specific responsibilities include: (i)
supervising the implementation of mitigation measures during subproject design,
construction and operation; (ii) ensuring that environmental management, monitoring, and
mitigation measures are incorporated into bidding documents, construction contracts and
operation management manuals; (iii) submitting semi-annual environmental monitoring
and progress reports to provincial PMO and further to ADB; (iv) coordinating the
implementation of GRM; and (v) responding to any unforeseen adverse environmental
impacts. The PPMO Environment Officer will be technically supported by the loan
implementation environment consultant (LIEC) of the PMC team. Each PIU nominates one
qualified environmental and social focal staff to check the overall implementation of
environmental management provisions of the EMP and to work in close coordination with
the SPMO Environment Officer.

12. Loan Implementation Environment Consultant (LIEC). LIECs are members of the
PMC consulting team. The LIECs advise the PMO, contractors and the CSCs on all aspects
of EMP implementation and environmental monitoring for the project. The LIECs will (i)
assist the PPMO/SPMO to update the EMP and environmental monitoring program as
necessary; (ii) verify the implementation of the mitigation measures specified in the EMP;
(iii) review internal and compliance monitoring reports and prepare semi-annual
environment performance/monitoring report to be submitted to ADB; (iv) provide training to
PMO, IAs, CSCs, contractors on environmental laws, regulations and policies, ADB SPS,
EMP implementation, GRM, etc.; (v) identify any environment-related implementation
issues, propose necessary corrective actions, and reflect these in a corrective action plan;
and (vi) undertake site visits to check EMP implementation.

13. Construction Contractors should be responsible for implementing the relevant
environmental mitigation measures and internal monitoring during construction period with
the help of the construction supervision company and under the supervision of the
environmental protection department. Each contractor will designate an Environment,
Health and Safety Officer to oversee contract specific EMP (CEMP) implementation.

14. Construction Supervision Companies. The CSCs should be responsible for
supervising construction progress and quality, and CEMP implementation on construction
sites. The CSC must arrange at least one environmental engineer at each construction site:
(i) supervise the EMP implementation performance of the contractor; (ii) Conduct internal
environmental inspections and monitoring; and (iii) Submit completed monthly

                                             3
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                  RBL EMR No.5


environmental performance forms to the PMO.

15. External Environmental Monitoring Agency (EMA). External environmental
monitoring (EEM) is required by ADB for projects which above Category "A" and "B" for
environment. The external environmental monitoring will be conducted by an independent
entity during the project implementation period and the first year of the operation period in
accordance with the requirements of the Environmental Monitoring Plan (EMoP) in the EMP.

16. Environmental Reporting. The environmental section of quarterly project progress
reports and semi-annual environmental monitoring reports will present EMP
implementation status, results of inspections by the PMO, problems encountered during
construction and operation, if any, and the relevant corrective actions undertaken. The
semi-annual internal environment monitoring report will be prepared by the PMC, on behalf
of the PPMO.




                                             4
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                     RBL EMR No.5


         III. COMPLIANCE WITH COVENANTS AND EMP IMPLEMENTATION

17. Compliance with environmental covenants defined in the Loan Agreement and
Project Agreement that directly or indirectly refer to EHS is assessed. It’s concluded that
the project complies with most of the covenants. A list of loan covenants and compliance
status is shown in Table 2.

          Table 2: Compliance with Environment Related Project Covenants

                                                                             Status of
  Agreement/Covenant                                         Section
                                                                            Compliance
                                                         LA. Sch. 4.    Being complied with.
  The Borrower shall ensure that the aggregate amount
                                                         Para. 2
  of Eligible Expenditures under the Program is equal to
  or exceeds the Loan proceeds withdrawn by the
  Borrower for the Program. Such Eligible Expenditures
  are part of the expenditures incurred under the ORCR
  Plan, but they exclude any expenditures for (a)
  procurement of works, goods and services from
  countries which are not members of ADB; (b)
  procurement of works, goods and services from
  persons or entities debarred or suspended by ADB;
  (c) procurement involving High-Value Contracts; (d)
  any activities which are classified as category A for
  environmental impact under the SPS; (e) any activities
  assessed as likely to have significant adverse impacts
  that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on
  environment and/or affected people; and (f) any
  activities which are prohibited investment activities
  provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.
                                                             PA. Sch.   Being complied with.
  HPG shall ensure that all Program Actions relating to
                                                             Para. 8
  environmental and social safeguards are
  implemented in a timely and efficient manner.
                                                             PA. Sch.   Being complied with.
  HPG shall ensure that no construction or rehabilitation
                                                             Para. 9
  works under the Program involve significant adverse
  environmental or social safeguards impacts that may
  be classified as category A under the SPS or whi.ch
  are assessed by ADB to be likely to have significant
  adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or
  unprecedented on the environment and/or affected
  people. Prior to commencing any construction or
  rehabilitation works under the Program, HPG shall
  cause HURDB to conduct a screening to ensure that
  any works that may be classified as Category A for
  environment impacts within the meaning of SPS or
  which are assessed by ADB to be likely to have
  significant adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse,
  or unprecedented on the environment and/or affected
  people are excluded from the Program.
                                                             PA. Sch.   Being complied with.
  HPG shall, and shall ensure that HURDB shall, stop
                                                             Para. 10
  relevant construction or upgradation works under the
  Program where any asbestos laden materials are
  encountered during the implementation. In such
  event, HPG, through HURDB, shall engage a licensed
  third-party hazardous waste treatment company for


                                                 5
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                 RBL EMR No.5


                                                                         Status of
  Agreement/Covenant                                     Section
                                                                        Compliance
  treatment and disposal of the asbestos following the
  Borrower's laws and regulations.
                                                         PA. Sch.   Being complied with.
  HPG shall ensure that no asbestos or asbestos
                                                         Para. 11
  containing materials are used in any goods or works
  supported by the Program.
                                                         PA. Sch.   Being complied with.
  HPG ensure that the preparation, design,
                                                         Para. 12
  construction, implementation, operation and
  decommissioning of all activities under the Program
  comply with (a) all applicable laws, regulations and
  guidelines of the Borrower relating to environment,
  health and safety; (b) Environmental Safeguards; and
  (c) all measures and requirements, including
  monitoring requirements set forth in the PSSA and
  PAP.
                                                         PA. Sch.   Being complied with.
  HPG shall submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports to
                                                         Para. 13
  ADB in respect of implementation of and compliance
  with Environmental Safeguards, the PSSA and the
  PAP, semiannually during construction and the
  implementation of the Program and the PAP, and
  thereafter, annually during implementation of the
  Program unless a longer period is agreed between
  ADB and HPG.




                                                6
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                      RBL EMR No.5


                               IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF EMP

A.    Assessment of Project Readiness and EMP Implementation

18. The project’s readiness in terms of environmental management was assessed based
on the indicators listed in Table 3, which are derived from the project IEE.

                     Table 3: Project Readiness Assessment Indicators

     Indicators                                 Criteria                        Assessment

 Staffing              (i) Provincial PMO and SPMO established with                Yes
                       appropriately qualified staff including safeguard
                       officers.
                       (ii) PIUs staffed appropriately.
                       (iii) Qualified LIEC recruited.
                       (iv) Qualified 3rd party environmental monitoring
                       agencies engaged.
 Budgeting             (i) Environment mitigation cost during construction         Yes
                       and operation is sufficiently and timely allocated.
                       (ii) Environment monitoring cost is sufficiently and
                       timely allocated.
                       (iii) Budget for capacity building is sufficiently and
                       timely allocated.
 Monitoring            (i) Compliance monitoring is conducted by PPMO              Yes
                       safeguard officers and LIEC.
                       (ii) Ambient air quality, water quality, and noise
                       monitoring is conducted by 3rd party environmental
                       monitoring company.
 Supervision           (i) ADB mission to review EMP implementation at             Yes.
                       least once a year during the construction phase.
                       (ii) Local environmental authorities to supervise
                       monitoring at their discretion.
 Reporting             (i) Semi-annual environmental monitoring reports            Yes.
                       prepared by PMO with the support of LIEC, and
                       submitted to ADB for review and disclosure.
 Capacity Building     (i) Construction Environmental Management Plans             yes
                       are developed and in place before substantive
                       construction activities begin.
                       (ii) Training on Construction Environmental
                       Management Plans, ADB safeguard policy, EMP
                       implementation, and GRM is provided prior to start
                       of construction.
                       (iii) Training on implementation of operation phase
                       EMP and health and safety is provided prior to
                       project operation.
 Grievance             (i) GRM contact persons are designated at the               Yes
 Redress               SPMO and PIU, and GRM contact information
 Mechanism             disclosed to the public before construction.
                       (ii) All complains are recorded and processed within
                       the set time framework in the GRM.
Source: based on PMC’s review and assessment.


                                                   7
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                       RBL EMR No.5


B.    Implementation of Mitigation Measures for EMP

19. During the reporting period, on-site construction activities mainly included piping
engineering, roof renovation and ground renovation. The contractor and monitoring have
implemented mitigation measures in accordance with the EMP.




                      Figure 1: Site Photos in Hehe RBL Program

20. A detailed assessment of the project’s compliance with the EMP for the pre-
construction, construction, and operation phases is presented in Table 4.

         Table 4: Assessment of EMP Mitigation Measures Implementation
                       Potential
                                            Mitigation Measures and/or
     Category        Impacts and                                                  Assessment
                                                    Safeguards
                        Issues
 A. Detailed Design Phase

                   Include mitigation
                                        ‒   Environmental mitigation
                   measures and
                                            measures and identified in the
                   environmental                                                  In compliance
                                            EMP will be incorporated into the
 Incorporate       monitoring plan in
                                            detailed design.
 Mitigation        detailed design
 Measures and                           ‒   Environmental mitigation
 Monitoring in     Include mitigation       measures identified in the EMP
 Detailed Design   measures and             will be incorporated in the bidding
 and Bidding and   monitoring               documents for the project and will
 Contracting                                                                      In compliance
                   program in               be included in contract
                   bidding                  documents for constructions. All
                   documents                contractors shall be required to
                                            strictly comply with the EMP.
                                        ‒   In accordance with the GRM
                                            presented in Appendix 3, a staff
                                            member within the Heihe PMO will
 Grievance                                  be assigned overall responsibility
                   Impacts on
 Redress                                    for the GRM; GRM training will be
                   project Affected                                               In compliance
 Mechanism                                  provided for PMO members and
                   Persons
 (GRM)                                      GRM access points; and the GRM
                                            access point phone numbers, fax
                                            numbers, addresses and emails
                                            will be disclosed to the public.

 B. Construction Phase
                                        ‒   Existing toilets in the communities
                   Surface and              will be provided for the workers.
 Wastewater                                                                       In compliance
                   groundwater          ‒   Construction wastewater will be
                   contamination            collected and discharged to


                                              8
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                          RBL EMR No.5


                        Potential
                                            Mitigation Measures and/or
    Category          Impacts and                                                    Assessment
                                                    Safeguards
                         Issues
                   from construction        municipal sewage system for
                   wastewater, and          treatment.
                   domestic water       ‒   All necessary measures will be
                                            undertaken to prevent
                                            construction materials and waste
                                            from entering drains.
                                        ‒   Repair and maintenance of
                                            construction machinery,
                                            equipment and vehicles will not
                                            be allowed on sites to reduce
                                            wastewater generation.
                                        ‒   Storage facilities for fuels, oil, and
                                            other hazardous materials are
                                            within secured areas on
                                            impermeable surfaces, and
                                            provided with bunds with 110% of
                                            the volume of materials stored
                                            and cleanup kits.
                                        ‒   Water will be sprayed on active
                                            construction sites including where
                                            fugitive dust is being generated
                                            on a daily basis, and more
                                            frequently during windy days.
                                        ‒   Transport vehicles will be limited
                                            to low speeds at construction
                                            sites.
                                        ‒   Loads will be covered during truck
                   Dust, vehicle
 Air Pollution                              transportation to avoid spillage or      In compliance
                   emissions, H2S
                                            fugitive dust generation.
                                        ‒   Transport routes and delivery
                                            schedules will be planned to
                                            avoid densely populated and
                                            sensitive areas, and high traffic
                                            times.
                                        ‒   Provide regular maintenance to
                                            vehicles in order to limit gaseous
                                            emissions (to be done off-site).
                                        ‒   Ensure that noise levels from
                                            equipment and machinery
                                            conform to PRC standard of
                                            GB12523-2011 (revised).
                                            Properly maintain construction
                                            vehicles and machinates to
                                            minimize noise.
                                        ‒   Construction activities, and
                   Impacts from             particularly noisy ones, are to be
                   construction noise       limited to reasonable hours during
 Noise                                                                               In compliance
                   on sensitive             the day and early evening.
                   resources            ‒   Construction activities will be
                                            strictly prohibited during the
                                            nighttime (22:00 h to 07:00 h).
                                            Exceptions will only be allowed in
                                            special cases, and only after
                                            getting approval of the
                                            surrounding residents, local EEB
                                            and other relevant departments.
                                            And nearby residents should be

                                              9
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                       RBL EMR No.5


                       Potential
                                           Mitigation Measures and/or
    Category         Impacts and                                                  Assessment
                                                   Safeguards
                        Issues
                                           notified of such night time
                                           activities well in advance.
                                      ‒    Low-noise equipment will be
                                           selected as much as possible.
                                      ‒    Noise PPE will be provided to
                                           workers.
                                      ‒    Transportation routes and
                                           delivery schedules will be
                                           planned during detailed design to
                                           avoid densely populated and
                                           sensitive areas and high traffic
                                           times.
                                      ‒    Vehicles transporting construction
                                           materials or waste will slow down
                                           and not use their horn when
                                           passing through or nearby
                                           sensitive locations, such as
                                           residential communities, schools
                                           and hospitals.
                                      ‒    Existing domestic waste
                                           containers will be used for
                                           domestic waste collection at
                                           construction sites.
                                      ‒    Domestic waste will be collected
                                           on a regular basis by the local
                                           sanitation departments and
                                           transported for recycling, reuse,
                                           or disposal at a licensed landfill,
                                           in accordance with relevant PRC
                                           regulations and requirements.
                                      ‒    Construction waste dumpsters will
                                           be provided at all work sites.
                                      ‒    Construction waste will be
                                           collected on a regular basis by a
                   Inappropriate
 Solid Waste                               licensed waste collection              In compliance
                   Waste Disposal
                                           company and transported for
                                           recycling, reuse, or disposal at a
                                           licensed landfill, in accordance
                                           with relevant PRC regulations and
                                           requirements.
                                      ‒    There should be no final waste
                                           disposal on-site. Waste
                                           incineration at or near the sites is
                                           strictly prohibited.
                                      ‒    Contractors will be held
                                           responsible for proper removal
                                           and disposal of any significant
                                           residual materials, wastes, and
                                           contaminated soils that remain on
                                           the site after construction.
                                      ‒    A hazardous material handling
                                           and disposal protocol that
                   Inappropriate
 Hazardous and                             includes spill emergency
                   transportation,
 Polluting                                 response will be prepared and          In compliance
                   storage, use and
 Materials                                 implemented by contractors.
                   spills
                                      ‒    Storage facilities for fuels, oil,
                                           chemicals and other hazardous

                                            10
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                       RBL EMR No.5


                       Potential
                                           Mitigation Measures and/or
    Category         Impacts and                                                  Assessment
                                                   Safeguards
                        Issues
                                           materials will be within secured
                                           areas on impermeable surfaces
                                           provided with dikes with a 110%
                                           volume, and at least 300 m from
                                           drainage structures and important
                                           water bodies. A stand-alone site
                                           within the storage facility will be
                                           designated for hazardous wastes.
                                      ‒    Signs will be placed at chemicals
                                           and hazardous materials storage
                                           sites to provide information on
                                           type and name of chemicals and
                                           hazardous materials.
                                      ‒    Suppliers of chemicals and
                                           hazardous materials must hold
                                           proper licenses and follow all
                                           relevant protocols and PRC
                                           regulations and requirements.
                                      ‒    Licensed companies will be hired
                                           to collect, transport, and dispose
                                           of hazardous materials in
                                           accordance with relevant PRC
                                           regulations and requirements.
                                      ‒    Under ADB’s List of Prohibited
                                           Investment Activities (SPS, 2009),
                                           the use of asbestos is prohibited
                                           except for the “purchase and use
                                           of bonded asbestos cement
                                           sheeting where the asbestos
                                           content is <20%” (SPS 2009: 76).
                                           However: (i) in practice, it is
                                           difficult to assess whether
                                           asbestos content is <20%; and (ii)
                                           international development banks
                                           are increasingly banning the use
                                           of all asbestos from their projects.
                                           To ensure international best
                                           practice for human health and
                                           safety for this project: no
                                           asbestos of any kind will be used
                   Asbestos                                                       In compliance
                                           in any materials supported by the
                                           project.
                                      ‒    Check with the design institute
                                           and PMO to ensure the proposed
                                           materials do not include the use
                                           of asbestos.
                                      ‒    Construction activities should be
                                           stopped if asbestos materials are
                                           identified during construction. IA
                                           should engage a licensed
                                           hazardous waste treatment
                                           company immediately for the
                                           treatment and disposal of
                                           asbestos. No construction can be
                                           resumed until the asbestos have
                                           been fully removed by the
                                           licensed company.

                                            11
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                      RBL EMR No.5


                       Potential
                                           Mitigation Measures and/or
    Category         Impacts and                                                 Assessment
                                                   Safeguards
                        Issues
                                       ‒   Transportation routes and
                                           delivery schedules will be
                                           planned during detailed design to
                                           avoid densely populated and
                                           sensitive areas and high traffic
                                           times.
                                       ‒   Vehicles transporting construction
                                           materials or wastes will slow
                   Community               down and not use their horn when
 Socioeconomic
                   Disturbance and         passing through or nearby             In compliance
 Resources
                   Safety                  sensitive locations, such as
                                           residential communities, schools
                                           and hospitals.
                                       ‒   Signs will be placed at
                                           construction sites in clear view of
                                           the public, warning people of
                                           potential dangers.
                                       ‒   Temporary access road will be
                                           provided whenever appropriate.
                                       ‒   Identify and minimize the causes
                                           of potential hazards to workers.
                                       ‒   Implement appropriate safety
                                           measures.
                                       ‒   Provide training to workers on
                                           occupational health and safety,
                                           emergency response, especially
                                           with respect to using potentially
                   Worker
                                           dangerous equipment and
                   Occupational                                                  In compliance
                                           storage, handling and disposal of
                   Health and Safety
                                           hazardous materials.
                                       ‒   Ensure that all equipment is
                                           maintained in a safe operating
                                           condition.
                                       ‒   Provide appropriate PPE to
                                           workers.
                                       ‒   Ensure regular safety meetings
                                           with staff.
 Occupational
                                       ‒   Prior to any works, inform
 Health and
                                           residents and businesses in
 Safety
                                           advance through media,
                                           information boards, and direct
                                           consultations, of the construction
                                           activities, dates and duration of
                                           expected disruption.
                                       ‒   Record all community feedback
                                           and solutions discussed and
                   Community               agreed.
                                                                                 In compliance
                   Health and Safety   ‒   Based on feedback from the
                                           community consultations: (i)
                                           update contractor site plans as
                                           needed to incorporate the
                                           solutions, including revisions in
                                           work schedules, working hours,
                                           and construction and/or mitigation
                                           methods; (ii) revise CSC
                                           monitoring schedules and
                                           monitoring criteria as needed to

                                            12
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                        RBL EMR No.5


                         Potential
                                             Mitigation Measures and/or
    Category           Impacts and                                                 Assessment
                                                     Safeguards
                          Issues
                                             reflect the updated contractor site
                                             management plans.
                                         ‒   Install signs at construction sites
                                             to inform people of the project
                                             GRM, potential dangers (e.g.
                                             moving vehicles, hazardous
                                             materials, excavations) and safety
                                             issues.
                                         ‒   Install safety barricades around
                                             all excavations, including open
                                             trenches.
                                         ‒   Assign personnel to direct
                                             pedestrians around dangerous
                                             work areas.
                                         ‒   Night time (8:00pm – 6:00am) use
                                             of heavy machinery is strictly
                                             prohibited.
                                         ‒   Record the locations that workers
                                             have visited/lived immediately
                                             before and during project work;
                                         ‒   Schedules for disinfecting /
                                             cleaning construction sites;
                                         ‒   Implement temperature checks
                                             and other health checks on-site;
                                         ‒   Implement social distancing
                     COVID- 19
                                             measures;                             In compliance
                     protection
                                         ‒   Mandatory use of PPEs such as
                                             facemasks, and provision of
                                             handwashing stations, hand
                                             sanitizers, and other appropriate
                                             protective measures;
                                         ‒   Procedures to be adopted in the
                                             event a worker is suspected of
                                             having contracted COVID-19.
                                         ‒   A construction phase chance find
                                             procedure will be established and
                                             activated if any chance finds of
                                             PCRs are encountered:
                                         ‒   Construction activities will be
                                             immediately suspended if any
                                             PCRs are encountered;
                                         ‒   Destroying, damaging, defacing,
                                             or concealing PCRs will be strictly
                     As yet unknown          prohibited in accordance with
                     PCRs may be             PRC regulations;
 Physical Cultural
                     damaged if proper   ‒   Local Cultural Heritage Bureau        In compliance
 Resources
                     precautions are         will be promptly informed and
                     not taken.              consulted;
                                         ‒   Construction activities will resume
                                             only after thorough investigation
                                             and with the permission of the
                                             local; Cultural Heritage Bureau;
                                             and
                                         ‒   In case of any PCR is found, ADB
                                             SPS 2009 requirements as well
                                             as PRC laws and regulations will
                                             be followed.

                                              13
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                     RBL EMR No.5


                        Potential
                                           Mitigation Measures and/or
    Category          Impacts and                                               Assessment
                                                   Safeguards
                         Issues
 C. Operation Phase


                   Discharge of       ‒    Domestic wastewater from staff
                   Domestic                generated from maintenance and
 Wastewater                                                                     In compliance
                   Wastewater              repair will be discharged to the
                                           municipal sewerage system.

                                      ‒    Waste generated from
                   Collection and          maintenance and repair will be
                   Disposal                recycled as much as possible.
 Solid Waste                                                                    In compliance
                                           Non-recyclable waste will be
                                           collected, transported and treated
                                           by certificated companies.
                                      ‒    Record the locations that
                   COVID-19                maintenance workers have
                   protection              visited/lived immediately before
                                           and during project work;
                                      ‒    Implement temperature checks
                                           and other health checks on-site;
                                      ‒    Implement social distancing
 Community and
                                           measures;
 Occupational
                                      ‒    Mandatory use of PPEs such as        In compliance
 Health      and
                                           facemasks, and provision of
 Safety
                                           handwashing stations, hand
                                           sanitizers, and other appropriate
                                           protective measures;
                                      ‒    Procedures to be adopted in the
                                           event a maintenance worker is
                                           suspected of having contracted
                                           COVID-19

Source: Based on PMC review and assessment.




                                            14
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                          RBL EMR No.5


                              V. ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING

21. The scope of environmental monitoring includes internal environmental monitoring
and external monitoring.

22. Internal monitoring. (i) regular site inspections have been performed by PIU
Environment Officer with assistance of CSC. The internal monitoring results have been
prepared by the CSCs and submitted to PIU for review. (ii) irregular site inspections
performed by PMO; (iii) daily inspection of the implementation of the EMP mitigation
measures by the contractors and CSCs.

23. External monitoring. The PPMO has hired the external environmental monitoring
entity, Harbin Xinkang Environmental Pollution Testing Co., LTD, to implement the external
environmental monitoring plan during the construction (Table 5). The external
environmental monitoring entity carried out construction site testing from 28 to 31 August
2025. All indicators of air and noise met the standard. See Table 6 for the testing summary
and Annex 1 for the test report.

                 Table 5: Environmental Monitoring Plan for RBL Program
                                (Construction phase only)

  Item                  Indicator                          Sites                   Frequency

    Air       Ambient dust monitoring         10 sensitive locations        Semiannual during
              (TSP, PM10, PM2.5) following    (rotating) selected by IA     construction season
              PRC requirements
   Noise      Ambient noise monitoring        10 sensitive locations        Semiannual during
              (day and night Leq dB(A))       (rotating) selected by IA     construction season
              following the Law of the PRC
              on the Prevention and
              Control of the Environmental
              Noise Pollution

                      Table 6: Environmental Testing Result Summary
 Sampling Sites (Hongzhi             TSP         PM10          PM2.5      Noise during Noise at night
 Community, Aihui District)         (ug/m3)      (ug/m3)       (ug/m3)    day (dB(A))     (dB(A))
 Unit 1                               96          42               19        53.1           34.9
 Unit 2                              102          31               21        52.5           40.9
 Unit 3                              108          35               23        51.9           36.7
 Unit 4                               91          50               24        52.4           40.3
 Unit 5                              104          42               18        53.3           34.6
 Unit 6                               92          40               22        53.6           35.2
 Unit 7                               97          33               19        55.3           34.8
 Unit 8                              102          51               20        52.6           32.9
 Unit 9                               93          44               24        54.0           32.8
 Unit 10                             106          37               23        53.2           43.7
 Standard value                      300         150               75         70             55




                                                15
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project              RBL EMR No.5


    VI. PUBLIC CONSULTATION AND GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM

24.    Public consultation. Public consultations were carried out for RBL program
during preparation of the domestic EIA and the EIA according to the Interim Measures
for Public Consultation on Environmental Impact Assessment in China (2019) and
ADB’s SPS (2009). Information disclosure and public consultation includes: (i) internet,
and on-site disclosure; (ii) questionnaire surveys of key stakeholders; (iii) visits to
communities and households in the project areas.

25.     In November 2023, the local community conducted a round of public
consultation in 13 communities, and a total of 130 questionnaires were collected. 60%
of the respondents were "very satisfied" with the comprehensive effect of the project.
The replies mainly focused on strengthening community greening. In addition, the PIU
has conducted public consultation surveys on 20 communities renovated in 2019, and
47% of the respondents are "very satisfied" with the comprehensive effect of the project.
In addition, 255 comments from residents were collected during the survey process.

26.    In 2024, PIU disclosed the construction information in the official website of
Auhui District government.

27.    In July 2025, a round of consultation survey about satisfaction was conducted
around renovated complexed completed in 2023 and 2024, involving a total of 5,260
residents in 19 renovated complexes, and 399 valid questionnaires were collected.
Among them, 12 complexes were renovated in 2023 and 7 complexes were in 2024.
100% of the residents surveyed were satisfied about the project implementation. See
Figure 2 for the questionnaire template.




                         Figure 2: Questionnaire Template

28.    Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). A GRM is established in compliance
with ADB’s SPS (2009) requirements to prevent and address community concerns,
and to assist the project to maximize environmental and social benefits. The GRM was
presented and discussed with potentially affected persons during public consultation

                                          16
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                 RBL EMR No.5


process. Key elements of GRM are as follows:

    i)     The Environmental and Social Staff of the PPMO and the Environmental and
           Social Staffs of the City PMOs will lead the coordination of GRM and establish
           a GRM tracking and document system.
    ii)    The PPMO coordinates with staff from city PMOs and PIUs, arranges
           meetings, and conducts on-site visits when necessary, maintains the entire
           project appeal record or database, and incorporates the appeal situation into
           the progress report submitted to the ADB.
    iii) At the level of RBL, the Environmental and Social Staff will guide contractors
         and the CSCs in implementing the GRM procedure, and coordinate with local
         environmental protection and other government departments as necessary.
    iv) PMC experts will provide training and technical support.
    v)     The contact persons for the GRM have been determined before construction
           and detailed information is provided in Table 7.
          Table 7: Contact Information for the Project Public Complaint Unit
Agency/         Person         in Position              Telephone     Email/Note
Institution     charge
PPMO            Li Chenglin      Deputy      Direct   of 136 0361 9330 fgw82603161@126.co
                                 PPMO                                  m
Heihe PMO       Lou Benqiang     E & S staff            0456-8226571 yhxmb8226571@163.
                                                                     com
PIU of Heihe Qi Yao              Housing          and 15145675471
RBL program                      Construction Bureau
                                 of Heihe /E & S staff
Heilongjiang                     E & S staff
Construction
and                                                                   The Contractor   for
                 Wang Tao                               18646642303
Installation                                                          2021 Package 1
Group       Co.,
Ltd.
Heihe                            E & S staff
Longzhu
Thermal
                                                                      The Contractor   for
Power           Wang Yu                                 18545678728
                                                                      2021 Package 2
Pipeline
Installation
Co., Ltd.
Heilongjiang                     E & S staff
Xinqiao
Computer                                                              The Contractor   for
                Lin Xiaobo                              13284061700
Room                                                                  2021 Package 3
Engineering
Co., Ltd.
Heilongjiang                     E & S staff
No.2
                                                                      The Contractor   for
Construction    Miao Yu                                 17689708777
                                                                      2022 Package
Engineering
Co., Ltd.




                                               17
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project                       RBL EMR No.5


Agency/          Person        in Position               Telephone        Email/Note
Institution      charge
China Energy                     E & S staff
Engineering
Group
                                                                          The Contractor for
Northeast
               Yue Fu                                    18298975161      2023 Package in Aihui
Electric Power
                                                                          District
No.2
Engineering
Co., Ltd.
Heilongjiang                     E & S staff
Chengzhu                                                                  The Contractor for
                 Zheng
Construction                                             15145673393      2024 Package in Aihui
                 Qianghua
Engineering                                                               District
Co., Ltd.
                                 E & S staff                              Supervisor for 2021
Heihe Hongxin
                                                                          Package 1 & Package
Construction Zhang
                                                         13845681961      3, 2022 Package, and
Supervision   Baocheng
                                                                          2023 Package in Aihui
Co., Ltd.
                                                                          District
Heihe Jiahong                    E & S staff
Engineering                                                               Supervisor for 2021
Project                                                                   Package 1 & Package
              Wang Pengfei                               13904562534
Management                                                                2, and 2024 Package
& Consulting                                                              in Aihui District
Co., Ltd.
Source: PMOs.

29.   A total of two complaints related to the environment were received as shown in
Table 7 below. During this reporting period, no complaint about environmental
safeguards was received.

               Table 8: Summary of Complaints Received and Solutions

Complaint Time       Content                        Solution

                     The drainage well covers        HURDB immediately organized relevant
                     of Unit 4 and Unit 5 of         personnel to set up warning signs at the
                     Building C in the               location and carried out emergency
7 December 2023
                     Youzheng residential            repairs. The replacement of the new well
                     area were broken and            covers has gained high recognition from
                     loose                           the surrounding residents.

                     Room 201, Unit 1,               HURDB immediately contacted the
                     Building 15 in Shiji            construction unit to conduct a survey on
                     Huayuan residential area        site. After investigation, the actual cause
                     of the old residential area     was a broken indoor buried pipeline in the
February 2024
                     was renovated. It’s             household. On 20 February 2024,
                     reported that the entire        contacted the property management for
                     unit of drainage pipes is       construction and replacement of drainage
                     frozen.                         pipelines.




                                               18
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project            RBL EMR No.5


                    VII. CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING

30.      The project EMP defines the capacity building and training plan, which adapts
to the training needs of environmental management during the project implementation
period to ensure that the contractors, CSCs, PIU staff and PMO staff take appropriate
environmental protection measures to protect the environment.

31.    The PIU participated in the environmental safeguard training activities
organized by ADB from19 to 21 August 2024.

32.    On 27 May 2025, LIEC conducted environmental management training at the
Suifenhe PMO. PIUs in Heihe participated in the training online.




                                          19
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project             RBL EMR No.5


                                VIII. CONCLUSIONS

33. During the report period, mitigation measures were implemented in the
construction sites. EMA carried out external environmental testing in August 2025. The
results indicate that they are in compliance with the national air pollutants and noise
standards.

34. The GRM for the RBL program has been set up by different organizations
involved in the RBL program implementation. No complaint was received during the
reporting period.

35. The reviews and assessments of compliance with relevant requirements in the
Loan Agreement and Project Agreement were carried out. The preparation of
environmental management and the implementation of mitigation measures meet the
requirements.




                                          20
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project   RBL EMR No.5


ANNEX 1. ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING IN THE 2nd HALF OF 2025 FOR THE RBL
         PROGRAM




                                          21
ADB Heilongjiang Green Transformation Demonstration Project   RBL EMR No.5




                                          22
