Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




Project Number: 54355-001
November 2021




Proposed Loan, Grant, and Technical
Assistance Grant
Kingdom of Bhutan: Green and Resilient Affordable
Housing Sector Project




Distribution of this document is restricted until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, ADB will disclose the document to the public in accordance with ADB's
Access to Information Policy.
                            CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                              (as of 14 October 2021)

                      Currency unit      –     ngultrum (Nu)
                           Nu1.00        =     $0.013
                             $1.00       =     Nu75.23


                                 ABBREVIATIONS

       ADB              –   Asian Development Bank
       ADF              –   Asian Development Fund
       COVID-19         –   coronavirus disease
       MOF              –   Ministry of Finance
       MOWHS            –   Ministry of Works and Human Settlement
       NHDCL            –   National Housing Development Corporation Limited
       NHP              –   National Housing Policy
       NPPF             –   National Pension and Provident Fund
       NSB              –   National Statistics Bureau
       O&M              –   operation and maintenance
       PAM              –   project administration manual
       PBL              –   policy-based loan
       PMU              –   project management unit
       SDG              –   Sustainable Development Goal
       TA               –   technical assistance
       TASF             –   Technical Assistance Special Fund


                                       NOTES

(i)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of Bhutan ends on 30 June. “FY” before a
       calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2022 ends
       on 30 June 2022.

(ii)   In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars.
Vice-President             Shixin Chen, Operations 1
Director General           Kenichi Yokoyama, South Asia Department (SARD)
Deputy Director General    Manmohan Parkash, SARD
Director                   Norio Saito, Urban Development and Water Division (SAUW), SARD

Team leaders               Saswati Belliappa, Senior Safeguards Specialist, SAUW, SARD
                           Jude Kohlhase, Unit Head, Project Administration, SAUW, SARD
Team members               Mikael Andersson, Financial Management Specialist, Portfolio,
                              Results and Quality Control Unit, Office of the Director General
                              (SAOD-PR), SARD
                           Amer A. Chowdhury, Senior Public–Private Partnership Specialist,
                              Advisory Division 1, Office of Public–Private Partnership
                           Dharmesh M. Dawda, Procurement Specialist, Procurement Division
                              1, Procurement, Portfolio, and Financial Management
                              Department
                           Manohari Gunawardhena, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, Public
                              Management, Financial Sector, and Trade Division, SARD
                           Hong Soo Lee, Senior Urban Specialist (Smart Cities), Urban Sector
                              Group, Sustainable Development and Climate Change
                              Department (SDCC)
                           Tashi Lhamo, Associate Project Officer, Bhutan Resident Mission
                              (BHRM), SARD
                           Charlene Liau, Urban Development Specialist, SAUW, SARD
                           Rodellyn S. Manalac, Operations Assistant, SAUW, SARD
                           Edgardo G. Moises II, Associate Project Officer, SAUW, SARD
                           Lyailya Nazarbekova, Principal Counsel, Office of the General
                              Counsel
                           Tshewang Norbu, Portfolio Management Specialist, BHRM, SARD
                           Santosh Pokharel, Urban Economist, SAUW, SARD
                           Achyutha Aleti Rao, Environment Specialist, SAUW, SARD
                           Rayhalda D. Susulan, Safeguards Officer (Resettlement), Office of
                              the Director General, SARD
                           Francesco Tornieri, Principal Social Development Specialist (Gender
                              and Development), SAOD-PR, SARD
                           Nidup Tshering, Senior Social Development Officer (Gender),
                              BHRM, SARD
                           Mario Unterwainig, Disaster Risk Management Specialist (Resilient
                              Infrastructure), Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management
                              Division, SDCC
                           Vivek Vishal, Senior Project Officer (Urban), India Resident Mission,
                              SARD
                           Noime Walican, Associate Safeguards Officer (Environment),
                              SAUW, SARD
                           Sheryl V. Yanez, Project Analyst, SAUW, SARD
Peer reviewer              Arnaud Heckmann, Principal Urban Development Specialist, Urban
                              and Social Sectors Division, East Asia Department

In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                     CONTENTS
                                                                   Page
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                   1
II.    THE PROJECT                                                    1
       A.   Rationale                                                 1
       B.   Project Description                                       4
       C.   Value Added by ADB                                        5
       D.   Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan                 6
       E.   Implementation Arrangements                               7
III.   ATTACHED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE                                  8
IV.    DUE DILIGENCE                                                  8
       A.    Technical                                                8
       B.    Economic and Financial Viability                         8
       C.    Sustainability                                           9
       D.    Governance                                               9
       E.    Poverty, Social, and Gender                             10
       F.    Safeguards                                              10
       G.    Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan     11
V.     ASSURANCES                                                    12
VI.    RECOMMENDATION                                                12


APPENDIXES
1.     Design and Monitoring Framework                               13
2.     List of Linked Documents                                      17
                                                                                                  Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                                          PROJECT AT A GLANCE

    1. Basic Data                                                                                              Project Number: 54355-001
       Project Name                      Green and Resilient Affordable Housing               Department/Division SARD/SAUW
                                         Sector Project
       Country                           Bhutan                                               Executing Agency            Ministry of Finance
       Borrower                          Bhutan

       Country Economic                  https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/
       Indicators                        ?id=54355-001-CEI
       Portfolio at a Glance             https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/
                                         ?id=54355-001-PortAtaGlance

    2. Sector                            Subsector(s)                                                                ADB Financing ($ million)
       Water and other urban             Urban housing                                                                                 30.00
       infrastructure and services
                                                                                                                Total                        30.00
    3. Operational Priorities                                                                 Climate Change Information
       Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities                                 GHG reductions (tons per annum)                 9.360
       Accelerating progress in gender equality                                               Climate Change impact on the                     High
       Tackling climate change, building climate and disaster resilience, and                 Project
       enhancing environmental sustainability
       Making cities more livable                                                             ADB Financing
       Strengthening governance and institutional capacity                                    Adaptation ($ million)                            4.80
                                                                                              Mitigation ($ million)                            7.20

                                                                                              Cofinancing
                                                                                              Adaptation ($ million)                            0.00
                                                                                              Mitigation ($ million)                            0.00
       Sustainable Development Goals                                                          Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
       SDG 1.5                                                                                Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
       SDG 5.4
       SDG 11.1                                                                               Poverty Targeting
       SDG 13.a                                                                               Household Targeting

    4. Risk Categorization:              Low
.


    5. Safeguard Categorization                       Environment: B Involuntary Resettlement: B Indigenous Peoples: C
.


    6. Financing
        Modality and Sources                                                                         Amount ($ million)
        ADB                                                                                                                                30.00
           Sovereign Sector grant: Asian Development Fund                                                                                   6.00
           Sovereign Sector (Concessional Loan): Ordinary capital resources                                                                24.00
        Cofinancing                                                                                                                         0.00
           None                                                                                                                             0.00
        Counterpart                                                                                                                         7.00
           Government                                                                                                                       7.00
        Total                                                                                                                              37.00
        Note: An attached technical assistance will be financed on a grant basis by the Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF-7) in the amount
        of $1,000,000.

       Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar




Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.          21102021154605555089                                 Generated Date: 21-Oct-2021 16:29:04 PM
                                         I.      THE PROPOSAL

1.      I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan
and a proposed grant, both to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Green and Resilient Affordable
Housing Sector Project. The report also describes proposed technical assistance (TA) for
Supporting the Green and Resilient Affordable Housing Sector Project, and if the Board approves
the proposed loan and grant, I, acting under the authority delegated to me by the Board, approve
the TA.

2.      The project will support the government’s national priority to improve the livability, safety,
and sustainability of human settlements through better access to adequate and affordable rental
housing,1 which will be implemented using the sector loan modality. The project will increase the
supply of green and resilient affordable housing in Nganglam, Phuentsholing, Samdrup Jongkhar,
Samtse, Thimphu, and Trashiyangtse; and benefit about 1,000 lower- to middle-income civil
servants and non-civil servants, including marginalized municipal waste workers. The project will
also implement the associated infrastructure and facilities, enhance the institutional capacity of
the National Housing Development Corporation Limited (NHDCL), and strengthen the housing
sector policy and regulatory framework necessary to provide access to land, and leverage the
private sector to address the housing supply shortage.

                                          II.      THE PROJECT

A.      Rationale

3.      Country macroeconomic context. Bhutan is steadily urbanizing. The share of the urban
population increased from 30% in 2005 to 42% in 2021, driven by an average annual growth rate
of 1.9% over that period. The urbanization rate is projected to reach 56.8% by 2047. 2 Urban
population growth is fueled by rural migration, mostly to the four largest urban centers of Gelephu,
Phuentsholing, Samdrup Jongkhar, and Thimphu, which account for 59.0% of the total urban
population. While 58.0% of the Bhutanese population still lives in rural areas and engages in
small-scale and subsistence agriculture, the constant flow of rural migration to urban centers is
exerting mounting pressure on urban services. Bhutan has a chance to be proactive and focus
on housing development. Economic growth in the capital city, Thimphu, has been fueled by
expansion in construction, services, and manufacturing. Bhutan has a current overall
unemployment rate of 2.4%, which is low relative to neighboring South Asia countries. 3 The
Government of Bhutan’s Twelfth Five Year Plan, 2018–2023 calls for developing the economy by
fostering growth in the private sector, which will create jobs and contribute to sustainable poverty
reduction and the country’s transition to green and resilient development (footnote 1).

4.     Housing demand. Affordable housing development in Bhutan has not kept pace with
population growth, particularly in urban areas where the demographic increase puts pressure on
the limited usable and appropriately zoned land and pushes house prices up, making it
increasingly unaffordable. In 2017, the estimated shortfall of housing nationwide was 21,156.4

1  Government of Bhutan, Gross National Happiness Commission. 2019. Twelfth Five Year Plan, 2018–2023: Just,
   Harmonious and Sustainable Society through Enhanced Decentralisation. Thimphu. Affordable housing is defined
   as the ability for households to meet housing costs within 30% of their gross monthly income.
 2 Government of Bhutan, National Statistics Bureau (NSB). 2019. Population Projections Bhutan 2017–2047.

   Thimphu.
 3
   Government of Bhutan, NSB. 2018. Population and Housing Census of Bhutan, 2017, National Report. Thimphu.
4 Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2017. Housing Finance Feasibility Study. Consultant’s report. Manila (SC107332);

   and ADB. 2018. Housing Finance Feasibility Study. Manila (SC 107332).
2


Nearly 63.5% of urban households rent, 17.5% live in rent-free dwellings, and only 19.0% of
households own their homes. 5 The affordable housing shortage is particularly acute for low-
income households, who spend on average more than 40% of their income on housing—greater
than the recommended 30%.6 Housing options are becoming increasingly unaffordable for low-
income households and vulnerable groups, including women, leaving them in (i) overcrowded
conditions in shared accommodation, and (ii) residing in informal settlements.

5.      Sector challenges—planning constraints, limited housing supply, and lack of
access to finance. Unclear and onerous land use planning and zoning constrain the timely
conversion of agricultural land for housing in Bhutan. The supply of sufficient and appropriately
zoned land for residential development limits the supply of affordable housing (footnote 6). The
private sector faces challenges in increasing housing stock because of high development costs
and the difficulty of acquiring land located near services and employment centers. Key
commercial housing finance constraints that limit housing development include high land prices
and maximum lending terms capped at 20 years (footnote 6). Despite these limitations, mortgage
lending for housing has increased significantly from 17% of total loans in 2018 to 27% in 2020.7
This reflects continuing high demand for housing credit, and is perceived as a medium-term risk
by domestic banks because of their high exposure in a vulnerable housing sector and the
possibility of leading to a real estate bubble. For home loans, microfinance is nascent in Bhutan
and no microfinance institutions offer housing finance to households. Low-income earners are
unable to access housing credit without verifiable income statements linked to formal
employment. While making housing finance more accessible to households is necessary to
address demand-side challenges, the government needs to intervene to increase housing supply.

6.      Climate and disaster vulnerability. Bhutan is highly vulnerable to climate change and
natural hazards.8 Flooding is considered the most significant climate-related hazard affecting the
built environment. The country is also exposed to other hazards such as earthquakes, glacial lake
outburst floods, forest fires, and landslides. Making housing and infrastructure more resilient to
the impacts of climate and disaster events is essential to protect the urban population, especially
the vulnerable communities.

7.       Government policy. Bhutan’s Twelfth Five Year Plan, 2018–2023 prioritizes the
government’s strategic thrust for economic stability, economic diversification, poverty reduction,
and affordable housing provision (footnote 1). The government approved the National Housing
Policy (NHP) in 2020. The NHP vision is “housing for all” and the policy objectives are (i) providing
safe, affordable, and adequate rental housing for all; (ii) promoting home ownership; (iii)
encouraging public-private partnerships (PPP) to provide affordable housing; (iv) establishing a
robust governance system; and (v) promoting green and energy-efficient housing. 9 The NHP
establishes an enabling environment for government to unlock housing challenges faced by the
private sector, by committing to reforms to streamline the land use zoning to increase supply, and
strengthening housing financing systems by the banking and non-banking sector, coupled with
fiscal incentives to make housing finance more attractive and providing access to land. The
government’s public housing program intends to supply 2,500 affordable housing units in a
phased manner, of which 1,000 are proposed to be built under this project. PPP arrangements

5 Government of Bhutan, NSB. 2017. Bhutan Living Standards Survey Report 2017. Thimphu.
6 Government of Bhutan, NSB. 2017. Bhutan Poverty Analysis Report 2017. Thimphu.
7 Government of Bhutan, Royal Monetary Authority. 2019. Annual Report 2019. Thimphu; and Government of Bhutan,

  Royal Monetary Authority. 2018. Annual Report 2018. Thimphu.
8
  Climate and Disaster Risk Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
9 Government of Bhutan, Ministry of Works and Human Settlements (MOWHS). 2020. Long-Term Strategy for Housing.

  Thimphu.
                                                                                                                3


for increasing housing stock is needed for mass affordable housing development.

8.      The Ministry of Works and Human Settlements (MOWHS) represents the government in
human settlement matters and is responsible for housing policies and preparing urban planning
strategies. The NHDCL, a state-owned enterprise, is focused on providing and maintaining public
housing. NHDCL units are leased at below market rates, and more than half of them are leased
to lower-income households. Of its 2,496 units, civil servants account for 84% of tenancies, while
non-civil servants account for 15%. Only 1% of NHDCL units are owner-occupied. A preliminary
assessment of the NHDCL indicates that it operated successfully from 2015 to 2019, averaging
annual growth of 9.9% in rental revenue, 15.9% in profit after tax, and 8.5% in its asset base. The
government has tasked NHDCL to increase supply of affordable housing in coordination with the
National Land Commission, which is responsible for management and allocation of land, and the
National Pension and Provident Fund (NPPF), which has investment portfolio in housing lending.

9.       ADB intervention in the sector. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has adopted a
holistic, long-term approach to the “housing crunch” in Bhutan.10 Upstream analyses paved the
way for a policy-based loan (PBL) to develop financial markets using a programmatic approach.11
Subprogram 1 of the PBL, approved in 2019 for the Financial Market Development Program,
focused on reforms to enhance the efficiency, stability, and inclusiveness of the finance sector
and supported updating the NHP. In October 2020, ADB approved subprogram 2 of the PBL to
support the development of a housing finance strategy to address housing supply issues,
including fiscal measures (including incentives to suppliers) and gender-based actions to improve
women’s access to finance (footnote 11). Subprogram 3 of the PBL, approved in October 2021,
will support a housing survey across urban areas, implementation of housing financing schemes,
and developing plans for affordable housing. Complemented by reforms tied to the PBL, this
project will support government efforts to increase housing supply and improve sector
performance by better targeting of the NHDCL’s affordable housing to the lowest income earners
while incorporating climate- and disaster-resilient building designs and innovative construction
methods; and strengthening MOWHS’s housing management information system to measure and
monitor demand and supply-side bottlenecks in the sector. The government has indicated its
intention to approach ADB for additional financing to expand affordable housing to cover an
additional 5% of the shortage (para. 4). Additional financing will be based on satisfactory
performance and lessons from the project implementation. ADB will coordinate with development
partners—the World Bank and the Japan International Cooperation Agency—that are providing
assistance for urban development, and climate change and disaster risk reduction.

10.     The following lessons are incorporated in the project design: (i) TA support is needed to
achieve sector reforms; (ii) strengthening of the implementing agency’s capacity will ensure
financial sustainability, adequate operation and maintenance (O&M), and improved asset
management; and (iii) a viable business model will be developed.12

10 ADB. 2017. Asian Development Outlook 2017: Transcending the Middle-Income Challenge. Manila.
11 ADB.   2019. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Programmatic
   Approach and Policy-Based Loan for Subprogram 1 and Technical Assistance Grant to the Kingdom of Bhutan for
   the Financial Market Development Program. Manila; ADB. 2020. Report and Recommendation of the President to
   the Board of Directors: Proposed Policy-Based Loan for Subprogram 2 and Technical Assistance Grant to the
   Kingdom of Bhutan for the Financial Market Development Program. Manila; and ADB. 2021. Report and
   Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Policy-Based Loan for Subprogram 3 to the
   Kingdom of Bhutan for the Financial Market Development Program. Manila.
12 Independent Evaluation Department. 2018. Validation Report: Urban Infrastructure Development Project in Bhutan.

   Manila: ADB; Independent Evaluation Department. 2018. Performance Evaluation Report: Housing for Integrated
   Rural Development Investment Program (Tranches 1, 2, and 3) in Uzbekistan. Manila: ADB; Independent Evaluation
4



11.      Sector lending modality. The project meets sector lending requirements as (i) the
government has an NHP and implementation program, which provide a framework for sector
investments; (ii) the NHDCL has the capacity to implement the sector development plans; and (iii)
the existing policies are appropriate, and assistance provided under the project will support their
implementation. The government has identified affordable rental housing subprojects, which are
at different stages of readiness, so the sector approach adds flexibility and is suitable. Additional
subprojects will be guided by detailed eligibility criteria agreed with the government.13

12.     Alignment with ADB strategic priorities. The project is consistent with (i) pillar 3 of
ADB’s country partnership strategy for Bhutan, 2019–2023 on more inclusive and equitable
socioeconomic development; and (ii) ADB’s Strategy 2030, as it supports five of the seven
operational priorities. 14 The project aligns with Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1 (no
poverty), SDG 5 (gender equality), SDG 11 (sustainable cities), and SDG 13 (climate action).15 It
is also aligned with ADB’s housing strategy.16

13.     Coronavirus disease. Bhutan achieved a remarkable reduction in poverty incidence from
31.7% in 2003 to 8.2% in 2017, but the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is deepening
preexisting vulnerability.17 ADB estimates that COVID-19 has put about 23,000 jobs at risk. The
project provides a direct boost to construction activity and support in the form of job generation,
while increasing the supply of housing for vulnerable, displaced people living in border towns
heavily affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.

B.       Project Description

14.    The project is aligned with the following impact: livability, safety, and sustainability of
human settlements ensured (footnote 1). The project will have the following outcome: access to
green and resilient affordable housing for low-income households improved.18

15.     Output 1: Climate- and disaster-resilient, energy-efficient, and affordable housing
units and public facilities for low-income households constructed.19 Output 1 will support
the NHDCL in building about 1,000 rental units, three integrated community service centers, and
two recycled waste stations connected to services, in support of SDG 1. The government selected
high-priority investments as subprojects. 20 The increase in the supply of affordable rental housing
is expected to immediately relieve the housing shortage and benefit lower-income civil servants
(about 10%) and non-civil servants (about 90%), including marginalized municipal waste workers.

   Department. 2013. Validation Report: Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Sector Project in Indonesia. Manila:
   ADB.
13 Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
14 ADB. 2019. Country Partnership Strategy Bhutan, 2019–2023—Fostering Diversification and Reducing Disparities.

   Manila; and ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient and Sustainable Asia and the
   Pacific. Manila. The project contributes to key operational priorities of ADB’s Strategy 2030, including (i) addressing
   remaining poverty and reducing inequalities; (ii) accelerating progress in gender equality; (iii) tackling climate change,
   building climate and disaster resilience, and enhancing environmental sustainability; (iv) making cities more livable;
   and (v) strengthening governance and institutional capacity.
15 United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals (accessed 16 October 2021).
16 ADB. Forthcoming. Guidance for ADB’s Housing Strategy. Manila.
17 United Nations. 2020. Policy Brief: The Impact of COVID-19 on Women. New York.
18 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
19 Resilient housing design incorporates climate change and disaster risk-reduction measures to avoid, minimize,

   and/or recover from a disaster in a timely and efficient manner.
20 Priority subprojects are located in Nganglam; Phuentsholing (Amochu, Rinchending and Drungpa’s Residence);

   Samtse (Tading); Samdrup Jongkhar (Dradulthang and Toed); Thimphu (Semtoka); and Trashiyangtse.
                                                                                                                   5


The NHDCL will select beneficiaries most in need by applying beneficiary eligibility and selection
criteria, with gender equality considered as part of the eligibility criteria as defined in the PAM
(footnote 13). The building designs incorporate gender-inclusive features; enhanced safety
against earthquake and fire hazards; and resource efficiency, making greater use of locally
available materials. 21 The building structures will employ reinforced-concrete frames and
innovative pre-engineered structures. The project design has identified and incorporated climate
and disaster resilience features, considering multiple hazards. The project will support green
building certification through the International Finance Corporation’s Excellence in Design for
Greater Efficiencies (EDGE) certification program.22 The housing designs reflect local cultural
heritage values and traditional architecture. 23 Additional subprojects will be selected during
project implementation in line with the NHP using the eligibility criteria set out in the project
administration manual (PAM) (footnote 13).

16.     Output 2: Institutional capacities, policy, and regulatory framework of the housing
sector strengthened. This output will (i) strengthen the NHDCL’s housing design, construction,
and management capacity—informed by climate and disaster risks and affordability
considerations; (ii) review the building code and regulations; (iii) develop climate- and disaster-
resilient building designs and related solutions to improve safety, resource efficiency, and gender
and disability inclusiveness; (iv) conduct awareness training and a capacity building program for
key project stakeholders on climate- and disaster-resilient design and the building code; (v)
enhance the NHDCL’s business model, strengthening its O&M capacity, and developing
partnerships with the private sector; (vi) strengthen the housing management information system
of the MOWHS by expanding it to include tenancy data and better understand and prepare
evidence-informed policy updates to address demand and supply-side bottlenecks in the sector;
(vii) develop a gender and socially inclusive national homeownership strategy, including a rent-
to-own mechanism; and (viii) provide project implementation support, including supervision, and
set up a safeguard unit in the NHDCL.

C.       Value Added by ADB

17.     ADB assistance will add value by enhancing the NHDCL’s institutional capacity to (i)
implement innovative affordable housing designs that incorporate (a) gender-inclusive features;
(b) anti-seismic building structures; (c) pre-engineered building construction methodology, which
is versatile and reduces construction time; and (d) resource efficiency, making the housing design
greener and more resilient (necessary for green building certification); (ii) support low-income
households in accessing affordable rental housing through better targeted NHDCL units and more
publicly available information on tenancy data; and (iii) establish a detailed registry for the
NHDCL’s housing asset management for improved efficiency in maintenance programs.
Affordability is addressed by providing a choice of units and applying pro-poor beneficiary
selection criteria. ADB’s value addition also includes a review of the national building code and
improved land management; incorporates climate change, disaster risk reduction, gender
inclusiveness, and energy efficiency considerations; and encourages the use of greener
construction techniques to achieve green building certification. ADB’s sustained interventions in
the sector target issues affecting the housing value chain. In addition, ADB support will develop

21  The gender-inclusive considerations include a preference for households headed by women and tenancy
   agreements signed by both spouses. In addition, the service centers will include childcare facilities, shelter for
   women, and offers employment opportunities. The green features include insulated walls, improved windows, use of
   timber and stone, and water-efficient faucets.
22
   EDGE. The Green Business Certification Inc. TM (GBCI) is an independent international company that administers
   the EDGE certification program. The GBCI reviews EDGE proposals and issues EDGE certificates.
23 Government of Bhutan, MOWHS. 2014. Bhutanese Architectural Guidelines. Thimphu.
6


a national homeownership strategy, and a PPP guideline based on improved monitoring of sector
bottlenecks. The $6 million Asian Development Fund (ADF) 13 Thematic Pool grant will (i) support
incremental costs associated with geophysical hazards and capacity building, and (ii) enable the
NHDCL to deepen the gender impact by introducing gender-sensitive features in support of SDG
5.

D.       Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan

18.   The project is estimated to cost $37.0 million (Table 1). Detailed cost estimates by
expenditure category and by financier are included in the PAM (footnote 13).

                                    Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates
                                                ($ million)
 Item                                                                                                  Amounta
A.       Base Costb
         1. Climate- and disaster-resilient, energy-efficient, and affordable housing units
            and public facilities for low-income households constructed                                   30.5
         2. Institutional capacities, policy, and regulatory framework of the housing
            sector strengthened                                                                            3.1
                  Subtotal (A)                                                                            33.7
B.      Contingenciesc                                                                                     2.9
C.      Financial Charges During Implementation                                                            0.4
                           Total (A+B+C)                                                                  37.0
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.
a
  Includes $0.9 million in taxes and duties. Such an amount does not represent an excessive share of the project cost.
  The National Housing Development Corporation Limited will finance taxes and duties of $0.9 million in the form of
  cash contribution.
b
  In mid-2021 prices as of the end of August 2021. Exchange rate of $1 = Nu74.5 is used.
c
  Physical and price contingencies are computed at 5.0% for civil works and equipment. Price contingencies are
  computed at 1.6%–1.8% for foreign exchange costs and 5.3%–6.4% for local currency costs and include provision
  for potential exchange rate fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

19.     The government has requested a concessional loan of $24 million from ADB’s ordinary
capital resources, and a grant not exceeding $6 million from ADB’s Special Funds resources
(ADF) to help finance the project. The loan will have a 32-year term, including a grace period of
8 years; an interest rate of 1.0% per year during the grace period and 1.5% thereafter; and such
other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan and project agreements. The Ministry of
Finance (MOF) has indicated that (i) ADB’s concessional loan of $24 million will be relent to the
NHDCL through a subsidiary loan agreement with the same terms and conditions as the ADB
loan, but with the NHDCL bearing the foreign exchange risk; (ii) the ADF grant of $6 million will
be passed on as a grant to the NHDCL; and (iii) $7 million in counterpart funding will come from
a loan to the NHDCL from the NPPF, backed by a government guarantee. The NPPF loan will
have a 22-year loan period, including a grace period of 2 years, and an interest rate of 7.15% per
year.

20.     The summary financing plan is in Table 2. The loan and grant will finance expenditures in
relation to (i) part of the civil works and equipment, and (ii) consulting services. Counterpart funds,
provided through NHDCL, will finance expenditures on civil works, land acquisition and
resettlement, consulting services, incremental administration expenses, contingencies, financing
charges, and taxes. A project grant from the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction (JFPR) is being
processed as cofinancing to improve disaster and climate resilience for low-income households
in Bhutan, subject to the approval of the Government of Japan. A JFPR grant proposal would
                                                                                                              7


finance improved anti-seismic building standards in Bhutan, pilot-test housing with sanitation and
energy-efficient technology, and provide capacity building for enhancing the required technical
skills and develop the self-help capacities of the poor based on needs assessment. The JFPR
grant cofinancing equivalent to $3 million will be administered by ADB.

                                 Table 2: Summary Financing Plan
                                                                           Amount            Share of Total
Source                                                                    ($ million)             (%)
Asian Development Bank
    Ordinary capital resources (concessional loan)                            24.0                 64.9
    Special Funds resources (ADF grant)                                        6.0                 16.2
National Housing Development Corporation Limited                               7.0                 18.9
                             Total                                            37.0                100.0
ADF = Asian Development Fund.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

21.      Climate mitigation is estimated to cost $7.2 million and climate adaptation is estimated to
cost $4.8 million. ADB will finance 100% of mitigation and adaptation costs. Mitigation activities
include installing light emitting diode lighting and use of locally available building materials.
Adaptation activities include constructing flood protection structures, retaining walls, and
institutional strengthening. The cost of disaster risk reduction measures to boost the project’s
disaster resilience is $10.4 million, of which $2.0 million will be sourced from the ADF grant.

E.      Implementation Arrangements

22.   Implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in the
PAM (footnote 13).

                              Table 3: Implementation Arrangements
Aspects                                                        Arrangements
Implementation period                       December 2021–December 2027
Estimated completion date                   31 December 2027
Estimated loan and grant closing date       30 June 2028
Management
  (i) Oversight body                        Project steering committee: Ministry of Finance (chair), Ministry
                                            of Works and Human Settlements, National Land Commission,
                                            Gross National Happiness Commission, National Commission
                                            for Women and Children, National Housing Development
                                            Corporation Limited, and representatives of the subprojects
                                            (members)
 (ii) Executing agency                      Ministry of Finance
 (iii) Key implementing agency              National Housing Development Corporation Limited
 (iv) Implementation units                  Project management unit: Thimphu, 14 staff. Project
                                            implementation units: Phuentsholing, 13 staff; Trashiyangtse, 4
                                            staff; Samdrup Jongkhar, 9 staff; and Nganglam, 4 staff.
Procurement                                 Open competitive        1 contract             $10.40 million
                                            bidding (international
                                            advertising) (3 lots)
                                            Open competitive        8 contracts            $8.34 million
                                            bidding (national
                                            advertising)
Consulting services                         Quality- and cost-      216 person-months $2.81 million
                                            based selection         13 person-services $0.04 million
 8


Aspects                                                                   Arrangements
                                                 (90:10) (2 contracts)
                                                 Cost-based selection 61 person-months          $0.30 million
Retroactive financing and/or advance             Advance contracting and retroactive financing will be considered
contracting                                      for eligible expenditures for civil works and consulting services
                                                 not exceeding 20% of the loan and grant amounts incurred prior
                                                 to effectiveness, but not earlier than 12 months before the loan
                                                 and grant agreements are signed.
Disbursement                                     Disbursement of the loan and grant proceeds will follow the Asian
                                                 Development Bank’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as
                                                 amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements agreed
                                                 between the government and Asian Development Bank.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

                               III.      ATTACHED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

 23.     The project will include an attached TA estimated to cost $1.1 million, of which $1.0 million
 will be financed on a grant basis by ADB’s Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF–7). The
 government will provide counterpart support in the form of counterpart staff, office space for
 consultants, access to information for consultants, and other in-kind contributions. The TA
 objectives are to (i) strengthen the NHP and review land availability, land management, and land
 use planning; (ii) mainstream resilience considerations in the housing development process, and
 promote the use of innovative construction technology and practices; (iii) establish an
 interoperable housing management information system; and (iv) provide technical support to the
 NHDCL on the projects’ safeguard compliance. 24 Specifically, the TA will provide technical
 advisory support services to the NHDCL (i) to review and update its allotment rules to ensure
 consistency with the NHP, and (ii) to monitor costs and target the uptake of new rental housing
 by low-income groups. It will also assist the NHDCL in monitoring and reporting on the
 achievement of the project design and monitoring framework indicators, in addition to ensuring
 that the project safeguards are effectively managed. The TA will also support the MOWHS in
 reducing the regulatory, land, and financing barriers for mobilizing private sector resources for
 increasing housing stock that are beyond the remit of the NHDCL.25

                                               IV.      DUE DILIGENCE

 A.       Technical

 24.    The sector loan modality requires the appraisal of a typology of subprojects that serve as
 a sample for future subprojects.26 The specifications applied to affordable housing will match
 green building principles such as the reduced use of energy, water, and embodied energy;
 disaster-resilient design; resource conservation; and the use of energy-efficient practices.

 B.       Economic and Financial Viability

 25.     The economic rationale for the intervention is sound—focused on inclusiveness, resilience,
 and affordability. The economic analysis evaluated the project’s viability in terms of subprojects
 for which detailed engineering designs have been completed. The estimated economic internal

 24  The project is benefiting from technical assistance provided through: ADB. 2020. Technical Assistance for
    Implementing the Cities Development Initiative for Asia. Manila; and ADB. 2020. Technical Assistance for Support
    to the Implementation of Strategy 2030 Operational Plans. Manila.
 25 Attached Technical Assistance Report (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
 26 About $14 million of the loan is not fully scoped and subprojects may be added subject to satisfying eligibility criteria.
                                                                                                                      9


rates of return is 9.2%, which is higher than the economic opportunity cost of capital of 6%,
indicating significant economic return. 27 The project’s economic viability is even higher if
unquantifiable benefits such as environmental improvements are included in the analysis. Asset
construction under this project and capacity building in the NHDCL will benefit about 1,000
households. The estimated poverty impact ratio is 24.4%, and since 8.2% of households in
Bhutan live below the poverty line, the project is expected to benefit the poor.28

C.       Sustainability

26.     The project team conducted financial analysis following ADB guidelines, assessing both
the project and the NHDCL as the operating entity. Rental revenue is the major source of revenue
for the NHDCL. In fiscal year 2019, rent provided 75% of NHDCL revenue. For the project, the
NHDCL is proposing to charge rental rates similar to those in an affordable housing project in
Phuentsholing. The NHDCL spends about 20% of its rental revenue on O&M. Rental revenues,
projected to grow by 10% every 2 years, can cover debt service as well as O&M costs in most
years. In the case of a shortfall in debt servicing caused by either unexpectedly high O&M costs,
lower rental recovery, or depreciation of the ngultrum against the United States dollar, the MOF
has assured ADB that the NHDCL will be able to service the debt. The financial sustainability risk
is moderate. ADB will provide sector advice, capacity building to enhance the NHDCL’s financial
performance.

27.     Affordability is crucial for ensuring the sustainability of the project. The project
beneficiaries currently pay rents equal to 20.7%–41.0% of their household income for homes
averaging 69 square meters.29 Under the project, the proposed rent for a unit averaging 69 square
meters with better services is significantly less, at 16.3%–29.1% of household income. The market
rent for comparable houses is between 35%–44% of household income.30

D.       Governance

28.     Financial management. The financial management assessment followed ADB
guidelines.31 The assessed pre-mitigation financial management risk is substantial because (i)
the NHDCL lacks experience in implementing externally financed projects, (ii) two accounts staff
positions are vacant, and (iii) the statutory auditor has identified internal control weaknesses.
These risks will be mitigated by (i) filling the vacant accounting staff positions and engaging a
financial management expert to support the project; (ii) providing training on ADB financial
management requirements, and disbursement procedures and systems; (iii) including
comprehensive financial information in the quarterly progress reports; and (iv) addressing pending
audit observations. Moreover, an independent auditor acceptable to ADB will audit the project
financial statements annually using auditing standards acceptable to ADB. A financial
management action plan is described in detail in the PAM (footnote 13).

29.   Procurement. The procurement of works and the recruitment of consultants will follow the
ADB Procurement Policy (2017, as amended from time to time) and Procurement Regulations for

27 A 6% threshold for the economic opportunity cost of capital is applicable for social sector projects under ADB. 2017.

   Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects. Manila. Since this project aims to provide affordable housing to
   low-income households and sanitary workers, it qualifies for this lower threshold of 6%.
28 Social, Poverty, and Gender Analysis (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2); and ADB. Poverty

   Data: Bhutan.
29
   ADB. 2021. Baseline Socio-economic Survey Report. Consultant’s report. Manila (TA 9781-REG).
30 Based on a market research survey, the monthly rent for a two-bedroom unit is Nu10,000–Nu11,000 in project areas.
31 ADB. 2015. Financial Management Technical Guidance Note: Financial Management Assessment. Manila.
10


ADB Borrowers (2017, as amended from time to time). An assessment of the project procurement
capacity risk concluded that the overall procurement risk is moderate. Mitigation measures include
recruiting the project implementation consultant through advance contracting and building
capacity in the NHDCL on the ADB Procurement Policy and Procurement Regulations for ADB
Borrowers. The project will enhance value for money through the strategic packaging of multistory
buildings into (i) the construction of reinforced-concrete buildings and pre-site preparation,
procured through the local market; and (ii) pre-engineered buildings, procured by bundling
packages suitable for the international market.

30.    Anticorruption. ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained
to and discussed with the government and the NHDCL. Integrity due diligence was conducted.
No significant integrity risks were identified. The specific policy requirements and supplementary
measures are described in the PAM (footnote 13).

E.      Poverty, Social, and Gender

31.     The project team conducted meaningful consultations with targeted communities. The
national poverty line in 2017 was Nu2,195.95 per capita per month. By this measure, the
percentage of people living in poverty fell from 12.0% in 2012 to 8.2% in 2017. In 2021, the poor
(based on income criteria) constitute 4.4% of the target population. The average poor household
has 4.9 members compared with 3.0 members in non-poor families. About 75.0% of the houses
of poor families are temporary shelters, a fifth of which do not have piped water supply (footnote
5). Consultations with the targeted beneficiaries will continue during implementation.

32.      The project is categorized effective gender mainstreaming. Women comprise 39% of the
civil servants in Bhutan.32 Households headed by women comprise 27% of the target population
(footnote 31). The lack of affordable housing affects women as they are generally responsible for
household management. A gender equality and social inclusion action plan will address these
matters, including (i) at least 30% of housing tenure allotted to households headed by women; (ii)
three integrated service centers established to deliver services to women and children, including
a shelter for victims of gender violence, and a daycare and counseling facility benefiting at least
700 female household members; (iii) two women’s self-help groups established for recycled waste
livelihoods; (iv) capacity building on gender mainstreaming; and (v) gender-sensitive policies. The
NHDCL will engage a civil society organization to implement gender equality solutions.

F.      Safeguards

33.    In compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the project’s safeguard
categories are as follows.33

34.     Environment (category B). An environmental assessment and review framework was
prepared and disclosed following ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement and applicable government
regulations; and will guide assessments of additional subprojects on site selection, screening and
categorization, information disclosure and consultation, impact assessment and environmental
management planning, institutional arrangements, grievance redress, monitoring, and reporting.
The project will not consider any category A subprojects with significant adverse, irreversible, or
unprecedented impacts. Initial environmental examinations and environment management plans

32
   Government of Bhutan, Royal Civil Service Commission. 2020. Annual Report (April 2019–June 2020): State of the
   Royal Civil Service. Thimphu.
33 ADB. Safeguard Categories.
                                                                                                             11


for five sample subprojects are disclosed and included in the bidding documents.34 Sample initial
environmental examinations confirm no significant impacts. Potential impacts are mostly short-
term, localized, and related to construction. The project management unit (PMU) and project
implementation units will have environmental safeguard officers and site engineers, assisted by
a project implementation assistance consultant, to manage safeguard requirements. The PMU
will submit environmental monitoring reports semiannually during project implementation.

35.     Involuntary resettlement (category B). The NHDCL prepared a resettlement framework,
draft resettlement plans for the subprojects in Thimphu and Phuentsholing, and a draft due
diligence report for Trashiyangtse following ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement. The project will
not consider any subproject with significant involuntary resettlement impacts. The government
land required for the sample subprojects is 4.5 hectares. The sample subprojects will affect 18
households with 65 members, through physical displacement and/or loss of livelihoods; and four
households with 19 members, through loss of minor structures and/or trees. One vulnerable
household with two members is among the affected persons. Proposed mitigation measures and
safeguard documents for subprojects are adequate to address the assessed impacts. Safeguard
documents will be updated following the final design. The resettlement framework will guide the
preparation of resettlement planning documents for additional subprojects. ADB has disclosed
the resettlement framework and resettlement plans. The government will disclose relevant
information from the documents in the local language to the affected people. The NHDCL will
ensure that the resettlement plans are included in the bidding documents. The PMU will prepare
semiannual social safeguard monitoring reports for ADB’s review and disclosure. The NHDCL will
establish a grievance redress mechanism and disclose it to project beneficiaries and affected
communities before works are awarded. Since this is the NHDCL’s first ADB-funded project, a
capacity building program on ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement social safeguards execution,
and monitoring and evaluation is planned. A social safeguard officer in the PMU will manage the
implementation of social safeguards, assisted by a project implementation assistance consultant.
The project engineer, site engineers, and contractors will implement the social safeguards
requirements in the resettlement plans, and regularly provide project implementation reporting.

36.    Indigenous peoples (category C). No project impacts are expected on indigenous
peoples or indigenous communities, as described in ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement, and no
plans are required.

G.      Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan

37.      Significant risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 4 and described in
detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan.35

                       Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
Risks                                                                  Mitigation Measures
Financial    management        risk:   (i)   the    Mitigation measures include (i) filling the vacant accounts
implementing agency lacks experience in             staff positions and engaging a financial management
implementing projects financed by ADB or            expert to support the project, (ii) providing training on
other multilateral development banks, (ii) the      ADB’s financial management requirements and
positions of an accounts officer and                disbursement procedures, (iii) including comprehensive
accountant are still vacant, and (iii) the          financial information in quarterly progress reports, and (iv)
statutory auditor has identified internal control   addressing pending audit observations.
weaknesses to be addressed.

34 Thimphu; Trashiyangtse; and Amochu, Rinchending, and Drungpa’s Residence in Phuentsholing.
35 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
 12


Risks                                                                 Mitigation Measures
The project has not been approved yet as part     The project is to be included in the FY2022 budget under
of the national budget, which may delay the       a separate budget code for timely release of funds for
implementation.                                   effective project implementation.
The NHDCL has limited understanding of            Project implementation assistance consultant services
ADB’s new procurement framework, including        include an international procurement specialist to provide
contract management and administration.           transaction support and capacity building.
The NHDCL rental revenue may experience           NHDCL’s other sources of income include consultancy
shortfalls.                                       fees, investments, and transfers from the government.
                                                  ADB will provide capacity building and policy advice to
                                                  enhance NHDCL’s financial performance.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, FY = fiscal year, NHDCL = National Housing Development Corporation Limited.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                            V.    ASSURANCES

 38.     The government and the NHDCL have assured ADB that project implementation of the
 project shall conform to all applicable ADB requirements, including those concerning
 anticorruption measures, safeguards, gender, procurement, consulting services, financial
 management, and disbursement as described in detail in the PAM and loan and grant documents.

 39.   The following conditions will be satisfied before the disbursement of the loan and grant
 proceeds:
         (i)  a financing agreement will be entered into between the NPPF and the NHDCL to
              ensure counterpart funding and will become legally binding upon each of the
              parties thereto in accordance with its terms, and a government guarantee will be
              issued by the MOF to the NPPF and becomes effective and legally binding in
              accordance with its terms; and
         (ii) a subsidiary loan agreement will be entered into between the government and the
              NHDCL for relending the loan proceeds upon terms and conditions satisfactory to
              ADB.

                                      VI.        RECOMMENDATION

 40.   I am satisfied that the proposed loan and grant would comply with the Articles of
 Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve:
         (i)   the loan of $24,000,000 to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Green and Resilient
               Affordable Housing Sector Project, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in
               concessional terms, with an interest charge at the rate of 1.0% per year during the
               grace period and 1.5% per year thereafter; for a term of 32 years, including a grace
               period of 8 years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in
               accordance with those set forth in the draft loan and project agreements presented
               to the Board; and
         (ii) the grant not exceeding $6,000,000 to the Kingdom of Bhutan, from ADB’s Special
               Funds resources (Asian Development Fund) for the Green and Resilient Affordable
               Housing Sector Project on terms and conditions that are substantially in
               accordance with those set forth in the draft grant and project agreements presented
               to the Board.

                                                                           Masatsugu Asakawa
                                                                           President
 11 November 2021
                                                                                          Appendix 1       13


                            DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK
Impact the Project is Aligned with
Livability, safety, and sustainability of human settlements ensured (Twelfth Five Year Plan, priority to
achieve a harmonious society)a
                                                           Data Sources and                 Risks and
Results Chain             Performance Indicators         Reporting Mechanisms         Critical Assumptions
Outcome                 By 2028
Access to green and     a. At least 95% of civil         a.–d. Project M&E,          R: Vulnerability to
resilient affordable    servant and private sector       annual reports of the       COVID-19 pandemic
housing for low-        low-income households            NHDCL and the               impact and continued
income households       occupying the housing units      MOWHS, and TA               restrictions on the value
improved                pay no more than 30% of          reports                     chain for goods and
                        their disposable income on                                   services
                        rent (2021 baseline: 48% for
                        civil servants and 21% for
                        private sector low-income
                        households) (OP 4.1)
                        b. At least 80% occupancy
                        rate in completed housing
                        units (2021 baseline: 0) (OP
                        4.1)
                        c. At least 95% of housing
                        units with 20% less energy
                        and water consumption
                        (2021 baseline: 0) b (OP 4.1)
                        d. At least 700 households
                        benefit from services
                        provided by the newly
                        constructed integrated
                        community service centers
                        (2021 baseline: 0) (OP 4.1)
Outputs                 By 2027
1. Climate- and         1a. 1,000 adequate,              1a.–f. Project M&E,         A: Continued
disaster-resilient,     affordable, and resilient        annual reports of the       government
energy-efficient, and   housing units constructed        NHDCL and the               commitment to
affordable housing      and 30% of the housing           MOWHS, and TA               expanding affordable
units and public        tenure allotted to women         reports                     housing supply and
facilities for low-     (2021 baseline 0 units, 0                                    improving
income households       women) (OP 4.1.2)                                            neighborhoods within
constructedc            1b. Three integrated service                                 the project
                        centers with gender-                                         implementation period.
                        inclusive features                                           A: Government
                        constructed (2021 baseline:                                  committed to applying
                        0)d (OP 2.5.2)                                               green building
                        1c. At least 95% of the                                      guidelines
                        residential buildings                                        R. COVID-19 pandemic
                        constructed comply with                                      containment measures
                        green guidelines and EDGE                                    including national and
                        certification and are                                        local lockdowns,
                        equipped with energy-                                        adversely impact
                        efficient insulation, metering                               project progress
                        devices, water pumps, and
14       Appendix 1


                                                       Data Sources and             Risks and
Results Chain           Performance Indicators       Reporting Mechanisms     Critical Assumptions
                      heating systems (2021
                      baseline: 0)e (OP 3.2.5)
                      1d. Two recycled waste
                      stations with gender-
                      inclusive features
                      constructed (2021 baseline:
                      0)d (OP 2.5.2)
                      1e. At least two SHGs with
                      operational by-laws in
                      recycled waste livelihoods
                      established (2021 baseline:
                      0) (OP 4.2.1)
                      1f. At least 80% of SHG
                      members (of whom 75% are
                      women) have increased
                      knowledge of waste
                      management, business, and
                      financial skills (2021
                      baseline: 0) (OP 2.1.1)
2. Institutional      2a. By 2022, project           2a.–g. Project M&E and
capacities, policy,   performance and                annual reports of the
and regulatory        management system              NHDCL and the
framework of the      established to ensure          MOWHS, cabinet
housing sector        generation of sex-             resolutions, and TA
strengthened          disaggregated data (2021       reports
                      baseline: Not established)
                      2b. By 2024, 81 staff of the
                      NHDCL, PMU, and PIUs
                      report improved knowledge
                      and skills in operation and
                      maintenance and asset
                      management of affordable
                      housing facilities, of whom
                      at least 25% are women
                      (2021 baseline: 0) (OP
                      6.1.1, OP 2.1.1)
                      2c. By 2024, building code
                      and guideline that
                      incorporate climate change,
                      disaster risk reduction,
                      gender inclusiveness, and
                      energy efficiency completed
                      and submitted to the
                      MOWHS (2021 baseline:
                      Not applicable) e (OP 4.3.1)
                      2d. By 2024, the MOWHS’
                      housing management
                      information system is
                      upgraded with links to
                      tenancy services and
                      interoperable with the
                      NHDCL asset management
                                                                                          Appendix 1       15


                                                           Data Sources and                 Risks and
Results Chain             Performance Indicators         Reporting Mechanisms         Critical Assumptions
                        system (to be established)
                        (2021 baseline: Not
                        applicable) (OP 4.2.1)
                        2e. By 2024, improved land
                        management capacity and
                        strategy for land assembly
                        completed, including options
                        for urban land pooling and
                        land banking for similar
                        future affordable housing
                        projects (2021 baseline: Not
                        applicable) (OP 4.2.1)
                        2f. By 2024, business model
                        and public–private
                        partnership guidelines for
                        future sector investment
                        completed (2021 baseline:
                        Not applicable) (OP 4.2.1)
                        2g. By 2024, strategy for
                        gender-inclusive
                        homeownership is finalized
                        (2021 baseline: Draft
                        available) f (OP 4.2.1)
Key Activities with Milestones
1. Climate- and disaster-resilient, energy-efficient, and affordable housing units and public
facilities for low-income households constructed
1.1 Complete detailed designs for core subproject (Q1 2021–Q4 2022)
1.2 Construct 1,000 affordable housing units (Q1 2022–Q4 2027)
1.3 Identify and process candidate subprojects and works (Q1 2022–Q4 2024)
1.4 Establish integrated community service centers and waste recycling facilities (Q1 2022–Q4 2027)
1.5 Establish women’s SHGs for livelihoods from waste recycling (Q1 2022–Q4 2025)
2. Institutional capacities, policy, and regulatory framework of the housing sector strengthened
2.1 Implement capacity development program (Q1 2021–Q4 2024)
2.2 Develop business model and prepare draft public–private partnership guidelines for future sector
investments (Q1 2022–Q4 2024)
2.3 Prepare NHDCL business plan (Q1 2022–Q4 2024)
2.4 Draft and finalize engineering guidelines for the practice of climate resilience, disaster risk reduction,
energy efficiency and gender-inclusivity in affordable housing construction (Q1 2022–Q4 2024)
2.5 Review the national building code and related guidelines to include climate change, disaster risk
reduction, gender inclusiveness and energy efficiency (Q1 2022–Q4 2023)
2.6 Establish a homeownership strategy and options by providing gender-inclusive alternative finance and
occupancy models (Q1 2022–Q4 2023)
2.7 Strengthen the MOWHS housing management information system (Q1 2022–Q4 2023)
2.8 Provide project implementation services (Q1 2022–Q4 2027)
Project Management Activities
Establishing the PMU and PIUs
Procuring works
Hiring of the project implementation assistance consultant
Reporting, monitoring and evaluation (including surveys)
Accounting and auditing
Inputs
ADB:         $24.0 million (loan: concessional ordinary capital resources)
 16       Appendix 1


       $6.0 million (grant: Asian Development Fund)
       $1.0 million (TA grant: TASF-7)
NHDCL: $7.0 million
A = assumption, ADB = Asian Development Bank, COVID-19 = coronavirus disease, EDGE = Excellence in Design and
Greater Efficiencies, M&E = monitoring and evaluation, MOWHS = Ministry of Works and Human Settlement, NHDCL =
National Housing Development Corporation Limited, OP = operational priority, PIU = project implementation unit, PMU
= project management unit, Q = quarter, R = risk, SHG = self-help group, TA = technical assistance, TASF = Technical
Assistance Special Fund.
a Government of Bhutan, Gross National Happiness Commission. 2019. Twelfth Five Year Plan, 2018–2023: Just,

   Harmonious and Sustainable Society through Enhanced Decentralisation. Thimphu.
b Baseline data will be determined during the first year of implementation to determine energy and water consumption

   patterns of tenants who reside in equivalent size NHDCL buildings.
c Affordable housing is defined as medium- and low-income households meeting housing costs, either rent or mortgage

   payments, with 30% of gross monthly income or less. Resilient housing is designed to incorporate climate change
   and disaster risk reduction measures to avoid, minimize and/or recover from disasters in a timely and efficient manner.
d Integrated service centers are multipurpose facilities in residential neighborhoods that provide childcare facilities for

   working mothers, shelter for women in difficult circumstances, and community-based livelihood and advocacy centers.
   Waste stations are for recycled waste, which offers employment opportunities for women and creation of self-help
   groups.
e Government of Bhutan, MOWHS. 2013. Bhutan Green Building Design Guidelines. Thimphu.
f
  Building codes and guidelines will be reviewed and amended aligning to relevant international building codes to ensure
   gender-inclusive space and fixtures (like restrooms, showers, locker rooms and changing rooms) based on practical
   gender needs.
Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities:
Expected values and methodological details for all OP indicators to which this operation will contribute results are
detailed in Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix
2).
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                         Appendix 2    17

                             LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS
                 http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=54355-001-3

1.    Loan Agreement
2.    Grant Agreement
3.    Project Agreement
4.    Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services
      (Urban Housing)
5.    Project Administration Manual
6.    Financial Analysis
7.    Economic Analysis
8.    Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
9.    Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
10.   Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities
11.   Attached Technical Assistance Report
12.   Climate Change Assessment
13.   Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Action Plan
14.   Initial Environmental Examination: Thimphu
15.   Initial Environmental Examination: Drungpa Residence Site, Phuentsholing
16.   Initial Environmental Examination: Rinchending, Phuentsholing
17.   Initial Environmental Examination: Amochhu, Phuentsholing
18.   Initial Environmental Examination: Trashiyangtse
19.   Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
20.   Resettlement Plan: Phuentsholing
21.   Resettlement Plan: Thimphu
22.   Resettlement Framework

Supplementary Documents
23. Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement Due Diligence Report
24. Climate and Disaster Risk Assessment
25. Social, Poverty, and Gender Analysis
26. Disaster Risk Assessment
