Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




INTERNAL

Project Number: 55201-001
October 2022




Proposed Loans and Grant
People’s Republic of Bangladesh: Coastal Towns
Climate Resilience Project




Distribution of this document is limited until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, this document will be reclassified as public and disclosed in accordance
with ADB’s Access to Information Policy.


.
                            CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                             (as of 14 September 2022)

          Currency unit      –     taka (Tk)
                Tk1.00       =     $0.010
                 $1.00       =     Tk95.8516


                                  ABBREVIATIONS

       ADB                  –        Asian Development Bank
       ADF                  –        Asian Development Fund
       COVID-19             –        coronavirus disease
       EMP                  –        environmental management plan
       EWCD                 –        elderly (older persons), women, children, and persons with
                                     disabilities
       GESI                 –        gender equality and social inclusion
       IEE                  –        initial environmental examination
       IWM                  –        integrated waste management
       LGED                 –        Local Government Engineering Department
       NbS                  –        nature-based solutions
       O&M                  –        operation and maintenance
       OCR                  –        ordinary capital resources
       PAM                  –        project administration manual
       PIU                  –        project implementation unit
       PMU                  –        project management unit
       SDG                  –        Sustainable Development Goal
       SEC                  –        small ethnic communities


                                        NOTES

(i)     The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of Bangladesh and its agencies ends on
        30 June. “FY” before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year
        ends, e.g., FY2022 ends on 30 June 2022.

(ii)    In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars.
Vice-President              Shixin Chen, Operations 1
Director General            Kenichi Yokoyama, South Asia Department (SARD)
Deputy Director General     Manmohan Parkash, SARD
Director                    Norio Saito, Urban Development and Water Division (SAUW),
                               SARD

Team leaders                Laxmi Sharma, Senior Urban Development Specialist, SAUW,
                                SARD
                            Arghya Sinha Roy, Principal Climate Change Specialist (Climate
                                Change Adaptation), Climate Change and Disaster Risk
                                Management Division, Sustainable Development and Climate
                                Change Department (SDCC)
Team members                Achyutha Rao Aleti, Environment Specialist, SAUW, SARD
                            Mikael Andersson, Financial Management Specialist, Portfolio,
                                 Results and Quality Control Unit, Office of the Director
                                 General, SARD
                            Saswati Belliappa, Senior Safeguards Specialist; SAUW, SARD
                            Urmee Bhattacharjee, Associate Project Analyst, Bangladesh
                                Resident Mission (BRM), SARD
                            Liming Chen, Urban Economist, SAUW, SARD
                            Marjana Chowdhury, Senior Water Resources Officer, BRM, SARD
                            Henry A. Cornwell, Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                            Dharmesh Mahendra Dawda; Senior Procurement Specialist;
                                Procurement Division 1; Procurement, Portfolio and Financial
                                Management Department
                            Prabhjot Rehan Khan, Social Development Specialist (Gender and
                                Development), Sustainable Development Thematic Cluster–
                                Gender, SDCC
                            Jennifer D. Lazatin, Senior Operations Assistant, SAUW, SARD
                            Sourav Majumder, Senior Project Officer (Urban), India Resident
                                Mission, SARD
                            SA Abdullah AI Mamun, Senior Project Officer (Urban
                                Infrastructure), BRM, SARD
                            Donna Marie R. Melo, Operations Assistant, SAUW, SARD
                            Sunghoon Kris Moon, Urban Development Specialist, Urban Sector
                                Group, SDCC
                            Santosh Pokharel, Senior Private Sector Development Specialist,
                                Sri Lanka Resident Mission, SARD
                            Nasheeba Selim, Senior Social Development Officer, BRM, SARD
                            Virinder Sharma, Principal Urban Development Specialist, Urban
                                Sector Group, Sector Advisory Service Cluster, SDCC
                            Pushkar Srivastava, Project Management Specialist, BRM, SARD
                            Noime S. Walican, Associate Safeguards Officer, SAUW, SARD
                            Sheryl V. Yanez, Project Analyst, SAUW, SARD
Peer reviewer               Stefan Rau, Senior Urban Development Specialist, Urban and
                                Social Sectors Division, East Asia Department

In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                     CONTENTS

                                                                   Page
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
MAP
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                   1
II.    THE PROJECT                                                    1
       A.   Rationale                                                 1
       B.   Project Description                                       5
       C.   Value Added by ADB                                        7
       D.   Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan                 7
       E.   Implementation Arrangements                               9
III.   DUE DILIGENCE                                                 10
       A.    Technical                                               10
       B.    Economic and Financial Viability                        10
       C.    Sustainability                                          11
       D.    Governance                                              11
       E.    Poverty, Social, and Gender                             12
       F.    Safeguards                                              13
       G.    Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan     14
IV.    ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS                                     15
V.     RECOMMENDATION                                                15

APPENDIXES
1.     Design and Monitoring Framework                               16
2.     List of Linked Documents                                      20
                                                                                          Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                                      PROJECT AT A GLANCE

    1. Basic Data                                                                                      Project Number: 55201-001
       Project Name                    Coastal Towns Climate Resilience Project       Department/Division SARD/SAUW
       Country                         Bangladesh                                     Executing Agency      Local Government
       Borrower                        People's Republic of Bangladesh                                      Engineering Department,
                                                                                                            Ministry of Local
       Country Economic                https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/                            Government, Rural
       Indicators                      ?id=55201-001-CEI                                                    Development, and
       Portfolio at a Glance           https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/                            Co-operatives
                                       ?id=55201-001-PortAtaGlance

    2. Sector                          Subsector(s)                                                       ADB Financing ($ million)
       Water and other urban           Other urban services                                                                 38.30
       infrastructure and services     Urban flood protection                                                               96.00
                                       Urban policy, institutional and capacity development                                 29.30
                                       Urban slum development                                                                 7.00
                                       Urban solid waste management                                                         10.10
       Transport                       Urban roads and traffic management                                                   69.30
                                                                                                      Total                250.00
    3. Operational Priorities                                                         Climate Change Information
       OP1: Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities                    GHG reductions (tons per                     6,041
       OP2: Accelerating progress in gender equality                                  annum)
       OP3: Tackling climate change, building climate and disaster resilience, and    Climate Change impact on the                   High
       enhancing environmental sustainability                                         Project
       OP4: Making cities more livable
                                                                                      ADB Financing
       OP6: Strengthening governance and institutional capacity
                                                                                      Adaptation ($ million)                      226.00
                                                                                      Mitigation ($ million)                        1.20

                                                                                      Cofinancing
                                                                                      Adaptation ($ million)                         0.00
                                                                                      Mitigation ($ million)                         0.00
       Sustainable Development Goals                                                  Gender Equity and Mainstreaming
       SDG 5.5                                                                        Gender Equity (GEN)
       SDG 11.1, 11.3, 11.5, 11.6, 11.7, 11.b
       SDG 13.a                                                                       Poverty Targeting
       SDG 14.1                                                                       Geographic Targeting
       SDG 16.7

    4. Risk Categorization:            Complex
.


    5. Safeguard Categorization                   Environment: B Involuntary Resettlement: B Indigenous Peoples: B
.


    6. Financing
        Modality and Sources                                                                  Amount ($ million)
        ADB                                                                                                                     250.00
           Sovereign Sector grant: Asian Development Fund                                                                         4.00
           Sovereign Sector (Concessional Loan): Ordinary capital resources                                                     150.00
           Sovereign Sector (Regular Loan): Ordinary capital resources                                                           96.00
        Cofinancing                                                                                                               0.00
           None                                                                                                                   0.00
        Counterpart                                                                                                              60.00
           Government                                                                                                            60.00
        Total                                                                                                                   310.00

       Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar




Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.      16092022145905710904                            Generated Date: 18-Oct-2022 15:43:24 PM
                                        I.       THE PROPOSAL

1.      I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on proposed loans
and a proposed grant to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the Coastal Towns Climate
Resilience Project.

2.       The project will strengthen the climate resilience of 22 coastal towns by enhancing their
ability to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, and recover from the effects of climate shocks and
stresses, including through interventions targeted at the poor and women. The project will (i)
improve priority municipal infrastructure and essential services that are critical for improving
climate and disaster resilience and local economic development in project towns; (ii) enhance the
livelihood resilience and adaptive capacity of vulnerable households through the graduation
program in six project towns with high poverty levels; and (iii) strengthen institutional capacity,
governance, and climate awareness. The project will support the Government of Bangladesh in
achieving integrated and sustainable urban development to improve the livability of coastal towns
in the face of increasing climate-related disaster risks.

                                          II.     THE PROJECT

A.      Rationale

3.      Climate and disaster risk. Bangladesh faces one of the highest disaster risk levels in the
world, with high exposure to multiple climate-related hazards. These natural hazards interact with
physical and socioeconomic factors, including low-lying delta and coastal areas, high population
density and poverty rates, and lack of resilient infrastructure, with widespread impacts on both
rural areas and expanding urban centers. Climate change is projected to alter precipitation
patterns to unprecedented extremes, raise average temperatures, and increase the intensity and
frequency of severe tropical cyclones leading to increased storm surges. Sea level rise is
projected to further exacerbate the impact of storm surges in low-lying coastal regions. Estimates
suggest that the effects of climate change could cause an average loss of about 1.3% in the
growth of gross domestic product per year until 2041. 1 In the business-as-usual scenario, about
11 million households in Bangladesh will be affected by climate change in 2024. The number of
affected households is expected to rise to 22 million and 30 million in 2028 and 2030,
respectively. 2

4.      Coastal towns and climate risk. Coastal towns have high levels of hazard, exposure,
and vulnerability to climate-related disasters because of factors including low elevation, high
population density, high poverty rates, and limited capacity of pourashavas (local governments)
to invest in resilience. Urban development related decisions being taken today will determine the
severity of longer-term risks in coastal areas. Study shows that without climate adaptation
measures, an estimated 2.5 million–7.2 million people annually will be affected by coastal flooding
in Bangladesh from 2070 to 2100. 3 The project towns are in 10 coastal districts of Bangladesh
and are very low-lying, with mean elevations of 2–12 meters (m) above sea level. 4 They face high
exposure to flooding, tropical cyclones and storm surges, drought, and extreme heat. Most of

1 Government of Bangladesh, Ministry of Planning, Bangladesh Planning Commission, General Economic Division.
  2020. Making Vision 2041 a Reality – Perspective Plan of Bangladesh, 2021–2041. Dhaka.
2 F. Khatun and S. Saadat. 2021. Climate Change in Bangladesh: A Sustainable Development Perspective. Dhaka.
3 K. Richardson. 2014. Human Dynamics of Climate Change: Technical Report. United Kingdom: The Met Office.
4 Government of Japan, Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry; and the United States National Aeronautics and

  Space Administration. 2019. Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) Global
  Digital Elevation Map (Model Version 3).
2


these low-lying coastal areas have a population density of more than 500 people per square
kilometer and some have more than 1,000 people per square kilometer. 5 Poverty rates range
from 15.6% to 43.9% in the project towns. 6 Rapid unplanned development, which compromises
natural drainage systems and wetlands; inadequate stormwater drainage facilities; and poor solid
waste management contribute to increased climate-related disaster risks. The coastal towns face
inadequate basic municipal infrastructure for climate resilience, limited adaptive capacity of their
low-income and vulnerable communities, and capacity and governance constraints at various
levels. Surmounting these challenges requires investments in climate adaptation to enable the
project towns to achieve their development potential.

5.        Inadequate basic municipal infrastructure for climate resilience. The project towns,
all of which are in coastal areas of Bangladesh lack adequate infrastructure for coping with flood
and cyclone risks. During 2002–2021, 34 flooding events occurred in Bangladesh. 7 The frequency
and intensity of such events is expected to increase. Climate projections indicate the number of
days with very heavy precipitation (20 millimeters or more per hour) could increase by almost 10
days on average from 1990 to 2100, increasing the risk of flooding. 8 Rapid and haphazard
urbanization, limited consideration of hydrology, and lack of climate and disaster risk-informed
urban development plans result in encroachment on waterways, reducing their retention capacity.
Capacity limitations, siltation, and dumping of solid waste in drains have caused severe flooding
and extended waterlogging. All project towns are served by on-site sanitation. 9 Most toilets are
pit latrines, which are susceptible to inundation by stormwater. Project towns generate 255.2 tons
of waste per day. The average collection efficiency in these towns is 40%, and collected waste is
disposed of in a dump site or low-lying area. 10 Poor and nonexistent solid waste and septage
management systems result in polluted waterways and high public health risks. Further, water
supply services suffer from increasing saline intrusion because of rising sea levels and
unsustainable groundwater extraction. Of the 22 project towns, 14 have a piped water supply
service coverage of less than 40%. 11 Inadequate basic municipal infrastructure to respond to
increasing climate risk threatens both quality of life and the economic growth of coastal towns.
This calls for an integrated approach for coastal town development that promotes risk-informed
planning and investment for building resilience.

6.      Limited adaptive capacity of low-income and vulnerable communities. The urban
poor of project towns tends to rely on agriculture- and fishery-based livelihoods, which are highly
vulnerable to climate impacts. Their disproportionate exposure to climate impacts results in
livelihood disruption and loss of physical, financial, human, social, and natural assets. Such
events often lead to negative coping strategies such as using personal savings, limiting food
consumption, selling assets, reducing non-food expenditure, and borrowing money at high
interest rates, which may impact long-term well-being and exacerbate poverty. Among the urban
poor, climate vulnerability varies between women and men, with women typically facing higher
levels of vulnerability because of preexisting gender norms; engagement in the informal economy;

5  Columbia University. Center for Earth Science Information Network. Socioeconomic and Data Applications Center.
6  Bangladesh Bureau of Statistic and World Food Programme. 2016. Poverty Maps of Bangladesh 2016. Dhaka;
   Household income below Tk12,887.6 per month for an average household size of 4.4.
7 Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, Université catholique de Louvain. Emergency Database (EM-

   DAT): The International Disaster Database. https://public.emdat.be/ (accessed 18 September 2022).
8 World Health Organization. 2015. Climate and Health Country Profile – 2015 Bangladesh. Geneva.
9 S. Rahman and M. Rahman. 2015. Climate Extremes and Challenges to Infrastructure Development in Coastal Cities

   in Bangladesh. Weather and Climate Extremes. 7. pp. 96–108.
10 Waste Concern. 2021. Waste Data Base of Bangladesh – A report prepared for Department of Environment,

   Government of Bangladesh. Dhaka (unpublished).
11 Government of Bangladesh, Department of Public Health Engineering. 2020. Water Supply in 22 Project

   Pourashavas: report based on data submitted by individual pourashavas in 2020. Dhaka (unpublished).
                                                                                                                       3


and limited access to productive assets, finance, skills, and awareness. These effects can be
mitigated by adopting a package of targeted resilient livelihood improvement strategies that aim
to reduce the resilience gaps of women by incorporating gender equality and social inclusion
(GESI)-sensitive measures. These measures can protect the most vulnerable, promote equality,
and foster community resilience. Similarly, providing women, the poor, and vulnerable
communities with access to early warning information, cyclone shelters with safe spaces for
women, and evacuation routes increases their preparedness and minimizes casualties during
disasters. 12 However, the few cyclone shelters in the project towns are often structurally weak
and poorly maintained; do not always incorporate inclusive design features to meet the needs of
the elderly (older persons), women, children, and persons with disabilities (EWCD); and have
limited EWCD access because of the poor condition of emergency access roads. Thus, there is
a critical need for higher-capacity, GESI-sensitive multipurpose cyclone shelters that are (i)
designed to meet EWCD’s needs and green building design features; (ii) equipped with alternative
power and water sources; and (iii) located away from hazard-prone areas, and accessible to all.

7.      Capacity constraints. Project towns’ high vulnerability is also linked to weak governance
and low adaptive capacity of local governments and communities. Addressing climate and
disaster risks requires moving beyond business-as-usual urban development and using GESI-
responsive climate and disaster risk information as a starting point for evidence-based decision-
making for integrated urban development. National and local government institutions’ capacity to
build resilience is improving, but gaps exist, especially in relation to citywide climate and disaster
risk assessment to inform integrated urban development plans, GESI-responsive climate risk
assessment in routine and periodic infrastructure maintenance processes, and participatory
processes to develop and implement city-level emergency preparedness. There is an urgent need
to strengthen institutional capacity and governance, public awareness, the participation of
vulnerable households, and the social capital of poor women to complement physical investments
as part of an integrated approach to building climate resilience.

8.        Government strategy. The government recognizes the need to address climate risk in
achieving the country’s development aspirations. The government’s Delta Plan 2100 provides an
inter-sectoral approach to addressing climate risk. 13 The plan outlines policies for hotspots that
are focused on flood risk management and freshwater conservation. 14 Coastal zones and urban
areas are identified as two of six hotspots. The government’s Eighth Five-Year Plan July 2021–
June 2025 emphasizes the need to scale up climate actions by local governments, undertake
gender-focused climate actions, address climate-induced migration issues through improvements
in livelihoods in cities, and increase commitments to green solutions. 15 The project aligns with the
priorities of the government’s climate and urban development and international commitments. 16

12 Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2014. Coastal Towns Environment Infrastructure Project. Manila; and ADB. 2018.

  Coastal Towns Environment Infrastructure Project-Additional Financing. Manila.
13 Government of Bangladesh. 2018. Delta Plan 2100: Bangladesh in the 21st Century Dhaka. Climate actions include

   the National Adaptation Programme of Action (2005); the Climate Change Trust Act 2010; the Bangladesh Climate
   Change Strategy and Action Plan (2009); the Intended National Determined Contribution (2015); the Climate Change
   and Gender Action Plan; the National Plan for Disaster Management, 2016–2020, and the National Water
   Management Plan.
14 Hotpots are prototypical areas where similar hydrological and climate change vulnerability characteristics and

   problems coverage such as sea level rise, river erosion, intensity of flooding, water shortage, siltation constraints.
   (Government of Bangladesh. 2018. Delta Plan 2100: Bangladesh in the 21st Century. Dhaka.)
15
   Government of Bangladesh. 2020. Eighth Five Year Plan July 2020–June 2025: Promoting Prosperity and Fostering
   Inclusiveness. Dhaka.
16 These include commitments to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG): SDG 1 (poverty targeting); SDG 5

   (gender mainstreaming); SDG 11 (making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable);
   SDG 13 (climate action); SDG 14 (life below water); and SDG 16 (strong Institutions); the Paris Agreement; and the
   Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
4


9.       Sector lending modality. The project will follow the sector loan modality because (i) it
has many small discrete subprojects; (ii) the government has clear sector development strategies
and priorities as elaborated in its Delta Plan 2100, Eighth Five-Year Plan, and Municipal
Development Plan (2011); (iii) the government has the requisite institutional framework and
capacity to implement the project; and (iv) the strategies applicable to the sector are appropriate
as they address current sector needs. The Municipal Development Plan, which the Local
Government Engineering Department (LGED) of the Local Government Division of the Ministry of
Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives is updating, covers three pillars:
governance, infrastructure, and climate change and disaster. The Ministry of Local Government,
Rural Development and Cooperatives, through the LGED and the Department of Public Health
and Engineering, has the institutional capacity to implement the plan. The project will play a key
role in assisting the government in implementing the plan and is expected to strengthen municipal
governance as well as financial, technical, and management capacity, and thereby the resilience,
of project coastal towns.

10.       Lessons. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is a major development partner in
Bangladesh’s urban development, water, and sanitation sector. ADB supported the
implementation of climate resilience measures under the Coastal Towns Environmental
Infrastructure Project (footnote 12), and performance-based investment projects such as the
Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement Project and its two subsequent projects. 17
Building on ADB’s long-term involvement in the sector and implementation of other projects
related to flood and riverbank erosion risk management, key lessons that inform the project design
include the following:
    (i)      Ensure a good understanding of climate risk to steer coastal towns’ economic
             development with an explicit focus on building resilience of the urban poor;
    (ii)     Adopt a holistic systems approach to adaptation, incorporating enhancements to
             social, ecological (nature-based), economic, and infrastructure resilience and adaptive
             capacity; 18
    (iii)    Strengthen the role of women in governance committees and diversify their
             livelihoods, including through specialized adaptive capacity building interventions for
             women and vulnerable communities; 19
    (iv)     Develop and implement the poverty reduction action plan, which provides a
             pourashava-level plan to reduce poverty and address barriers faced by the poor and
             vulnerable communities; and
    (v)      Provide financial incentives linked to performance indicators early in the project life
             cycle to incentivize the pourashavas to better perform and comply with sustainable
             operation and maintenance (O&M) practices. 20

11.    Alignment with ADB’s priorities. The project aligns with ADB’s Strategy 2030 by
supporting key operational priorities related to addressing remaining poverty and reducing
inequalities; accelerating progress in gender equality; tackling climate change, building climate
and disaster resilience, and enhancing environmental sustainability; making cities more livable;


17 ADB.  2002. Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project. Manila (closed); ADB. 2008.
   Second Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project. Manila (closed); ADB. 2014. Third
   Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project. Manila; and ADB. 2017. Additional Financing—
   Third Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project. Manila.
18 ADB. 2018. Advancing Inclusive and Resilient Urban Development Targeted at the Urban Poor. Manila.
19 Committees include a cyclone shelter management committee, a solid waste management committee, operation and

   maintenance O&M) committees, and disaster management committees.
20 ADB. 2014.
              Third Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project. Manila.
                                                                                                                      5


and strengthening governance and institutional capacity. 21 The project will contribute to ADB’s
Healthy Oceans Action Plan by reducing the amount of solid waste entering coastal waters and
increasing coastal resilience to climate change. 22 The project also aligns with the country
partnership strategy for Bangladesh, 2021–2025, which prioritizes the provision of climate- and
disaster-resilient infrastructure and services. 23 ADB closely coordinates with development
partners including the Japan International Cooperation Agency, the World Bank and United
Nations Agencies through the local consultative group to ensure effective and coordinated
implementation of national polices, strategies, and programs. 24

12.     Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). COVID-19 has deepened negative economic impact
on women and vulnerable households. Women and girls are generally earning less, saving less,
and holding insecure jobs or living close to poverty, which make them more vulnerable. 25
Unemployment surged to 22.4% during April-July 2020, from 2.1% in March 2020. 26 The Eighth
Five-Year Plan stresses the importance of a wider and more inclusive social protection system
for an inclusive recovery from COVID-19 (footnote 15). The project will directly support the
livelihood resilience of women and vulnerable households that are also affected by COVID-19
(paras. 15 and 17).

B.       Project Description

13.     The project is aligned with the following impacts: higher and sustainable growth
trajectories achieved in the face of the various weather-related natural hazards and risk (footnote
13) and improved livability of coastal towns (footnote 1). The project will have the following
outcome: climate and disaster resilience of coastal towns strengthened, including benefiting the
poor and women. 27 The project’s support across pourashavas will be determined using a
differentiated approach based on each pourashava’s vulnerability and exposure to climate risk
and suitability for growth (para. 25). The project directly supports the achievement of project
outcomes through three interlinked outputs.

14.     Output 1: Municipal infrastructure for resilience improved. Output 1 supports the
development of priority municipal infrastructure and essential services that are critical for
improving climate and disaster resilience and local economic development in the 22 project
towns. 28 Output 1 includes (i) the construction of EWCD-friendly cyclone shelters with early
warning systems; 29 (ii) the upgrading or construction of emergency access roads to cyclone

21 ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific.

  Manila.
22 ADB. 2019. Action Plan for Healthy Oceans. Manila.
23 ADB. 2021.
                 Country Partnership Strategy: Bangladesh, 2021–2025—Sustain Growth, Build Resilience, and Foster
   Inclusion. Manila.
24 Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services (accessible from the list of linked

   documents in Appendix 2)
25 United Nations. 2020. Policy Brief: The Impact of COVID-19 on Women. New York.
26 Government of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. 2020. Report on Perception Survey of Livelihood 2020.

   Dhaka.
27 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
28 The towns, which are selected based on a climate risk and vulnerability assessment screening process of 11 coastal

   districts, are Bagerhat, Bakerganj, Banaripara, Betagi, Bhedarganj, Borhanuddin, Chalna, Charfesson, Gournadi,
   Jhalakathi, Kolaroa, Kuakata, Lalmohon, Morelganj, Mehendiganj, Muladi, Nalchiti, Paikgacha, Patharghata,
   Patuakhali, Swarupkathi, and Zanjira.
29 EWCD-friendly cyclone shelters will include separate toilets for women and men, separate space for women

   (including nursing mothers) and girls with adequate lighting, access to safe drinking water, solar panels, ramps for
   easy access by the elderly and persons with locomotor disability in the building and toilets, and tactile flooring on
   stairs and entrances to assist visually impaired persons.
6


shelters; (iii) the development of climate-resilient infrastructure for improved urban flood risk
management, including stormwater drainage, nature-based solutions (NbS), restoration of water
bodies, and integrated waste management (IWM); 30 (iv) rehabilitation or construction of roads
with stormwater drainage, bridges, and culverts for improved connectivity and access to
emergency services; (v) improvement of gender-responsive and socially inclusive urban public
spaces; (vi) implementation of slum improvement programs; and (vii) construction of EWCD-
friendly sanitation facilities for poor households. Output 1 also supports the development of
EWCD-friendly socioeconomic infrastructure, including local markets; bus terminals; and other
priority roads, bridges, culverts, and boat landing stations. All subprojects are in accordance with
the project subproject selection criteria detailed in the project administration manual (PAM). 31

15.     Output 2: Resilient livelihoods enhanced. Output 2 supports increasing the adaptive
capacity of vulnerable households, and especially poor women, to deal with climate shocks in six
project towns with high poverty levels through the graduation approach (also known as economic
inclusion). 32 The graduation approach will build the livelihood resilience of vulnerable households
and women through a sequenced and comprehensive set of interventions to place households
on an upward trajectory from poverty. 33 The activities will include assessing climate risk and local
markets to identify viable income-generating activities; mapping household skills and resources;
matching household enterprise and employment; and providing tailored technical training and
livelihood assets, especially to women to deliver holistic support and overcome the gaps they face
in building resilient livelihoods. Output 2 includes (i) covering climate-vulnerable households in
the graduation program in six project towns; (ii) training women, including persons with disabilities,
to increase skills for resilient livelihoods; and (iii) documenting vulnerable households’ inventories
of productive assets and facilitating access to insurance. This will also help poor and vulnerable
households recover from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.

16.      Output 3: Institutional capacity, governance, and climate awareness strengthened.
The project supports the strengthening of the LGED and project pourashavas’ institutional
capacity, governance, and climate awareness through knowledge management to complement
physical investments as part of an integrated approach to building climate change resilience.
Output 3 includes: (i) submission of risk-informed urban development plans and poverty reduction
action plans of project towns to the pourashavas council and ensuring that development activities
align with the risk-informed urban development plans; (ii) training of LGED and pourashava staff,
including 90% of eligible female staff, for increased knowledge on GESI-responsive climate and
disaster risk assessment to inform urban development plans and development control regulations
linked with hazards; (iii) training of LGED and pourashava staff, including 90% of eligible women
staff, to increase knowledge and capacity on NbS and green solutions; (iv) operationalizing of the
disaster management committee on disaster preparedness measures; cyclone shelter
management committees; and standing committees on women’s and children’s affairs, poverty

30 NbS promote actions to protect, sustainably manage, and restore natural and modified ecosystems in ways that

   address societal challenges effectively and adaptively to provide both human well-being and biodiversity benefits.
   Source: International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). 2020. Guidance for using the IUCN Global Standard
   for NbS. A user-friendly framework for the verification, design and scaling up of NbS. First edition. Gland, Switzerland.
31 Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
32 Six project towns with high poverty rates are identified from the top-ranked climate risk project pourashavas—Chalna,

   Gournadi, Mehndiganj, Muladi, Nalchiti, and Paikgacha.
33 The four key pillars of the graduation approach are (i) social protection through a subsistence allowance and links to

   basic services, (ii) livelihood promotion through access to sustainable and resilient livelihoods, (iii) financial inclusion
   through access to formal savings mechanisms and financial literacy, and (iv) social empowerment for positive
   behavior change among families and communities. Following this approach, the graduation program will be designed
   for each pourashava. The project will recruit two local civil society organizations as partners, to support the design
   and implementation of the graduation program.
                                                                                                                     7


reduction, and slum improvement in project pourashavas to improve municipal governance and
sustainable service delivery; 34 (v) approval of a revenue enhancement plan by each project
pourashava; (vi) establishment of functioning computerized tax records and billing systems; (vii)
approval of annual GESI-responsive O&M plans by each project pourashava and allocation and
spending of at least 75% of the required annual budget; and (viii) development of gender-
responsive and socially inclusive urban space design guidelines.

17.      Output 3 also supports enhanced public awareness, behavior change, and community
mobilization in light of emergencies such as the COVID-19 pandemic and Cyclone Amphan in
2020. It will also support training and capacity building of the LGED and pourashavas to
institutionalize information technology-based remote monitoring through strengthening the
LGED’s geographic information systems section, monitoring and evaluation unit, and project
management unit (PMU).

C.       Value Added by ADB

18.      ADB has undertaken a series of assessments that have informed the overall project
design. They include (i) country diagnostic work on climate-resilient, pro-poor urban development
undertaken through a knowledge and support technical assistance project (footnote 18); (ii) an
assessment of lessons from implementing resilience measures in the ADB-financed Coastal
Towns Environmental Infrastructure Project (footnote 12); and (iii) climate risk and adaptation
assessment of project towns using the Spatial Data Analysis Explorer. Innovative aspects of the
project to add value include: (i) adopting a holistic approach to strengthening climate and disaster
resilience by designing all project outputs based on a robust understanding of climate and disaster
risks and promoting transformative solutions for poor and vulnerable communities; (ii) introducing
transformational resilience solutions, such as risk-informed urban planning and NbS, that address
underlying drivers of vulnerabilities through changes in land use patterns, restoration of
ecosystems, and engagement of poor and vulnerable communities, especially women, in
decision-making, financed through additional grants from the Asian Development Fund (ADF) 13
thematic pool; (iii) adopting innovative solutions such as the graduation approach to livelihood
resilience, which complements wider initiatives on strengthening resilience through social
protection; 35 (iv) introducing gender-responsive and socially inclusive urban space design
guidelines and using those guidelines to pilot the development of urban spaces in two project
towns; (v) adopting an integrated flood and drainage management approach, which will generate
co-benefits of salinity prevention and recreation space provision; (vi) supporting the
institutionalization of earth observation technology for risk-informed urban development and
remote project management; and (vii) promoting governance-led investment through
performance-based allocations. These features will be captured in a knowledge product and will
be used as a model for replication in other climate-vulnerable towns in Bangladesh and other
countries in South Asia and the Asia Pacific region.

D.       Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan

19.      The project is estimated to cost $310 million (Table 1).



34 A   risk-informed performance-based budget allocation strategy will be adopted to promote governance-led
   infrastructure improvement to ensure sustainable urban services. The pourashava will need to fulfill a set of
   performance criteria to receive funds for infrastructure improvement. The performance criteria are elaborated in the
   Project Administration Manual (footnote 31).
35 ADB. 2021.
                 Strengthening Social Resilience Program. Manila.
8


20.     Detailed cost estimates by expenditure category and financier are included in the PAM
(footnote 31).

                                     Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates
                                                 ($ million)
    Item                                                                                                Amounta
    A.        Base Costb
    1.        Output 1: Municipal infrastructure for resilience improved                                     244.1
    2.        Output 2: Resilient livelihoods enhanced                                                         4.0
    3.        Output 3: Institutional capacity, governance, and climate awareness                             24.7
               strengthened
                                             Subtotal (A)                                                    272.8
                               c
    B.        Contingencies                                                                                   29.3
    C.        Financing Chargesd                                                                               7.9
              Total (A+B+C)                                                                                  310.0
a Includes taxes and duties of $34.1 million. Such amount does not represent an excessive share of the project cost.
  The government will finance taxes and duties of $34.1 million from cash contribution. An exchange rate of $1 = Tk86
  is used.
b In mid-2021 prices as of January 2022.
c Physical and price contingencies, and a provision for exchange rate fluctuation are included. Physical contingencies

  are computed at 2% for civil works and equipment. Price contingencies are computed at 1.7%–1.8% on foreign
  exchange costs and 5.5%–5.9% on local currency costs; includes provision for potential exchange rate fluctuation
  under the assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
d Includes interest for ordinary capital resources (OCR) regular and concessional loans and commitment charges for

  OCR regular loan. For regular OCR, interest during construction for the Asian Development Bank loan has been
  computed at the 5-year United States dollar secured overnight financing rate fixed-swap rate plus a spread of 0.5%,
  surcharge on funding cost margin of 0.14%, and a maturity premium of 0.1%. Commitment charges for an Asian
  Development Bank loan are 0.15% per year to be charged on the undisbursed loan amount. For the concessional
  loan, interest during construction is calculated at 2% per annum and there is no commitment charge.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

21.      The government has requested (i) a concessional loan of $150 million from ADB’s ordinary
capital resources (OCR), (ii) a regular loan of $96 million from ADB’s OCR, and (iii) a grant not
exceeding $4 million from ADB’s Special Funds (ADF) to help finance the project. The
concessional loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period of 5 years; an interest rate
of 2.0% per year during the grace period and thereafter; and such other terms and conditions set
forth in the draft loan and project agreements. The regular loan will have a 25-year term, including
a grace period of 5 years; an interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s Flexible Loan
Product; a commitment charge of 0.15% per year; and such other terms and conditions set forth
in the draft loan and project agreements. Based on the straight-line method, the average maturity
is 15.25 years and the maturity premium payable to ADB is 0.10% per year.

22.    The summary of the financing plan is in Table 2. The ADF grant will finance civil works,
equipment, consulting services, and contingencies related to NbS for climate adaptation. 36 ADB
concessional and regular OCR loans will finance the expenditures in relation to civil works and
equipment, consulting services, incremental administration cost, and part of contingencies. The
government will provide $60 million toward taxes and duties, land acquisition and resettlement,
contingencies, and financing charges during implementation.


36 The ADF 13 thematic pool grant will enable the project to demonstrate the proof of concept of transformative pro-

    poor resilience solutions, such as NbS, to strengthen resilience and development risk-informed urban development
    plans, thereby steering urban development in resilient directions.
                                                                                                               9


                                   Table 2: Summary Financing Plan
                                                                             Amount          Share of Total
Source                                                                      ($ million)           (%)
Asian Development Bank
    Ordinary capital resources (regular)                                              96.0              31.0
    Ordinary capital resources (concessional)                                        150.0              48.4
    Special Funds resources (Asian Development Fund grant)a                            4.0               1.2
Government of Bangladesh                                                              60.0              19.4
                             Total                                                   310.0             100.0
a Asian Development Fund 13 thematic pool.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

23.    Climate mitigation is estimated to cost $1.4 million and climate adaptation is estimated to
cost $261.1 million. ADB will finance 85.7% of mitigation costs and 86.6% of adaptation costs.
The project has a primary objective of building climate resilience and, accordingly, the total cost
of the majority of outputs (except the cost of infrastructure for local economic development) is
counted as climate adaptation. 37

E.        Implementation Arrangements

24.     Implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3 and described in detail in the
PAM (footnote 31). The potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on implementation is factored
into the project implementation period and corresponding cost estimates.

                                Table 3: Implementation Arrangements
    Aspects                                               Arrangements
    Implementation period          November 2022–December 2029
    Estimated completion date      30 June 2029
    Estimated loans and grant      31 December 2029
    closing date
    Management
      (i) Oversight body           Steering committee: Secretary, LGD (chair); joint secretary (planning
                                   wing), LGD; joint secretary (development), LGD; chief engineer, LGED;
                                   deputy secretary (chief), LGD; representatives of ECNEC and
                                   coordination wing of the Planning Division, Planning Commission
                                   (Physical Infrastructure Division), Planning Commission (Programming
                                   Division), sector concerned of the Implementation Monitoring and
                                   Evaluation Division, Economic Relations Division (Foreign Aided
                                   Project), Ministry of Finance (Finance Division), and Planning, LGED;
                                   project director (member secretary); senior assistant chief and assistant
                                   chief concerned, LGD; and special invitees to advise the committee on
                                   technical issues
     (ii) Executing agency         LGED, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development, and Co-
                                   operatives
     (iii) Key implementing        Each project pourashava
           agencies
     (iv) Implementation unit      22 pourashavas, 176 staff
    Procurement                    Open competitive bidding—              15 contracts        $10.7 million
                                   goods (nationally advertised)
                                   Open competitive bidding—              205 contracts      $216.8 million
                                   works (nationally advertised)


37 Climate Change Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
10


 Aspects                                                         Arrangements
 Consulting services               QCBS                              2,724 person-months        $16.1 million
                                   SSS                                 86 person-months          $0.8 million
 Retroactive financing and/or      Advance contracting and retroactive financing of civil works, equipment,
 advance contracting               and consulting services will be undertaken. Retroactive financing will be
                                   considered for up to 20% of the loan and grant amount for expenditures
                                   incurred for civil works; consulting contracts; and establishment and
                                   operation of the PMU, and project implementation units before loan and
                                   grant effectiveness, but not earlier than 12 months before the signing of
                                   the loan and grant agreements.
 Disbursement                      Disbursement of the loans and grant proceeds will follow ADB's Loan
                                   Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time) and
                                   detailed arrangements agreed between the government and ADB.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ECNEC = Executive Committee of the National Economic Council, LGD = Local
Government Division, LGED = Local Government Engineering Department, NEC = National Economic Council, PMU
= project management unit, QCBS = quality- and cost-based selection, SSS = single source selection.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                          III.    DUE DILIGENCE

A.      Technical

25.     The project outputs were identified and designed based on a detailed climate risk and
adaptation assessment of the 22 project pourashavas (footnote 37). This included an assessment
of overall climate vulnerability and exposure to establish the baseline climate risk for each
pourashava. Further, an assessment of future climate was undertaken using analysis of Coupled
Modeled Intercomparison Project-6 (CMIP 6) climate models at the district level, with percentage
increases in maximum daily precipitation, temperature, and sea level rise used to define climate
change impacts. The assessment helped identify the 15 pourashavas facing the highest overall
climate risk and risks to key infrastructures such as drainage and cyclone shelters. This formed
the basis for the prioritization of investments. In parallel, integrated drainage plans and detailed
engineering designs of roads and cyclone shelters were reviewed to identify climate risk gaps and
recommend design improvements. Potential climate change-related impacts can be reduced by
including climate adaptation measures in subproject designs. Master planning processes and
early warning systems were reviewed to identify opportunities for strengthening climate resilience.

B.      Economic and Financial Viability

26.     Economic analysis. The project being a sector project, the economic analysis evaluated
the economic feasibility of interventions of four sample subprojects in two pourashavas. 38 The
economic rationale for the government’s intervention is sound as the project focuses on
strengthening climate resilience through the provision of urban basic services, including cyclone
shelters, urban drains, emergency access roads, and IWM, where there is a natural monopoly
and the services are public goods managed by the government. The estimated economic internal
rates of return for the sample subprojects are 12.7% (Bagerhat drain), 15.2% (Jhalakathi cyclone
shelter), 15.5% (Bagerhat IWM), and 18.5% (Jhalakathi roads), which are higher than the
economic opportunity cost of capital of 9.0%, indicating significant economic returns. The results
are found satisfactory against all downside risks with higher economic internal rates of return than
the minimum required economic opportunity cost of capital of 9%, except for the combined worst-
case scenario for drain and cyclone shelter subprojects. The construction of assets under these

38 Complete due diligence was conducted for the four sample subprojects in the two pourashavas—Jhalakathi (cyclone

  shelters and urban roads) and Bagerhat (IWM and stormwater drainage).
                                                                                                                 11


four sample subprojects will benefit 130,000 people by 2029. The estimated poverty impact ratio
for four sample subprojects ranges from 25.3% (Jhalakathi roads) to 29.4% (Bagerhat drain). 39

27.     Financial analysis. ADB carried out financial analysis for the same four sample
subprojects (footnote 38). The proposed sample subprojects are nonrevenue-generating, with no
project-specific revenue stream that would cover O&M expenses. The historical and future cash
flow analysis was conducted for the project towns, which will operate and maintain assets to be
constructed under this project. The analysis found that, with current trends in income, expenditure,
and the government grant, Bagerhat has adequate capacity to operate and maintain the proposed
subprojects, and Jhalakathi requires additional financial support from the government to
sustainably operate and maintain the proposed subproject. To ensure sustainable O&M, the
project will support the development of a revenue enhancement plan for each pourashava under
output 3. The scope of the plan includes (i) identifying the potential for increasing the revenue
from existing sources by improving the collection efficiencies to 85%, (ii) exploring new revenue
sources, and (iii) assessing the legal provisions required to amend and implement the revenue
enhancement measures. The government has given its assurance that it will provide funding to
ensure financial sustainability in case the project towns are unable to meet O&M requirements
through their revenue sources (footnote 39).

C.       Sustainability

28.     The project will contribute to the wider goals of the Delta Plan 2100, which aims to ensure
the sustainability of the country’s long-term development aspirations by adopting integrated
strategies and interventions to address the impact of climate change. 40 Each project pourashava
will adopt a GESI-inclusive O&M plan with an improved asset management system, committing
to adequate budgetary allocation for O&M and technical support and training to pourashava staff
for enhanced O&M capacity. The project will support each pourashava to prepare, adopt, and
implement a revenue enhancement plan, which will improve revenue coverage, valuation,
collection, and taxpayer services.

D.       Governance

29.     Financial management. The assessed pre-mitigation financial management risk is
substantial mainly because (i) the most of the dedicated accounts staff positions in the PMU and
project implementation units (PIUs) are vacant; (ii) the fund flow is decentralized to the
pourashavas, which lack experience in implementing ADB-financed projects; (iii) challenges in
complying with ADB’s disbursement procedures have been noted in ADB’s ongoing LGED-
implemented projects; (iv) manual accounting systems are used to record project expenditures;
and (v) pourashavas are not audited annually. These risks will be mitigated by (i) filling the vacant
accounts staff positions and engaging financial management experts to support the project at all
levels, (ii) providing annual training in ADB’s financial management requirements and
disbursement procedures, (iii) including the project in the audit plan of LGED’s internal audit
function, (iv) strengthening pourashavas’ accounts and audit committees to undertake regular
internal audits, (v) incorporating comprehensive financial information as part of the quarterly
progress reports submitted to ADB, and (vi) recording all projects transactions in computerized
accounting software. As per established practice, the project will maintain separate books of
accounts in accordance with accounting standards acceptable to ADB and the consolidated

39 Financial Analysis and Economic Analysis (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
40 The Delta Plan 2100 has six goals. The project will contribute to SDG 1 on ensuring safety from floods and climate

  disasters (footnote 13).
12


project financial statement will be audited annually by an independent auditor acceptable to ADB
in accordance with International Standards on Auditing.

30.    Procurement. All procurement and consulting activities shall be carried out in accordance
with the ADB Procurement Policy (2017, as amended from time to time). The LGED has
demonstrated experience in procuring goods, works, and consulting services in accordance with
ADB procedures and requirements and satisfactory capacity in supporting pourashavas to
implement similar multisector projects, including procurement. Value for money is expected to be
achieved through efficiency gains from the use by each pourashava of national bidding
documents (electronic Public Works 3-Document [ePW3-D]) suitable for local contractors and e-
government procurement systems.

31.    ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed
with the government. The specific policy requirements and supplementary measures are
described in the PAM (footnote 31).

E.       Poverty, Social, and Gender

32.     The project is classified as a targeted intervention for geographic poverty targeting. One
in four people in Bangladesh continue to live in poverty, with 12.9% of the population suffering
from extreme poverty. 41 The Household Income and Expenditure Survey 2016 highlights that the
highest incidence of poverty (over 60%) occurs in climate-at-risk regions of Bangladesh. Coastal
towns are characterized by high poverty incidence, which increases the vulnerability of the urban
poor to the impacts of climate change. Coastal towns also suffer from large flood protection
infrastructure deficits that exacerbate vulnerability to climate change. During disasters, the poor
and vulnerable face financial losses through depleting savings and incomes; loss of productive
assets and livelihoods; loss of human assets with disruption in education, health, and skills
development; and loss of natural resources. The project will address the multiple dimensions of
poverty through sustainable and resilient livelihoods, and investments in adaptations in
infrastructure, capacity building, governance, and risk-informed urban planning. The project
directly targets the poorest and most vulnerable households in the project towns. Sustainable and
resilient livelihoods for the communities is a key focus area. The graduation approach will be
adopted in six towns to provide a comprehensive support mechanism for vulnerable households
to develop adaptive, diversified, and climate-resilient livelihoods.

33.     The project is categorized gender equity theme. The project will ensure women’s effective
participation in subproject design and implementation, decision-making, and leadership in
committees. The project will support at least 60% of vulnerable households, with 50% women
beneficiaries under the graduation approach, which will be implemented with the support of civil
society organizations. At least 50% women, including persons with disabilities, will receive
livelihood improvement training. The project will construct EWCD-friendly infrastructures. It will
enhance the institutional capacity of the PIU and LGED staff on GESI, climate and disaster risk
assessment, NbS, and green solutions. Moreover, all towns will develop and approve GESI-
responsive O&M plans with annual budget allocation. The project will introduce gender-
responsive and socially inclusive urban space design guidelines and support the development of
urban spaces in two project towns. Two social and gender development consultants will be hired
to ensure the effective implementation of the GESI action plan. 42

41 Government of Bangladesh, Ministry of Planning, Statistics and Informatics Division. 2017. Household Income and

  Expenditure Survey 2016. Dhaka.
42 Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Action Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                               13



F.         Safeguards

34.      In compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the project is categorized
B for environment, involuntary resettlement, and indigenous peoples. 43 The PMU will prepare
semiannual safeguard monitoring reports for ADB’s review and disclosure. A project grievance
redress mechanism integrated with the pourashavas’ existing complaint registration and redressal
systems will be established and disclosed to the project’s beneficiaries and/or affected
communities before civil works contracts are awarded. The LGED has significant experience in
implementing ADB-assisted projects (footnotes 12 and 17) and demonstrated commitments to
managing environmental and social risks. Orientation on ADB policy was undertaken for PMU
and consultants. A capacity development program on safeguards implementation will be provided
for all PMU, PIUs, and pourashava staff.

35.     Environment (category B). An environmental assessment and review framework and
five draft initial environmental examination (IEE) reports were prepared for sample subprojects. 44
The assessment results show that the subprojects are unlikely to have any significant
environmental impacts. Subprojects require compensatory plantation in a 1:2 ratio for trees cut.
Most potential impacts are likely to be temporary in nature and can be mitigated with proven
mitigation measures. The IEEs will be prepared for each subproject in each town. The
environmental assessment and review framework will guide the preparation of environmental
assessment reports, including IEEs and environmental management plans (EMPs), for the
remaining subprojects after loan approval. The IEEs and EMPs will be updated based on the final
design. All drafts and updated reports will be disclosed locally in accessible places and in
language affected people and other stakeholders can understand and on ADB and project
websites. The PMU and PIUs will obtain an environmental clearance certificate, as required, from
the Department of Environment prior to contract award or the start of works and will ensure
regulatory compliance. Institutional arrangements have been agreed upon for the implementation
of the EMPs.

36.    Involuntary resettlement (category B). A resettlement framework and resettlement
planning documents have been prepared for sample subprojects (footnote 44). The sample
subprojects are assessed to involve potentially significant impacts for 11 households (56
members), including 7 vulnerable households (38 members); insignificant impacts for 106
households (504 members), including 51 vulnerable households (289 members); and the loss of
268 trees. The proposed mitigation measures and safeguard planning documents for sample
subprojects address these impacts adequately. No category A subprojects are envisaged, and
none will be allowed. The social safeguards planning documents will be updated during the final
design and detailed measurement survey. The resettlement framework will guide the preparation
of resettlement planning documents for future subprojects after loan approval. The PMU will
disclose the resettlement framework, resettlement plans, small ethnic communities (SEC)
planning framework, resettlement and SEC plan, and due diligence reports on the project’s official
website, and the documents will be available in the local language and disclosed to affected
persons. 45 The PMU will ensure that the resettlement planning documents are included in the
bidding documents and civil works contracts.



43 ADB. Safeguard Categories.
44 Jhalakathi cyclone shelter and access road, Jhalakathi urban roads, Bagerhat drainage, Bagerhat IWM, and Kuakata

  roads.
45 The Government of Bangladesh requires use of the term “small ethnic communities” instead of indigenous peoples.
14


37.      Indigenous peoples (category B). Six project towns report the presence of SEC. Of the
six towns, Kuakata reports the highest proportion of SEC (1.67% of the total population). SEC
populations in the remaining project towns are scattered and integrated in urban society. Six SEC
households (26 family members) in Kuakata are assessed to face insignificant temporary loss of
income and loss of trees, while 25 SEC households (103 family members) will benefit. The road
subproject in Kuakata includes a roadside drainage component that was added based on the
expressed needs of the SEC population. Ten SEC households also expressed a preference to
provide the right to use a strip of land for drain construction without ownership transfer. The option
of the negotiated settlement will also be provided to the 10 SEC families. No direct or indirect
impacts on the dignity, human rights, livelihood systems, or natural or cultural resources of SEC
are anticipated. The SEC planning framework and the resettlement and SEC plan for the Kuakata
roads subproject have been prepared. The framework will guide the preparation of subprojects
identified after loan approval.

G.      Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan

38.      Significant risks and mitigation measures are summarized in Table 4 and described in
detail in the risk assessment and risk management plan. 46

                       Table 4: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
Risks                                                            Mitigation Measures
Limited financial management            Through output 3, ADB will provide capacity building in financial
capacity in pourashavas will lead       management, internal auditing, and ADB’s financial management
to improper financial management,       requirements and disbursement procedures and systems to staff of
noncompliance with ADB’s                the PMU and PIUs to ensure robust and transparent project financial
financial requirements and              management. The PMU and PIUs will record all project transactions
disbursement delays.                    using computerized accounting software.
The lack of familiarity of project      Each pourashava will use national bidding documents (electronic
pourashavas with ADB’s                  Public Works 3-Document [ePW3-D]) suitable for local contractors
Procurement Policy, 2017 will lead      and e-government procurement systems. ADB procurement clinics
to start-up delays and                  combined with project-specific training programs conducted by the
implementation delays.                  PMU and relevant consultants will build the capacity of pourashavas
                                        concerning all procurement and contract management in the PIUs.
The implementation capacity of the      ADB will provide sufficient capacity support to the LGED and the
LGED is stretched by the broad          pourashavas through output 3. The LGED will allocate subprojects
geographic coverage with multiple       based on pourashavas’ assessed absorptive capacity and
coastal towns and subprojects,          performance. The LGED will strengthen its project management
resulting in project start-up delays    capacity by establishing the PMU with adequate provision of
and implementation problems.            consulting services and assigning responsibilities to divisional and
                                        regional offices for project implementation. The project
                                        implementation period allows for potential delays.
The pourashavas’ financial and          The project will support each pourashava to increase revenue by
O&M capacity are inadequate to          adopting a revenue enhancement plan, achieving 85% tax collection
ensure the sustainability of project    efficiency, setting up a computerized accounting and billing system,
assets.                                 and enhancing pourashavas’ own-source revenue. Output 3 will
                                        support a gender and social inclusion-responsive O&M plan and
                                        monitor expenditures. In the event of any shortfalls, the government
                                        has agreed to support pourashavas through revenue grants to
                                        sustain their O&M expenditures.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, LGED = Local Government Engineering Department, O&M = operation and
maintenance, PIU = project implementation unit, PMU = project management unit.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

46 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                              15



                          IV.    ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS

39.     The government has assured ADB that implementation of the project shall conform to all
applicable ADB requirements, including those concerning anticorruption measures, safeguards,
gender, procurement, consulting services, financial management, and disbursement as described
in detail in the PAM and loan and grant documents.

40.      The government has agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the project, which are set
forth in the draft loan and grant agreements and project agreement.

                                 V.      RECOMMENDATION

41.   I am satisfied that the proposed loans and grant would comply with the Articles of
Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve:
      (i)     the loan of $96,000,000 to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the Coastal
              Towns Climate Resilience Project, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in
              regular terms, with interest to be determined in accordance with ADB’s Flexible
              Loan Product; for a term of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years; and such
              other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance with those set forth
              in the draft loan and project agreements presented to the Board;
      (ii)    the loan of $150,000,000 to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the Coastal
              Towns Climate Resilience Project, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in
              concessional terms, with an interest charge at the rate of 2% per year during the
              grace period and thereafter; for a term of 25 years, including a grace period of 5
              years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance with
              those set forth in the draft loan and project agreements presented to the Board;
              and
      (iii)   the grant not exceeding $4,000,000 to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, from
              ADB’s Special Funds resources (Asian Development Fund) for the Coastal Towns
              Climate Resilience Project, on terms and conditions that are substantially in
              accordance with those set forth in the draft grant and project agreements
              presented to the Board.

                                                           Masatsugu Asakawa
                                                           President
3 October 2022
16        Appendix 1



                            DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK

Impacts the Project is Aligned with
Higher and sustainable growth trajectories achieved in the face of the various weather-related natural
hazards and risk. (Delta Plan 2100, 2018) a
Improved livability of coastal towns. (Making Vision 2041 a Reality – Perspective Plan of Bangladesh,
2021–2041, 2020)b
                                                               Data Sources and            Risks and
                                                                  Reporting                  Critical
Results Chain               Performance Indicators               Mechanisms               Assumptions
Outcome
Climate and disaster    By 2030:
resilience of coastal   a. Capacity of EWCD-friendly         a, b, and d. LGED         A: Climate change
towns strengthened,     cyclone shelter increased for        annual reports and        impacts are within
including benefiting    10,000 people with enhanced          project      quarterly    projected levels.
the poor and women      safety featuresc and spaces          progress reports
                        for 5000 women (2022 baseline: 0)                              A: Pourashava (local
                        (OP2.5.2, OP3.2, OP4.1)                                        government)
                        b. At least 75% of households in                               continues to
                        project areas reported reduced                                 prioritize
                        inundation for less than 3 days                                governance
                        (2022 baseline: 43%) (OP3.2,                                   improvement.
                        OP4.1)
                        c. Livelihood improvedd for 1,500    c. Baseline and endline
                        women in six project pourashavas     survey for graduation
                        (2022 baseline: 0) (OP4.1)           program
                        d. 85% holding tax collection
                        efficiency achieved in 20
                        pourashavas (2022 baseline: 0
                        towns)

Outputs                 By 2029
                        (2022 baseline: 0)
1. Municipal            1a. 25 EWCD-friendly cyclone         1a.–1j. Project           A: Pourashavas
infrastructure for      shelters constructed with early      quarterly progress        achieve governance
resilience improved     warning system (OP 2.5.2, OP         reports                   improvement criteria
                        3.2.5)                                                         to be eligible for
                        1b. 9.7 km of emergency access                                 project investments.
                        roads to cyclone shelters
                        upgraded or constructed (OP
                        3.2.5, OP4.1.2)
                        1c. 200 km of stormwater drainage
                        constructed or rehabilitated (OP
                        3.2.5, OP 4.1.2)
                        1d. NbS piloted in at least three
                        towns (OP 3.2.5)
                        1e. Three integrated waste
                        managemente subprojects
                        completed (OP 4.3.1)
                        1f. 238 km of roads with
                        stormwater drainage, bridges, and
                        culverts rehabilitated or
                        constructed (OP3.2.5, OP 4.1.2)
                                                                                   Appendix 1   17


                                                                Data Sources and      Risks and
                                                                   Reporting            Critical
Results Chain                Performance Indicators               Mechanisms         Assumptions
                       1g. At least two gender-responsive
                       and socially inclusivef urban open
                       spacesg constructed (OP1.3.1)
                       1h. 150 EWCD-friendly sanitation
                       facilities, including community
                       latrines,h constructed serving poor
                       households (OP 1.3.1)
                       1i. Slum improvement program
                       implemented in at least 90% of
                       project pourashavas that have
                       slums (2021 baseline: Not
                       implemented)
                       1j. At least six local EWCD-friendly
                       socioeconomic infrastructuresi
                       developed (OP1.3.1)

                       By 2029:
                       (2022 baseline: 0)
2. Resilient           2a. 60% of vulnerable households       2a and 2c. Project
livelihoods enhanced   (including 50% female                  quarterly progress
                       beneficiaries) covered in the          reports
                       graduation program in six project
                       pourashavas (OP 2.5.1)
                       2b. 50% women, including               2b. Post-training
                       persons with disabilities, reported    survey reports
                       increased skills for resilient
                       livelihoods in six project
                       pourashavas (OP2.1.1, OP 2.5.1)
                       2c. Inventory of productive assets
                       of 70% of low-income households
                       documented for insurance (OP
                       2.5.1)

                       By 2029:
                       (2022 baseline: Not applicable)
3. Institutional       3a. Risk-informed urban                3a.–3i. Project
capacity,              development plan and poverty           quarterly progress
governance, and        reduction action plan of each town     reports
climate awareness      submitted to pourashava council,
strengthened           and development activities
                       controlledj (OP 3.2.4, OP4.2, OP
                       6.2.1)
                       3b. At least 225 staff of LGED and
                       pourashavas, including 90% of
                       eligible female staff, reported
                       increased knowledge on climate
                       and disaster risk assessment to
                       inform urban development
                       planning (OP2.3.2, OP 6.1.1)
                       3c. At least 225 staff of LGED and
                       pourashavas, including 90% of
                       eligible female staff, reported
18     Appendix 1


                                                            Data Sources and          Risks and
                                                               Reporting                Critical
Results Chain                  Performance Indicators         Mechanisms             Assumptions
                         increased knowledge on NbS and
                         green solutions (OP 6.1.1)
                         3d. Disaster management
                         committee on disaster
                         preparedness measures and
                         cyclone shelter management
                         committees operationalizedk in
                         each project pourashava (OP
                         6.2.4)
                         3e. Standing committees on
                         women’s and children’s affairs,
                         poverty reduction, and slum
                         improvement operationalized in
                         each project pourashava (OP
                         6.2.4)
                         3f. Revenue enhancement plan
                         approved by each project
                         pourashava (2022 baseline: No
                         plan exists (OP 6.1)
                         3g. Computerized tax records and
                         billings systems made functional in
                         each project pourashava (OP 6.1)
                         3h. Annual gender-responsive
                         O&M plans approvedl and annual
                         budget allocated by each project
                         pourashava (OP 6.1)
                         3i. Gender-responsive and socially
                         inclusive urban space design
                         guidelines incorporated in the
                         design of urban open spaces of
                         two project pourashavas (OP
                         6.2.1)
Key Activities with Milestones
1. Municipal infrastructure for resilience improved
1.1 Prepare integrated drainage plan for 10 towns with high climate risk impact (Q4 2023).
1.2 Design municipal infrastructure for climate resilience improvement (stage I) (Q4 2026).
1.3 Conduct procurement for (Q4 2025) and construct stage I infrastructure works (Q3 2028)
1.4 Design socioeconomic infrastructure (stage II) works (Q3 2026).
1.5 Conduct procurement for and construct stage II infrastructure works (Q1 2029).
2. Resilient livelihoods enhanced
2.1 Conduct market assessment, skills-mapping, and training needs assessment (Q2 2025).
2.2 Prepare inventory of productive assets of each household (Q2 2024).
2.3 Provide skills training and raise awareness on climate adaptation (Q1 2029).
3. Institutional capacity, governance, and climate awareness strengthened
3.1 Evaluate performance for entry level (stage I) criteria of all project pourashavas (Q3 2022).
3.2 Conduct orientation on the stage I and stage II criteria to project pourashavas (Q2 2023).
3.3 Sign partnership agreement with project pourashavas (Q4 2022).
3.4 Establish and operationalize disaster management standing committees and cyclone shelter
    management committees in all pourashavas (Q1 2029).
3.5 Select type of NbS for piloting and awareness raising (Q2 2026).
3.6 Support each pourashava in revenue enhancement (Q3 2028).
3.7 Prepare O&M plan and support implementation and monitoring (Q1 2029).
3.8 Evaluate pourashavas’ performance in accessing funds for socioeconomic infrastructure (Q2 2025).
                                                                                                      Appendix 1         19


3.9 Conduct training, climate awareness, and implementation of risk-informed urban plans (Q1 2029).
Project Management Activities
Procure works packages (Q4 2026).
Recruit and mobilize project management consultant (Q2 2023).
Recruit and mobilize detailed design service consultant (Q2 2023).
Recruit and mobilize institutional capacity and community development consultant (Q2 2023).
Recruit and mobilize two nongovernment organizations (Q2 2023).
Conduct review missions, midterm review, and project completion review (2022–2029).
Inputs
Asian Development Bank: $250 million (loan of $96 million from regular OCR, $150 million from
concessional OCR lending, and grant of $4.0 million from Asian Development Fund)
Government of Bangladesh: $60 million
A = assumption; EWCD = elderly (older person), women, children, and persons with disabilities; km = kilometer; LGED
= Local Government Engineering Department; NbS = nature-based solutions; O&M = operation and maintenance; OCR
= ordinary capital resources; OP = operational priority; Q = quarter.
a Government of Bangladesh. 2018. Delta Plan 2100. Dhaka.
b Government of Bangladesh. 2020. Making Vision 2041 a Reality–Perspective Plan of Bangladesh, 2021–2041.

   Dhaka.
c Enhanced safety features for women and girls will include separate space for women (including nursing mothers),

   adequate lighting, signage clearly displaying helpline numbers, space for livelihood activities during and after climate
   events, and mobilization of female cyclone shelter volunteers to address women’s specific needs. EWCD-friendly
   cyclone shelters will include ramps for easy access by the elderly (older persons) and persons with locomotor
   disability in the building and toilets, tactile flooring for stairs and entrances for visually impaired persons, separate
   amenities for women and men including toilets, and points for safe drinking water.
d Income levels enhanced to at least match the national minimum wage through improved skills and access to

   livelihood opportunities, measured by endline survey.
e Waste management service chain from source, collection, recovery, treatment, and disposal.
f Features that enhance women's safety and feelings of safety with special focus on lighting, visibility,

   pedestrianization, ease of access for women including those with babies and children, and signage with helpline
   numbers. Each open space will be designed considering the perspective of women and girls who will be the users.
g
   Open space is land and/or water area with its surface open to the sky, consciously acquired or publicly regulated to
   serve conservation and urban shaping function in addition to providing recreational opportunities.
h EWCD design features for toilets include features such as doors, windows, ventilation, and buckets for disposal of

   menstrual pads that are selected considering the safety, security, and privacy for women and girls; water taps, knobs
   and latches of toilet doors and windows at suitable heights and convenience for different ages persons; ramp-ups to
   toilets, sufficient space for a wheelchair in the passage, and hand railing in the passage and within the toilet cubicles.
i Includes (i) allocated space for women sellers in markets; (ii) separate toilets for women with water facilities in

   markets, bus terminals, and boat landings; and (iii) adequate lighting for commercially important roads.
j Enforce at least 80% control of new building construction, reconstruction activities, land development and effective

   prevention of encroachment on public land (such as natural ecosystem, river, canal, and khas [government-owned])
   land practiced.
k Meets at least twice a year and functions effectively as per terms of reference, meetings are publicly announced and

   involve active participation by women and poor, and minutes are prepared and publicly disclosed.
l O&M plans will include targets for women members in committees, provision for regular monitoring and maintenance

   of gender-responsive infrastructure, and targets for women’s employment in O&M.
Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities:
Expected values and methodological details for all OP indicators to which this operation will contribute results are
detailed in Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix
2).
Source: Asian Development Bank.
20    Appendix 2


                              LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS
                   http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=55201-001-3

1.     Loan Agreement: Ordinary Operations
2.     Loan Agreement: Ordinary Operations (Concessional)
3.     Grant Agreement
4.     Project Agreement
5.     Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services
6.     Project Administration Manual
7.     Financial Analysis
8.     Economic Analysis
9.     Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
10.    Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
11.    Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities
12.    Climate Change Assessment
13.    Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Action Plan
14.    Initial Environmental Examination: Construction of Multipurpose Cyclone Shelter
       Under Jhalakathi Pourashava
15.    Initial Environmental Examination: Construction/Improvement of Drains in Bagerhat
       Pourashava
16.    Initial Environmental Examination: Construction/Improvement of Roads and Roadside
       Drain in Kuakata Pourashava
17.    Initial Environmental Examination: Construction/Improvement of Roads and Roadside
       Drains in Jhalakathi Pourashava
18.    Initial Environmental Examination: Integrated Waste Management for Bagerhat
       Pourashava
19.    Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
20.    Resettlement Plan: Construction/Improvement of Roads and Roadside Drains in
       Jhalakathi Pourashava
21.    Land Acquisition and Resettlement Due Diligence Report: Construction of
       Multipurpose Cyclone Shelter Under Jhalakathi Pourashava
22.    Resettlement Plan: Integrated Waste Management for Bagerhat Pourashava
23.    Resettlement Plan: Construction and Improvement of Reinforced Cement Concrete
       Drains in Bagerhat Pourashava – Length: 5.557 km
24.    Resettlement and Small Ethnic Communities Plan: Kuakata Town Roads Subproject
25.    Small Ethnic Communities Planning Framework
26.    Resettlement Framework

Supplementary Document
27.   Climate Risk and Adaptation Assessment
