                                     GRANT AGREEMENT
                                     (Special Operations)


          GRANT AGREEMENT dated 26 December 2022 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
OF BANGLADESH ("Recipient") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADS").

               WHEREAS

                (A)    by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Recipient and ADS
("Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the
Recipient from ADB's ordinary capital resources ("Ordinary Operations Loan") in an amount of
ninety six million Dollars ($96,000,000) for the purpose of financing expenditures under the
Project described in Schedule 1 of the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement ("Project");

                  (8)    by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Recipient and ADB
("Concessional Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Recipient
from ADB's ordinary capital resources ("Concessional Loan") in an amount of one hundred and
fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000) for the purpose of financing expenditures under the Project;

                (C)    the Project will be carried out by the Recipient and the Pourashavas
identified in Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement ("Pourashavas"), and for this
purpose the Recipient shall make available to the Pourashavas the proceeds of the loan provided
for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

              (D)    ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Recipient from ADB's Special
Funds resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the Project Agreement of
even date herewith between ADB and each Pourashava;

              NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:



                                           ARTICLE I

                                Grant Regulations; Definitions


              Section 1.01.           All the provisions of ADB's Special Operations Grant
Regulations, dated 1 January 2022 ("Grant Regulations"), are hereby made applicable to this
Grant Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject,
however, to the following modifications:

              (a)     Section 2.01 (m) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

                      "Project Agreement" means the project agreement of even date herewith
                      between ADB and each Pourashava, as such agreement may be amended
                      from time to time; and such project agreement includes all schedules to the
                      Project Agreement;
                                                2


               (b)    The term "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01(a),
                      8.01(c), 8.01(e), 8.01(i), 9.01(b) and 9.02(b) of the Grant Regulations shall
                      be substituted by the term "each Pourashava"

              Section 1.02.          Wherever used in this Grant Agreement, the several terms
defined in the Grant Regulations and the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement have the
respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise requires.



                                          ARTICLE II

                                           The Grant


              Section 2.01.       ADS agrees to make available to the Recipient from ADB's
Special Funds resources an amount of four million Dollars ($4,000,000).



                                          ARTICLE Ill

                                 Use of Proceeds of the Grant


              Section 3.01.         The Recipient shall make an appropriate portion of the
proceeds of the Grant available to the Pourashavas upon terms and conditions satisfactory to
ADS and shall cause the Pourashavas to apply such proceeds to the financing of expenditures
on the Project in accordance with the provisions of this Grant Agreement and the Project
Agreement.

              Section 3.02.         The proceeds of the Grant shall be allocated and withdrawn
in accordance with the provisions of the Schedule to this Grant Agreement, as such Schedule
may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Recipient and ADB.

               Section 3.03.         Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Recipient shall
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of
the Grant in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Ordinary Operations Loan
Agreement.

             Section 3.04.        Withdrawals from the Grant Account in respect of Goods,
Works and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

               (a)    Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and Services
                      which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as shall have been
                      specified by ADS from time to time as eligible sources for procurement; and

              (b)     Goods, Works and Services which meet such other eligibility requirements
                      as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.
                                                    3


              Section 3.05.        The Grant Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 of
the Grant Regulations shall be 31 December 2029 or such other date as may from time to time
be agreed between the Recipient and ADS.



                                             ARTICLE IV

                                        Particular Covenants


                Section 4.01.         In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project
facilities, the Recipient shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in
Schedule 4 to the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

                Section 4.02.          (a)      The Recipient shall (i) maintain separate accounts
and records for the Project and ensure that each Pourashava maintains separate accounts and
records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project and ensure that
each Pourashava prepares annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with
financial reporting standards acceptable to ADS; (iii) consolidate its own annual financial
statements for the Project with the annual financial statements received from each Pourashava;
(iv) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADS, in accordance with
auditing standards acceptable to ADS; (v) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare
a report, which includes the auditors' opinions on the financial statements and the use of the Grant
proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the
Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (vi) furnish to ADS, no later than
9 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements,
audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADS shall from time to time reasonably
request.

               (b)     ADS shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the Project
and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date of ADS's
confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADS's website.

                (c)     The Recipient shall enable ADS, upon ADS's request, to discuss the
financial statements for the Project and the Recipient's financial affairs where they relate to the
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iv) hereinabove, and shall authorize
and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested
by ADS. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an
authorized officer of the Recipient, unless the Recipient shall otherwise agree.

                Section 4.03.      The Recipient shall enable ADS's representatives to inspect
the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

                Section 4.04.          The Recipient shall take all actions which shall be necessary
on its part to enable Pourashavas to perform their obligations under the Project Agreement, and
shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the performance of such obligations.
                                               4



                                          ARTICLEV

                                         Suspension


              Section 5.01.          The following are specified as additional events for
suspension of the right of the Recipient to make withdrawals from the Grant Account for the
purposes of Section 8.01(k) of the Grant Regulations:

               (a)    the Ordinary Operations Loan shall have become liable for suspension or
                      cancellation prior to the Loan Closing Date; and

               (b)    the Concessional Loan shall have become liable for suspension or
                      cancellation prior to the Loan Closing Date.



                                         ARTICLEVI

                                        Effectiveness


              Section 6.01.       The following are specified as additional conditions to the
effectiveness of this Grant Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(e) of the Grant
Regulations:

              (a)     the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement shall have been duly executed
                      and delivered and all conditions to its effectiveness (other than the
                      effectiveness of the Concessional Loan Agreement and this Grant
                      Agreement) shall have been fulfilled; and

              (b)     the Concessional Loan Agreement shall have been duly executed and
                      delivered and all conditions to its effectiveness (other than the
                      effectiveness of the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement and this Grant
                      Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

                Section 6.02.          A date 90 days after the date of this Grant Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Grant Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the
Grant Regulations.
                                                 5


                                          ARTICLE VII

                                           Termination


              Section 7.01.          The Grant Agreement and all obligations of the parties
thereunder shall terminate on a date 20 years after the date of this Agreement.



                                          ARTICLE VIII

                                    Delegation of Authority


             Section 8.01.          The Recipient hereby designates the Project Executing
Agency and the Pourashavas as its agents for the purposes of taking any action or entering into
any agreement required or permitted under Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.04 of this Grant Agreement
and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 5.03 and 5.04 of the Grant Regulations.

                Section 8.02.         Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the
Project Executing Agency and the Pourashavas pursuant to the authority conferred under Section
8.01 of this Grant Agreement shall be fully binding on the Recipient and shall have the same force
and effect as if taken by the Recipient.

             Section 8.03. The authority conferred on the Project Executing Agency and
Pourashavas under Section 8.01 of this Grant Agreement may be revoked or modified by
agreement between the Recipient and ADB.
                                                6


                                           ARTICLE IX

                                        Miscellaneous


                Section 9.01.        The Senior Secretary or Secretary or any Additional
Secretary, Joint Secretary or Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary or Deputy Chief, Senior Assistant
Secretary or Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of the Economic
Relations Division of the Recipient's Ministry of Finance is designated as representative of the
Recipient for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Grant Regulations.

              Section 9.02.         The following addresses are specified for the purposes of
Section 11.01 of the Grant Regulations:

              For the Recipient

                      Economic Relations Division
                      Ministry of Finance
                      Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh
                      Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
                      Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh

                      Facsimile Number:

                             +880 2 918-0788

              For ADB

                      Asian Development Bank
                      6 ADB Avenue
                      Mandaluyong City
                      1550 Metro Manila
                      Philippines

                      Facsimile Numbers:

                             (632) 8636-2444
                             (632) 8636-2338.
                                                8


                                          SCHEDULE

                        Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds


General

1.            The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Grant and the allocation of the Grant
proceeds to each such Category ("Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Grant Account

2.             Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Grant shall be allocated
to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of
expenditure, as set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3.               Notwithstanding the allocation of Grant proceeds and the withdrawal percentages
set forth in the Table,

               (a)    if the amount of the Grant allocated to any Category appears to be
                      insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may,
                      in consultation with the Recipient, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the
                      extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Grant which
                      have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of ADB, are
                      not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation cannot
                      fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage
                      applicable to such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under
                      such Category may continue until all expenditures thereunder shall have
                      been made; and

               (b)    if the amount of the Grant allocated to any Category appears to exceed all
                      agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation with the
                      Recipient, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4.           Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Grant proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook, and detailed agreements agreed upon
between ADB and the Recipient.
                                               9
                                                                                    Schedule 2



Retroactive Financing

5.             Withdrawals from the Grant Account may be made to finance eligible expenditures
incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 months before the
date of this Grant Agreement in connection with items 1 (Civil works and equipment), 2 (Civil
works and equipment (nature-based solutions)), 4 (Project management and capacity
development) and 5 (Incremental administration costs) of the Table, subject to a maximum
amount equivalent to 20% of the Grant amount.
