Land Acquisition and Resettlement Due Diligence
Report


PUBLIC

Document Stage: Draft for Consultation
Project Number: 55201-001
October 2025.




Bangladesh: Coastal Towns Climate Resilience
Sector Project

Construction and Improvement of Reinforced Cement
Concrete Drain-01(Length 3.701km.) in Kuakata
Pourashava (Package: e-GP/CTCRP/KUAK/DR-01)




Prepared by Local Government Engineering Department, Government of Bangladesh for the
Asian Development Bank (ADB).
             CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                (As of October 2025)

             Currency unit   –   taka (Tk)
                   Tk1.00    =   $0.00824
                    $1.00    =   Tk121.29


                 ABBREVIATIONS

ADB      -     Asian Development Bank
AIDS     -     acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
BAN      -     Bangladesh
CDTA     -     Capacity Development Technical Assistance
CTCRP    -     Coastal Towns Climate Resilience Project
DDR      -     Due Diligence Report
DDS      -     Detailed Design services
DPHE     -     Department of Public Health Engineering
FGD      -     Focus Group Discussion
GRM      -     Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRC      -     Grievance Redress Committee
IEE      -     Initial Environmental Examination
LGED     -     Local Government Engineering Department
PAM      -     Project Administrative Management
PIU      -     Project Implementation Unit
PMSC     -     Project Monitoring and Supervision Consultants
PPTA     -     Project Preparatory Technical Assistance
SCF      -     Strategic Climate Fund
TLCC     -     Town Level Co-ordination Committee
TMRESC   -     Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities
SPS      -     Safeguard Policy Statement


             WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

°C       -     Degree Celsius
cm       -     centimeters
km       -     kilometer
m        -     meter
mm       -     millimeter
m2       -     micrograms per cubic meter
                                                  NOTES

(i) The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of Bangladesh and its agencies ends on 30 June. “FY”
before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY 2025 ends on 30
June 2025.

(ii) In this report, "$" refers to United States dollar.




This land acquisition and resettlement due diligence report is a document of the borrower. The
views expressed herein do not necessarily represent those of ADB's Board of Directors,
Management, or Staff, and may be preliminary in nature. Your attention is directed to the
“terms of use” section of ADB’s website.

In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, ADB
does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                                CONTENTS
 I.       INTRODUCTION                                                         1
          A.      Background                                                   1
          B       Project Description                                          1
          C.      Scope of Due Diligence Report                                4
 II.      PROJECT DESCRIPTION                                                  4
          A.   About the Project Area                                          4
          B.   Location of the Site                                            5
 III.     LAND AVAILABILITY AND RESETTLEMENT IMPACTS                          17
          A.      Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement               17
          B.      Impact on Indigenous Peoples                                19
 IV.      FIELD WORK AND PUBLIC CONSULTATION                                  20
          A.      Outline of Field Work                                       20
          B.      Public Consultations                                        20
          C.      Focus Groups Discussions (FGD)                              22
          D.      Summary of Discussions                                      22
          E.      Future Consultation and Disclosure                          28
          F.      Findings                                                    29
 V.       GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM                                         29
 VI.      BUDGET TO IMPLEMENT SUBPROJECT COMPONENT                            32
 VII.     CONCLUSIONS                                                         32
          A.      Summary and Conclusion                                      32
          B.      Next Steps                                                  33
LIST OF TABLES:

Table 1: District-wise Pourashavas where Project will be implemented          02
Table 2: Details of proposed drains                                           03
Table 3: Details of Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement Impacts      17
Table 4: Summary of Public Consultation                                       21
 Table 5: Budgetary Provision for Implementation of DDR                       32

  LIST OF FIGURES:

  Figure 1: Google Earth Map of Kuakata Pourashava                             06
  Figure 2: Location of DR 1-1 in Kuakata Pourashava                           07

  Figure 3: Location of DR 1-2 in Kuakata Pourashava                           08

  Figure 4: Topographic Site Plan of Drain                                     09
  Figure 5: Photographs of FGD meeting and existing condition of the Drains    23
  Figure 6: Grievance Redress Process                                          31
  APPENDIXES:
  Appendix 1: Involuntary Resettlement Impacts Screening Checklist             34

 Appendix 2: Indigenous Peoples Impact Screening Checklist                     35

 Appendix 3: Minutes of Focus Group Discussion                                37

 Appendix 4: Sample Grievance Registration Format                              44
Appendix 5: Specific Action Plan of TMRESC/IP Households                       45
 Appendix 6: Ownership Certificate (NOC) from Pourashava                       48
1




                                       I. INTRODUCTION

A. Background

1.       The Asian Development Bank (ADB) supported Coastal Towns Infrastructure
Environmental Infrastructure Project (CTEIP) in 10 coastal towns effectively commenced in
September 2014 which will be completed in June 2022. As a continuity of the project ADB
extended his support to Coastal Towns Climate Resilience Project (CTCRP) which will
strengthen climate resilience and disaster preparedness in 22 (twenty-two) vulnerable coastal
Pourashavas (secondary towns) of Bangladesh. The towns were selected based on their
vulnerability, population size, density, and level of past investments. The project takes a holistic
and integrated approach to urban development and will (i) provide climate-resilient municipal
infrastructure, and (ii) strengthen institutional capacity, local governance, and knowledge-
based public awareness, for improved urban planning and service delivery considering climate
change and disaster risks. Key infrastructure investments include (i) drainage, (ii) water supply,
(iii) sanitation, (iv) cyclone shelters, and (v) other municipal infrastructure including emergency
access roads and bridges, solid waste management, bus terminals, slum improvements, boat
landings, and markets. Investments will benefit the poor and women. The Ministry of Local
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MLGRDC) acting through its Local
Government Engineering Department (LGED) will be the Executing Agency. Pourashavas are
the implementing agencies of the project.

2.      Coastal towns are particularly at risk from the impacts of climate change due to high
levels of poverty and limited capacity of Pourashavas (urban local governments) to invest in
resilience. The Pourashavas lack resilient infrastructure, clubbed with haphazard urbanization,
lack of storm water drains, poor solid waste management system further worsens the condition
of these towns. Most of the coastal towns are situated on the riverbanks of low-lying tidal zones
at an average elevation of 1.0–1.5 meters (m) from the sea level1 and coastal flooding is a key
hazard faced by these towns. Inadequate basic municipal infrastructure to respond to
increasing climate risk threatens both quality of life and the economic growth of coastal towns.
This calls for an integrated approach for coastal town development that promotes risk-
informed planning and investment for building resilience.

B. Project Description

3.      The project will be aligned with the following impacts: higher and sustainable growth
trajectories achieved in the face of the various weather-related natural hazards and risk and
improved livability of coastal towns. The outcome of the project will be climate and disaster
resilience of coastal towns strengthened including benefiting the poor and women. The project
directly supports to achieve project outcomes through three outputs.

4.       Output 1: Municipal infrastructure for resilience improved. Municipal infrastructure
will include (i) elderly people, women, children, and persons with disability friendly cyclone
shelters; (ii) 240 kms emergency access roads including bridges and culverts which are critical
for accessing emergency services; (iii) 272 kms of storm water drains constructed for improved
flood control; (iv) water supply and sanitation services for unserved (or underserved) core
urban areas and slum areas; (v) seven integrated solid waste management facilities; and (vi)
slum improvement programs for basic service improvement implemented in each Pourashava
following poverty reduction action plan.



1 Sowmen   Rahman and Mohammed Ataur Rahman. Climate Extremes and Challenges to Infrastructure
  Development in Coastal Cities in Bangladesh. Volume 7, March 2015, Pages 96–1
2 Government of Bangladesh, General Economics Division, Bangladesh Planning Commission Ministry of

  Planning. 2020. Making Vision 2041 a Reality – Perspective Plan of Bangladesh, 2021–2041. Dhaka.
2


5.     Output 2: Resilient livelihood improved. Output 2 includes (i) livelihood training
programs for diversifying the skills of poor households including women, (ii) strengthening
market linkages for local economic development, (iii) inventory of productive assets of each
household maintained and insured, and (iv) the Graduation Approach and Program will be
adopted to ensure livelihood resilience.3

6.       Output 3: Institutional capacity, governance, and climate-awareness strengthened.
Output 3 includes (i) capacity of LGED and Pourashavas strengthened to undertake climate
and disaster risk assessment to inform the formulation and update urban development plans;
and enforcement of development control regulations that factor in natural hazards
considerations; (ii) knowledge and capacity of LGED and Pourashavas on NbS and green
solution application developed; (iii) municipal governance, and sustainable service delivery
improved; and (iv) public awareness, behavior change, and community mobilization enhanced
in light of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and recent severe cyclones.

7.     The proposed CTCRP is to be implemented in 22 Pourashavas or urban local bodies
(ULBs). District-wise location of the towns is summarized in Table 1.

          Table 1: District-wise Pourashavas where Project will be Implemented
       District        Town (Pourashava)              District       Town (Pourashava)
    1. Barisal        1. Bakerganj               5.   Bhola          1. Charfassion
                      2. Mehendiganj                                 2. Lalmohan
                      3. Banaripara                                  3. Borhanuddin
                      4. Muladi                  6. Jhalokathi       4. Jhalokathi
                      5. Gouranadi                                   5. Nalchity
    2. Bagerhat       6. Bagerhat                7. Satkhira         6. Kalaroa
                      7. Morelganj               8. Khulna           7. Paikgacha
    3. Patuakhali     8. Patuakhali                                  8. Chalna (Dacope)
                      9. Kuakata                 9. Pirojpur         9. Swarupkathi
    4. Shariatpur     10. Zanjira                10. Barguna         10. Patharghata
                      11. Bhedarganj                                 11. Betagi


8.      This land acquisition and resettlement due diligence report is prepared for the
construction of RCC drains in Kuakata Pourashava of Patuakhali district. The drains will be
constructed on the existing right-of- way of the pourashava own land. The subprojects will be
implemented under CTCRP, LGED. Improvement of drains is expected to bring various
quantifiable benefits for the citizens of the area. The components of the subproject, shown in
Table 2.
                                                                                                  3

                                Table 02: Details of Proposed Drains
Sl.                                                            Details of Land Ownership and          Rem
No                                                      Type      Involuntary Resettlement            arks
      Name of Drains                         Length     of                 Impacts
                                             (km)       Drai      Land           Involuntary
                                                        ns     Ownership        Resettlement
                                                                                   Impacts
1.    Construction     of   RCC      Drain   3.195 km   RCC    Kuakata       No land acquisition
      Nilanjana Hotel to Paurashava End                        Pourashava and involuntary
      via Sikder Resort (CH. 0+0.00Km to                                     resettlement Issues
      CH. 2+0.100km) with 3 (Three) Link                                     (refer to Table 3 for
      drain, Link-1. Farajibari to WAPDA                                     the detailed
      Baribandth Sarak (CH. 0+0.00km to                                      assessment).
      CH. 0+0.258km). Link-2. Farajibari
      to Mahbubur Rahman Sarak (CH.
      0+0.00km to CH. 0+0.382km). Link-
      3. Hotel Seacrown to Mahbubur
      Rahman Sarak (CH. 0+0.00km to
      CH. 0+0.455km), Total Length of
      Road, L=0.908km, Ward No: 07, 08
      & 09.

2.    Construction of RCC Drain Eshakh       0.506km    RCC    Kuakata        No land acquisition
      Hawlader House to Dopashi Para                           Pourashava     and involuntary
      Bridge via Minhaz Mawlana House                                         resettlement Issues
      (CH.0+0.00km to CH. 0+0.506km),                                         (refer to Table 3 for
      Total Length of drain L=0.506km,                                        the detailed
      Ward No.08.                                                             assessment).

                  Total                      3.701km
4

                             C. Scope of Due Diligence Report

9.      This due diligence report (DDR) is prepared for the proposed construction work of DR-
01 in Kuakata Pourashava. The report is prepared based on the available preliminary design
and the Sub Project Appraisal Report (SPAR) prepared for this project and relevant sections
of the Capacity Development Technical Assistance (CDTA) Report; discussions with related
stakeholders and PIU/Pourashava authorities and consultation with the Department of Public
Health Engineering (DPHE) personnel.

10.    Social safeguards due diligence has been conducted to examine the land acquisition
and resettlement issues in detail based on the preliminary design and information, aligned with
Asian Development Bank’s Safeguard Policy Statement (ADB SPS), 2009. All construction
work will use Pourashava land, no land acquisition or involuntary resettlement impacts have
been identified as the proposed land is free from any encumbrances.

11.    Any adverse impact in terms of permanent or temporary such as land acquisition,
physical displacement, economic displacement, adverse impact on livelihood, community
properties or any other impact is not anticipated due to the proposed project. This report
describes the findings and provides copies of relevant documents, community consultations
and photographs.

12.      The DDR will be updated during design verification by the contractor, in case of any
design or alignment change. The updated document will be submitted to ADB for clearance,
prior to start of construction. The Executive Engineer of the concerned Pourashava will be the
focal person for all social safeguard related issues. The draft DDR will be reviewed and
disclosed on MLGRDC, LGED and ADB websites.


                                 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
A. About the Project Area

13.    Kuakata is a town in southern Bangladesh known for its panoramic sea beach. Kuakata
beach is a sandy expanse 18 km. long and 3 km wide. From the beach, one can have an
unobstructed view of both sunrise and sunset over the Bay of Bengal. Kuakata is situated in
Kalapara Upazila, Patuakhali District. It is about 320 km south of Dhaka, the capital, and about
70 km from the district headquarters.

14.      The town Kuakata has sea beach named Kuakata Beach. Many tourists visit the place
to see the beach although it hasn’t received international recognition like Cox’s Bazar Beach
but it remains to be popular in Bangladesh. There are many places tourist visit such as: (a)
Kuakata National Park; (b) Kuakata Ecopark; (c) Forest of Fatra (The protected mangrove
forest on the western side of the beach is known as the ‘second Sundarban’); (d) Well of
Kuakata; for the Shima Buddhist Monastery; (f) Rakhaine settlement of Keranipara; (g) Alipur
Port; (h) Mishripara Buddhist Monastery; and (i) Forest of Gangamati.


15.      Being situated adjacent to the Bay of Bengal, Kuakata Pourashava have experience
frequent natural disasters every year, leading to increase suffering among its inhabitants.
Adding to this, climate change effect has speed up the frequency of natural disaster like,
cyclone, tidal, storm surge, thunderstorm, excessive rainfall, rising temperature, increase
salinity, land slide, erosion of riverbanks, etc. and these are the major disaster for Kuakata in
Potuakhali district. The Pourashava is more susceptible to floods, cyclonic surges and heavy
rainfalls. There are no sufficient cyclone shelters in Kuakata Pourashava that would provide
refuge to the affected vulnerable population during the hazard situation.
                                                                                             5


16.     The area of Kuakata Pourashava is 12.75 km spread over 3 mouzas, 9 mahallas in
Kalapara Upazila of Potuakhali District under Barisal Division. Kuakata Pourashava is
bounded by 7 No. Latachapli Union to the North, East and Weast and Bay of Bengal to the
south. About 6,000 households with 49,900 population (male 25,100 and female 24,800)4 are
currently living in the town. The Pourashava consists of 9 wards.

17.    The Pourashava has a total of 40 km pucca road, 2 km semi pucca road, 30km kancha
road. There are 1 government hospital, 4 private clinics, 1 post office and 11 public toilets in
Kuakata Pourashava. The Pourashava also 1 non-government, secondary schools, 7
government, primary schools, 3 kindergarten, 10 madrasah, 2 pagoda, 32 mosques, and 102
ponds

18.     The Pourashava has plans to strengthen the provision of citizen services by increasing
collection of revenue by taking up income generating activities. Kuakata Pourashava also has
plans to develop as a tourist centre with roads, sewerage modernization, construction of
children’s park, installation of cable cars, modernization of entertainment spots.

B. Location of the Site

19.    The proposed drains are at Kuakata Pourashava. Kuakata Pourashava is located
under Kalapara Upazila in Patuakhali District of Barishal Division on the southern part of
Bengal Basin. It is situated at 21°48′55.98″ north latitude and 90°07′18.62″ east longitude by
its municipal central zero point. Nationally, it is a newly declared municipality (proposed on
15th December 2010 and implemented in May 2011) area under the Latachapli Union,
Kalapara Upazila. It is 350 km away from the capital city Dhaka. Kuakata, locally known as
Sagar Kannya (Daughter of the Sea). Kuakata Pourashava is bounded to the north by the
Upazila headquarters of Kalapara Upazila, to the south by the Bay of Bengal, and
Andharmanik, Galachipa and Khaprabhanga rivers to the east, west and north respectively.

20.     Kuakata is known for its panoramic sea beach. Being situated adjacent to the Bay of
Bengal, Kuakata Pourashava have experience frequent natural disasters every year, leading
to increase suffering among its inhabitants in many aspects. Due to inadequate and non-
functional drains lead the sufferings especially during rainy season.

21.    The project consists of three components i) improved climate-resilient infrastructure ii)
strengthening institutional capacity, governance, and awareness, and iii) project management
and administrative support. The outcome of the project will be improved access to climate
disaster resilience municipal services including i) municipal infrastructure such as drainage,
cyclone shelters, urban roads, bridges, culverts, solid waste management, bus terminals, slum
improvement, boat landing and markets; ii) water supply and iii) sanitation.

22.     The proposed alignments for the drains under Kuakata Pourashava, District:
Patuakhali are located within the Pourashava area, which are mostly within urban areas. Total
length of the proposed drains is 3.701 km. Refer to Figure 1 Google earth map, Figure 2 & 3
location map and Figure 4 Topographic Site Plan of the Kuakata pourashava where the
proposed drains will constructed/improved.
6


                     Figure 1: Google Earth Map of Kuakata Pourashava




    Source: Google Earth Pro, Image 2024.
                                                      7

Figure 02: Location of DR 1-1 in Kuakata Pourashava
8

    Figure 03: Location of DR 1-2 in Kuakata Pourashava
                                            9

Figure 04: Topographic Site Plan of DR-01
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
                                                                                                17

                III. LAND AVAILABILITY AND RESETTLEMENT IMPACTS

A. Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

23.    The social safeguard study for the proposed package, e-GP/CTCRP/KUAK/DR-01, of
the Kuakata Pourashava indicates that there is no need for land acquisition as drains will be
constructed on the existing available land of Kuakata Pourashava.

24.    The scope of the land acquisition and involuntary resettlement has been assessed
during field visits and data collection. The project will not result into any permanent or
temporary land acquisition and no involuntary resettlement impact is envisaged, as the
proposed site and development activities are within the vacant land of existing drains. All the
construction works will be undertaken to implement the proposed drains within the right-of-
way. The DDC engineering team has made efforts to avoid any resettlement impacts by careful
design and verification.

25.      It was revealed through a physical investigation that the subproject will not impact any
privately owned land for undertaking civil works. As such, no land acquisition and resettlement
will be required. There will also be no loss of livelihood, either permanent or temporary to
titleholders or non-titled persons.

26.    The detail of land acquisition and involuntary resettlement impacts, which has been
assessed using a standard involuntary resettlement checklist, undertaking a complete transect
walk for the subproject, is shown in Table 3.

       Table 3: Details of Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement Impacts

              Component                  Length      Land                       IR Impact
                                          (km)     Ownership
  1.Construction of RCC Drain           3.195 km   Kuakata      The drain will be constructed on the
  Nilanjana Hotel to Paurashava End                Pourashav    existing available land of the Kuakata
  via Sikder Resort (CH. 0+000Km to                a            Pourashava. Implementing the RCC drain
  CH. 2+100km) with 3 (Three) Link                              will not cause temporary or permanent
  drain, Link-1. Farajibari to WAPDA                            income loss or impact structures. There
  Baribandth Sarak (CH. 0+000km to                              are no issues related to land acquisition or
  CH. 0+258km). Link-2. Farajibari to                           involuntary resettlement.
  Mahbubur Rahman Sarak (CH.
  0+000km to CH. 0+382km). Link-3.
  Hotel Seacrown to Mahbubur
  Rahman Sarak (CH. 0+000km to
  CH. 0+455km), Total Length of
  Road, L=908m, Ward No: 07, 08 &
  09.

  2. Construction of RCC Drain          0.506 km   Kuakata      The drain will be constructed on the
  Eshakh Hawlader House to Dopashi                 Pourashav    existing available land of the Kuakata
  Para Bridge via Minhaz Mawlana                   a            Pourashava. Implementing the RCC drain
  House (CH.0+000km to CH.                                      will not cause temporary or permanent
  0+506km), Total Length of drain                               income loss or impact structures. There
  L=506m, Ward No.08.                                           are no issues related to land acquisition or
                                                                involuntary resettlement.
18

27.     The contract is planned to be implemented over a period of 12 months. Detailed
designs have been prepared; the DDR will be updated during design verification by the
contractor, in case of any change in design or alignment. The package for the construction of
the proposed drain is to be implemented by post-qualified contractors under a single envelope
single stage bidding process through National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procedures.

28.     The stated time period will depend on the resources put in place by the contractor. Pre-
construction activities include detailed design, bidding process (Notice inviting Bids, Bid
submission, evaluation and award of work to the contractor). The pre- construction activities
will be completed within a 6-month period. The summarized construction schedule is given in
the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) report. The general arrangement drawings
including typical details, plans, cross-sectional details and long sections are also given.

29.      The construction schedule of drain depends on the methodology adopted for
construction. The stated time period will depend on the resources put in place by the
contractor. Pre-construction activities include detailed design, bidding process (Notice inviting
Bids, Bid submission, evaluation and award of work to the contractor). The pre- construction
activities will be completed within a 6-month period. The summarized construction schedule is
given in the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) report. The general arrangement drawings
including typical details, plans, cross-sectional details and long sections are also given.

30.     The project is not likely to have any adverse social impact on the project area, other
than the short-term impacts during the construction phase. The baseline data for this Due
Diligence Report was collected from primary and secondary sources. The primary sources
include site visits and visual inspection. The secondary sources include reports, books, maps
and legal documents from various government and non-government organizations on subject
matter.

31.     The impacts are assessed based on preliminary design and standard methodology for
the review, field visit data collection and impact assessment. The Bangladesh National Acts,
Legislation and Laws were consulted with a view to ensuring compliance with the relevant
requirements.

32.     The outcome of the CTCRP interventions will be to improve access to, and availability
of, climate-disaster resilient municipal services, including (i) municipal infrastructure such as
roads, drainage, cyclone shelters, urban drains, bridges, culverts, solid waste management, bus
terminals, slum improvements, boat landings, and markets, (ii) water supply, and (iii)
sanitation.

33.     Detailed designs were prepared; the DDR will be updated during design verification by
the contractor, in case of any alignment or design change. The updated document will be
submitted to ADB for clearance, prior to start of construction. The subprojects will avoid land
acquisition. There are no anticipated adverse impacts in terms of Involuntary Resettlement or
Indigenous People for the selected drain projects. In case of temporary physical or economic
impacts are identified during construction, negotiated settlement or voluntary land donation
can be also used as an alternate to land acquisition as guided in the Resettlement Framework.
The project will ensure social safeguards mitigation measures according to the guidance of
the Resettlement Framework of the project adhered to ADB SPS, 2009.




B. Impacts on Indigenous Peoples/TMRESC
                                                                                                  19

34.    According to ADB Safeguard Categories, Projects are classified into the following four
categories in terms of indigenous people:

(i) Category A. A proposed project is likely to have significant impacts on indigenous peoples.
An indigenous people’s plan (IPP), including assessment of social impacts, is required.

(ii) Category B. A proposed project is likely to have limited impacts on indigenous peoples.
An IPP, including assessment of social impacts, is required.

(iii) Category C. A proposed project is not expected to have impacts on indigenous peoples.
No further action is required.

(iv) Category FI. A proposed project involves the investment of ADB funds to or through a
financial intermediary. The financial intermediary must apply and maintain an environmental
and social management system, unless all of the financial intermediary's business activities
unlikely to have impacts on indigenous peoples.

35.    As per Bangladesh Population and Housing Census 2011, 154 or 1.67% out of the
9,177 pourashava’s total population are from the Rakhain community. Majority of Rakhain
people living in Bangladesh are concentrated in the rehabilitation area: Cox’s Bazar
municipality, Khuruskul, Chowfaldandi, Ramu sadar, Panerchhara, Ashkor Kata, Teknaf
sadar, Kharangkhali, Hneela, Harbang of Chokoria, Gorokhghata of Maheskhali and
Khepupara and Kuakata of Patuakhali.

36.      Rakhain is a small ethnic community/TMRESC in Kuakata, migrated from Arakan of
Myanmar some 200 years back. Rakhain Palli consists of several villages including Monthey
Para, Kerani Para, and Amkholapara. Notably, Kerani Para and Monthey Para are situated
within the Kuakata Pourashava. There are 26 households with 125 population are currently
living in Kerani Para and 10 households with 45 population in Monthey Para. The proposed
drain will not pass through/traverse the Rakhain community. No assets such as
homesteads, structures, trees or any kind of immovable property nor livelihood activities will
be affected due to improvement of the drain from the Rakhain community. The
construction/improvement of drains will benefit the rakhain households by providing improved
access and connectivity to markets, jobs, schools and health centers. All the proposed
construction activities will be done within the right of way and along the existing drains routes
on government land owned by Kuakata pourashava. No direct or indirect impacts on the
dignity, human rights, livelihood systems, or natural or cultural resources or territories of
TMRESC are anticipated

37.      Specific Action Plan. Further, to enhance project benefits to SEC, ensure culturally
appropriate project implementation, address any potential safeguards issues and ensure
inclusion, a specific action plan for indigenous peoples/small ethnic community is proposed
for this subproject. The action plan will carry out the following specific activities: (i) a baseline
survey10 will be conducted to enable tracking of benefits to small ethnic households within the
project influence area; (ii) proposed benefits (e.g. access to roads) to SEC households will be
shared and monitored; (iii) IEC materials, information sharing, consultations and other
activities stated in the CAPP will be culturally sensitive and appropriate when implemented;
(iv) the chief of the tribe or a member of the tribal council as traditional arbitrator (to ensure
that traditional grievance redress systems are integrated) and an NGO/CSO working with SEC
will be special invitees, when required. GRC will also ensure that grievance redress
established is gender inclusive in receiving and facilitating resolution of the SEC concerns; (v)
consultations with SEC households will be conducted in all subproject stages which shall help
in identifying any culture-specific requirements and traditions like avoidance of any specific
festival days, and/or other activities with cultural significance to the SEC communities during
civil work; and any other SEC related issues and concerns that may be of importance to the
community. An end-line sample survey will be conducted to document the views of SEC
households about subproject benefits. Such survey is in line with subproject internal
monitoring. The proposed action plan with activities, timelines and responsibilities is attached
in Appendix 5. This action plan will be used for project monitoring to ensure that SEC/IP
activities are undertaken on a timely basis and reported semi-annually and to determine
20

whether project objectives have been achieved.

                      IV. FIELD WORK AND PUBLIC CONSULTATION

A. Outline of the Field Work

38.     The DDR was prepared in consultation with the stakeholders. Meetings and individual
interviews were held by involving related stakeholders. Consultations have been made with
the people of the locality along with the Pourashava personnel and related authorities. Public
consultation with the stakeholders has been conducted to understand the local issues and
public views including the possible impact of the project. The issues like, awareness and extent
of the project and development components, benefits of project as well as community, labor
availability in the project area or requirement of outside labour involvement, local disturbances
due to project construction work, any drainage problem, drinking water problem, and any
sensitive area nearby the project road sites.

39.      During subproject preparation, consultations were held with the official representatives
of the line agencies, and also the communities from the selected drains sites and the nearby
project areas. None of the community members opposed the sub-project.

B. Public Consultation

40.     Public participation and community consultation has been taken up as an integral part
of the social assessment process of the project. Consultation was used as a tool to inform and
educate stakeholders about the proposed action both before and after the development
decisions were made. It assisted in the identification of the impact’s problems associated with
the project as well as the needs of the community.

41.    This participatory process helped in reducing the public resistance to change and
enabled the participation of the local people in the decision-making process. Initial Public
consultation has been carried out in the project areas with the objectives of minimizing
probable adverse impacts of the project and to achieve speedy implementation of the project
through bringing in awareness among the community on the benefits of the project.

42.    As part of the project consultations, efforts were made to consult with the public as well
as a number of local authorities, to determine their thoughts, opinions and feedback on the
impact of the proposed construction/improvement of the selected drains. Information and
comments collected from the public early in the study process were of use.

43.     Different stakeholders were consulted to give them the opportunity to express their
views and concerns. As part of the process, they were also provided with relevant and
sufficient information on the project prior to its start - up. These stakeholders include the central
and local authorities, as well as the population so as to determine their thoughts, opinions and
feedback on the impact of the project. The main groups of stakeholders met are: Local
authorities, community people and potential shelter users; and Schools, Colleges, Mosque,
Madrassa and cooperative leaders. During the consultative process, beside the local
authorities and ordinary population (potential road users), other related drain side users cum
organizations were also invited to attend the consultation meetings.

44.     During these consultations, the project explained to the communities about the project,
its benefits, social and environmental impacts. The participants were encouraged to be open
and make known their concerns and claims. The presentation highlighted the project
background, objectives, expected upcoming activities, social economic information, and
environmental information. The salient features of the meetings are presented below:(i) create
awareness of the project; and to obtain stakeholders responses, feedback and concerns on
the project. After the presentations, the community was given opportunity to give their views,
comments, and queries. The concerns of the communities were addressed during the meeting
in which the local participants expressed repeatedly their main concerns as follows drains
connectivity and access issues, prospects of jobs and income generating activities; and
potential disruption to road users and public access during construction phase.
                                                                                           21

45.    Comments or questions raised by stakeholders were responded to. The consultant
explained that positive and negative impacts of the project on people and the environment will
be analyzed such as air pollution, dust, influx of people, employment. All the participants
confirmed that they appreciate the Project. The project received high degree of acceptability,
which will boost local economy due to improved climate change resilient designs, road access
and assured durability.

46.    The data obtained from public consultation and views as well as concerns from different
stakeholders are given is details in Table 4.

                        Table 4: Summary of Public Consultations

 01    Question     What is the construction plan of the proposed drains?
       Answer       Proposed drains will be 3.701 km length.

 02    Question     Who is responsible for construction and operations?
       Answer       Pourashava will play role as implementing agency in construction,
                    operation, and maintenance of the proposed drains in the Pourashava
                    area
 03    Question     Who will Pourashava support cost for major maintenance?
       Answer       This is the responsibility of the Pourashava to manage required fund for
                    repair and maintenance, as well as logistics during disaster period for
                    realizing development objective of this project
 04    Question     What will be the criteria for labour recruitment during construction?
       Answer       This largely depends on the types of job and will be assessed on a case-
                    to-case basis by the contractor according to needs.
 05    Question     Priority for jobs should also consider women; women can do the same
                    work.
       Answer       Priority will include women and there will not be any discrimination.
 06    Question     Raised the issue of employment, he suggested that the local people
                    should be the first ones to be employed in the project.
       Answer       The consultant team explained that local people will be employed
                    accordingly to job requirement.
 07    Question     Wishes to speed up the project?
       Answer       It was explained that implementation will take place immediately after
                    the rainy season.
 08    Question     The construction creates lot of dust and noise, is there any increase
                    anticipated.
       Answer       The increase in dust and noise will be at construction site and all
                    mitigation measures will be taken in place by the contractor.




C. Focus Group Discussions

47.    As part of the impact assessment, the project consultants also conducted focus group
22

discussions. Focus groups are useful in obtaining a particular kind of information that would
be difficult to obtain using other methodologies.

48.     Focus Group Discussions (FGD) were conducted for the proposed drains on 02
September, 2025 at the existing drains with 41 local people. The objective of the FGDs was
to further appraise the stakeholders about the current progress of the subproject and to
reiterate the environmental and social impacts of the proposed subproject and safeguards
to mitigate the same. Comments or questions raised by the group were discussed until they
were satisfied with the level of information provided.

49.    Key concerns raised by the participants during consultation meetings are as
follows:

(i) The participants were happy to have improved drainage conditions and proper drainage
system as they often face water logging situation during rainy season.

(ii) The community mentioned that they will cooperate during project implementation.

(iii) The participants opined to be happy to have improved drains facility in the near future by
the Pourashava.

(iv) Engage local people to construction works by their capacity, if possible.

(v) Construction works should be completed in dry season.

(vii) For any complaints/grievances, the participants were informed that there would be a
project specific grievance redress mechanism and the contact numbers of the point person
will be shared with affected persons and community people.

D. Summary of Discussions

50.     The existing condition of the drains are poor and needs development for a smooth
network. Local people expressed their deep interest for development of the selected drains
under the Project. The Pourashava officials assured the people that they will provide them with
any help they need. The Rakhain community will be benefited. The people appreciated ADB’s
Resettlement Policy for eligibility criteria, entitlement for compensation and resettlement
assistance, as well as the provisions of the approved Resettlement Framework for the project.
The roads schemes will improve socioeconomic conditions of the local people through creating
more opportunity of income and employment, as well as exploiting local resources for boosting
local productions.

51.    Refer to Figure 5 for the photographs taken during the consultation meetings held at
the respective drain sites and photographs of depict existing condition of the drains of the
Pourashava. In addition, Appendix 3 shows the meeting, s details and attendances.




     Figure 05: Photograph of FGD meeting and Existing Condition of the Drains
23
24
                                                                                                                  25

                                 Existing Condition of the Drains




Construction of RCC Drain Nilangona Hotel to Pourashava      Construction of RCC Drain Nilangona Hotel to
End Vaia Sikder Resort, (Photo-01) Ward no-07,08,09, Under   Pourashava (Photo-02) Ward no-07,08,09, Under
Kuakata Pourashava, Kalapara, Patuakhali. CH 0.0m(main).     Kuakata Pourashava, Kalapara, Patuakhali




Construction of RCC Drain Nilangona Hotel to Pourashava      Construction of RCC Drain Nilangona Hotel to
End Vaia Sikder Resort, (Photo-03) Ward no-07,08,09, Under   Pourashava End Vaia Sikder Resort, (Photo-04) Ward
Kuakata Pourashava, Kalapara, Patuakhali.ch 1200m (main)     no-07,08,09, Under Kuakata Pourashava,
26




     Construction of RCC Drain Nilangona Hotel to Pourashava      Construction of RCC Drain Nilangona Hotel to Pourashava
                                                                  End Vaia Sikder Resort, (Photo-06) Ward no-07,08,09, Under
     End Vaia Sikder Resort, (Photo-05) Ward no-07,08,09, Under
                                                                  Kuakata Pourashava, Kalapara, Patuakhali.ch 1850.0m (main)
     Kuakata Pourashava, Kalapara, Patuakhali. Ch.1900m (main)




      link 01: Faraji Bari to Wapda very Bandth Sarok ch 5.0m     Link-2: Faraji Bari to Mahabobur Rahaman sarok ch0.0
     (Photo-01).                                                  (Photo-01)
                                                                                                           27




                                                        Link-03, Hotel Seacrown to mahabur Rahman Sarok ch0.0 m
Link-2 Faraji Bari to Mahabobur Rahaman sarok ch 382m   Start (Photo-01).
out fall other drain (Photo-02).




Link-03,Hotel Seacrown to mahabur Rahman Sarok ch 455   Link-03, Hotel Seacrown to mahabur Rahman Sarok ch0.0
m out fall other drain (Photo-02)                       m Start (Photo-01).
28




     Link-03, Hotel Seacrown to mahabur Rahman Sarok ch 455   Construction of RCC Drain Eshakh Hawlader House to
     m out fall other drain.                                  Dopashi Para Bridge Under Kuakata Pourashava.



E. Future Consultation and Disclosure

52.    This DDR and other relevant documents will be made available at public locations in
the Pourashava and posted on the websites of executing agencies and ADB. The consultation
process will be continued and expanded during the project implementation, to ensure
stakeholders participate fully in project execution, as well as to implement comprehensive
information, education, and communication plan.

53.     The public consultation and disclosure program, with all interested stakeholders and
affected parties, will remain a continuous process throughout the project implementation, and
shall include the following:

(i) Consultations during construction phase: (a) public meetings with affected communities to
discuss and plan work programs and allow issues to be raised and addressed once
construction has started; and (b) smaller scale meetings to discuss and plan construction work
with individual communities to reduce disturbance and other impacts, and to provide a
mechanism through which stakeholders can participate in project monitoring and evaluation.

(ii) Project information disclosure: (a) public information campaigns (via newspaper, flyers, and
media) to explain the project to the wider city population and prepare them for disruptions they
may experience once construction is underway; (b) public disclosure meetings at key project
stages to inform the public of progress and future plans, and to provide copies of summary
documents in local language; (c) formal disclosure of completed project reports by making
copies available at convenient locations in the study areas, and informing the public of their
availability; and (d) providing a mechanism through which comments can be made.
                                                                                               29

F. Findings

54.    In this subproject intervention, no impacts including full or partial, permanent or
temporary, physical and economic displacements are assessed. No direct or indirect impacts
on the dignity, human rights, livelihood systems, or natural or cultural resources or territories
of TMRESC are anticipated for this subproject.

55.    The construction will be carried out in a systematic manner following the contractor’s
work plan during the whole implementation period.

56.  The proposed project is not assessed to have any adverse impact on the status of
women and/or girls to widen gender inequality.

                          V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM

57.      A project-specific grievance redress mechanism (GRM) has been established to
receive, evaluate, and facilitate the resolution of AP’s concerns, complaints, and grievances
about the social and environmental performance at the level of the project. The GRM will aim
to provide a time-bound and transparent mechanism to voice and resolve social and
environmental concerns linked to the project. Assessment of the GRM designed and
implemented for Coastal Towns Climate Resilience Project (CTCRP) shows that the system
is effective in timely resolution of grievances in a transparent manner. The arrangements under
CTCRP are appropriately adjusted to accommodate the change in institutional arrangements
under CTCRP.

58.    Common GRM. A common GRM is in place for social, environmental, or any other
grievances related to the project; the RPs, RSECPs and IEEs will follow the GRM described
below, which is developed in consultation with key stakeholders. The GRM will provide an
accessible and trusted platform for receiving and facilitating resolution of affected persons‟
grievances related to the project. The multi-tier GRM for the project is outlined below, each tier
having time-bound schedules and with responsible persons identified to address grievances
and seek appropriate persons‟ advice at each stage, as required.

59.     Across the Pourashava, public awareness campaigns will ensure that awareness on
grievance redress procedures is generated through the campaign. The project implementation
unit (PIU) under the guidance of Assistant Director RPMU will conduct Pourashava-wide
awareness campaigns to ensure that poor and vulnerable households are 13 made aware of
grievance redress procedures and entitlements and will work with the PIU safeguards
assistant to help ensure that their grievances are addressed.

60.     Affected persons (APs) will have the flexibility of conveying grievances/suggestions by
dropping grievance redress/suggestion forms in complaints/suggestion boxes that will be
installed by project Pourashavas or through telephone hotlines at accessible locations, by e-
mail, by post, WhatsApp or by writing in complaints register that will be kept in pourashava
offices. Appendix 5 has the sample grievance registration form. Careful documentation of the
name of the complainant, date of receipt of the complaint, address/contact details of the
person, location of the problem area, and how the problem was resolved will be undertaken.
The Assistant Directors from project management unit (PMU), RPMU and Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) will have the overall responsibility for timely grievance redressed
on environmental and social safeguards issues and for registration of grievances, related
disclosure, and communication with the aggrieved party.

61.     Grievance redress process. In case of grievances that are immediate and urgent in the
perception of the complainant, the Social Coordinator, Contractor and Social Safeguard and
Environment Specialist from the project management and supervision consultants (PMSC) on-
site will provide the most easily accessible or first level of contact for quick resolution of
grievances. The contact phone numbers and names of the concerned PIU safeguards
assistant, contractors, PMU safeguards officer, PMSC environmental and social safeguards
specialists will be posted at all construction sites at visible locations.
30

62.    1st Level Grievance, Pourashava Level PIU. The contractors, PIU Safeguard and
Gender Focal person can immediately resolve issues on-site or at pourashava level in
consultation with each other with the support of Administrative Officer of Pourashava,
designated municipal ward councillor and will be required to do so within 7 days of receipt of
a complaint/grievance. Assistance of ward level coordination committees (WLCC) will be
sought if required for resolution of the issue, by any one or all of them jointly. The first level
grievance redress team will comprise of the following members:
         (i)     Chief Executive Officer or in his absence Pourashava Secretary
         (ii)    Executive Engineer, Pourashava (Safeguard and Gender Focal person)
         (iii)   Administrative Officer, Pourashava
         (iv)    Municipal Ward Councilor (designated)
         (v)     EHS Supervisor/Social Coordinator, Contractor

63.     The town-level grievance redress team shall have at least one women member. In
addition, for project-related grievances, representatives of affected persons, community-
based organizations (CBOs), and eminent citizens must be invited as observers in GRC
meetings. In case of any impacts on Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities’
(TMRESC)), in subproject towns (example: Kuakata), the grievance redress team must have
representation of the affected MRESC, the chief of the TMRESC group as traditional arbitrator
(to ensure that traditional grievance redress systems are integrated) and/or an NGO working
with TMRESC.

64.     2nd Level Grievance, RPMU, Division Level. All grievances that cannot be
redressed within 7 days at PIU level will be brought up to the RPMU level. Second level
grievance redress team headed by the Deputy Project Director, RPMU supported by the
Assistant Directors (environment, social safeguard and gender) and Construction Supervision
and Safeguards Engineers /Asst. Supervision and Safeguards Engineers, PMSC will attempt
to resolve the grievance /complaint within 7 days. At the RPMU level, the composition of 2nd
level grievance redress team will be as follows:

         (i)   Deputy Project Director
         (ii)  Assistant Director (Environmental Safeguards)
         (iii) Assistant Director (Social Safeguards)
         (iv)  Assistant Director (Gender) supported by Construction Supervision
         and Safeguards Engineers /Asst. Supervision and Safeguards Engineers,
         PMSC.

65.    3rd Level Grievance, PMU Level. All grievances that cannot be redressed within 7
days at RPMU level will be brought up to the PMU level. The RPMU safeguards team will refer
any unresolved or major issues to the PMU level grievance redress team, that will be headed
by the Project Director and will have Deputy Project Director, social safeguard, environment
safeguards and gender Assistant Directors and PMSC, who will resolve the
complaints/grievances within 15 days. The PMU level grievance team will comprise of:
         (i)     Project Director, PMU
         (ii)    Deputy Project Director (Safeguards)
         (iii)   Assistant Director (Environment)
         (iv)    Assistant Director (Social Safeguards)
         (v)     Assistant Director (Gender) supported by Social, Environment and Gender
                 Specialist, PMSC

66.    The grievance redress process is represented in Figure 6.

67.   Despite the project GRM, an aggrieved person shall have access to the country's legal
system at any stage and accessing the country's legal system can run parallel to accessing
the GRM and is not dependent on the negative outcome of the GRM.
                                                                                                    31

68.      In the event that the established GRM is not in a position to resolve the issue, the
affected person also can use the ADB Accountability Mechanism (AM) through directly
contacting (in writing) the Complaint Receiving Officer (CRO) at ADB headquarters or the ADB
Bangladesh Resident Mission (BRM). Before submitting a complaint to the Accountability
Mechanism, it is necessary that an affected person makes a good faith effort to solve the
problem by working with the concerned ADB operations department and/or BRM. Only after
doing that, and if they are still dissatisfied, will the Accountability Mechanism consider the
compliant eligible for review. The complaint can be submitted in any of the official languages
of ADB’s developing member countries. The ADB Accountability Mechanism information will
be included in the project-relevant information to be distributed to the affected communities, as
part of the project GRM.




                            Figure 6: Grievance Redress Process
 GRC = grievance redressal committee; PIU = project implementation unit; PMSC = project management and
 supervision consultants; PMU = project management unit.
 Note: In case of project towns where impacts to TMRESC are assessed, the PIU-level grievance redress
 committee/team will have representation of the affected TMRESC.

69.     Record keeping. Records will be kept by PIU of all grievances received, including
contact details of complainant, date the complaint was received, nature of grievance, agreed
corrective actions and the date of the incident and final outcome. The number of grievances
recorded and resolved and the outcomes will be displayed/disclosed in the PMU office,
municipal office, and on the web, as well as reported in the safeguards monitoring reports
submitted to ADB on a semi-annual basis.

70.     Periodic review and documentation of lessons learned. The PMU safeguard officer will
periodically review the functioning of the GRM in each town and record information on the
effectiveness of the mechanism, especially on the project’s ability to prevent and address
grievances.

71.    Costs. All costs involved in resolving the complaints (meetings, consultations,
communication and reporting/information dissemination) will be borne by the concerned PIU at
town-level; while costs related to escalated grievances will be met by the PMU. Any
transportation costs incurred by affected persons or their representatives (e.g., CBOs,
TMRESC representative/NGOs) to attend GRC meetings will be reimbursed by the concerned
PIU. Cost estimates for grievance redress are included in resettlement cost estimates.

               VI. BUDGET TO IMPLEMENT SUBPROJECT COMPONENT
32

72.     A budget is included in this due diligence for implementation of the subproject
component, ‘Construction of Drain under Kuakata Pourashava. The budget will include (i)
conducting detailed measurement survey in case of design or alignment changes at design
verification stage, (ii) consultation and grievance redress cost, and (iii) contingency provision.
The budget is outlined in Table 4.

                  Table 5: Budgetary Provision for Implementation of DDR
               Item Description                  Unit      Rate          Total Amount
                                                           (BDT)             (BDT)
 DMS Survey for DDR updating (In case of          LS                          1,50,000.00
 design or alignment changes at design
 verification stage)
 Consultation                                     LS                          1.50,000.00
 Grievance Redress                                                            1.50,000.00
                                                          Sub-total           4,50,000.00
 Contingency (20%)                                LS                            90,000.00
                                                          Grand total         5,40,000.00


                                      VII. CONCLUSIONS

A. Summary and Conclusion

 3.      It is concluded from the due diligence exercise that the proposed infrastructure
 improvements which include construction/improvement of the drains 7.140 km in Kuakata
 Pourashava, District Patuakhali will not require private land acquisition nor will incur
 involuntary resettlement impacts. An effective and efficient Grievance Redress Mechanism
 has been established and mitigation measures will be adopted as per the approved EMP.
 The GRM will enhance the provision of timely and sensible hearings and facilitate solutions,
 in the event of any complaints or concerns.

73.      This information has been disseminated during the public consultations with
stakeholders including local personnel who have attended the Public Consultation sessions.
During public consultation, recommendations were drawn including: i) involve local
communities in all stages of project planning and development, ii) establish permanent
communication between project initiators and local authorities, iii) setup a grievance redress
mechanism which will publicized through Pourashava level coordination committee and
monitoring register and iv) during construction, local people including women shall be given
first priority in the employment of skilled and unskilled labour.

74.     Construction of drains at Kuakata Pourashava will result in significant benefits by
reducing the water logging problem There is no involuntary resettlement involved in this sub-
project; therefore, preparation of a resettlement plan is not required with respect to the
involuntary resettlement impact. Hence, this due diligence report has been prepared for
documentation and official record. This report summarizes the assessment of project impact
and outcome with reference to the relevant maps, drawings and related documents. Hence, the
screening checklist is prepared and submitted in Appendix 1.
                                                                                                  33


B. Next Steps

75.    The DDR will be updated during design verification by the contractor; in case of any
design or alignment change. Any change in site or design at design verification stage will be
assessed afresh for land acquisition, involuntary resettlement impacts. The following
information will be included in the updated social safeguards document:

(i) During design verification, if there is any design or alignment change and any involuntary
resettlement impact is identified for such change, a resettlement plan will be prepared in
accordance with the project Resettlement Framework and submitted to ADB for approval prior
to contract award and/or civil works contract.

(ii) Formal and informal consultations will be carried out including, but not limited to: focus group
discussions (FGDs), public meetings, community discussions, and in-depth and key informant
interviews. An intensive information dissemination campaign will be conducted. Emphasis
should be given to more consultations with female members of the community and appraise
them about the proposed drains. The updated DDR will include details of such consultations.
34

            Appendix 1: Involuntary Resettlement Impact Screening Checklist
 Probable Involuntary Resettlement             Yes     No    Not                      Remarks
                Effects                                      Known

 Involuntary Acquisition of Land
 1. Will there be land acquisition?                   No                All the construction works will be
                                                                        undertaken for the implementation
                                                                        of the proposed drains within the
                                                                        existing road rights-of way under the
                                                                        ownership of Kuakata Pourashava.
 2. Is the site for land acquisition known?                              Not applicable
 3. Is the ownership status and current                                  Not applicable
 usage of land
 to be acquired known?
 4. Will easement be utilized within an                                  Not applicable
 existing Right of Way (RoW)?

 5. Will there be loss of shelter and                                    Not applicable
 residential land due to land acquisition?

 6. Will there be loss of agricultural                                   Not applicable
 and other
 productive assets due to land acquisition?
 7. Will there be losses of crops, trees,                                Not applicable
 and fixed assets due to land acquisition?

 8. Will there be loss of businesses or                                  Not applicable
 enterprises due to land acquisition?

 9. Will there be loss of income sources and                              Not applicable
 means of livelihoods due to land
 acquisition?
 Involuntary restrictions on land use or on access to legally designated parks and protected areas
 10. Will people lose access to natural               No
 resources, communal facilities and
 services?
 11. If land use is changed, will it have an          No
 adverse impact on social and economic
 activities?
 12. Will access to land and                          No
 resources owned communally or by
 the state be restricted?
 Information on Displaced Persons:                                                  Not Applicable


 Any estimate of the likely number of persons that will be displaced by the Project?            [--] No
                                                           [--] Yes, If yes, approximately how many?

 Not applicable.
 Are any of them poor, female-heads of households, or vulnerable to poverty risks?             [--]
 No                                                                                            [--] Yes
 Not applicable.
 Are any displaced persons from indigenous or ethnic minority groups?            [--] No       [-
 -] Yes Not applicable.
                                                                                                    35

               Appendix 2: Indigenous Peoples Impact Screening Checklist
               KEY CONCENS
(Please provide elaborations                         YES   NO    NOT
  on the Remarks column)                                        KNOWN      Remarks

 A. Indigenous Peoples Identification
 1. Are there socio-cultural groups present in        √                 In Kuakata, there is a
 or use the project area who may be                                     population of 1.6%
 considered as "tribes" (hill tribes, schedules                         SEC belonging to
 tribes, tribal peoples), "minorities" (ethnic or                       Rakhain community,
 national      minorities)   or     "indigenous                         a     TMRESC           in
 communities" in the project area?                                      Bangladesh.
                                                                        Improvement            of
                                                                        drains will traverse
                                                                        only by the side of
                                                                        Nilanjana road and
                                                                        no Rakhain will be
                                                                        adversely affected
                                                                        due        to        the
                                                                        improvement of the
                                                                        proposed drains.
                                                                        No direct or indirect
                                                                        impacts      on      the
                                                                        dignity,        human
                                                                        rights,      livelihood
                                                                        systems, or natural
                                                                        or cultural resources
                                                                        or    territories      of
                                                                        TMRESC are
                                                                        anticipated.




 2. Are there national or local laws or               √
 policies as well as anthropological
 researches/studies that consider these
 groups present in or using the project area
 as belonging to "ethnic
 minorities",    scheduled      tribes,     tribal
 peoples, national minorities, or cultural
 communities?
 3. Do such groups self-identify as being part of     √
 a distinct social and cultural group?
 4. Do such groups maintain collective                     √
 attachments to
 distinct habitats or ancestral territories and/or
 to the natural resources in these habitats and
 territories?
 5. Do such groups maintain cultural,                      √
 economic,       social,    and       political
 institutions distinct from the dominant
 society and culture?
 6. Do such groups speak a distinct language or            √
 dialect?
 7. Has such groups been historically,                     √
 socially and economically marginalized,
 disempowered, excluded, and/or
 discriminated
 against?
 8. Are such groups represented as                         √
 "Indigenous Peoples" or as "ethnic
 minorities" or "scheduled tribes" or "tribal
 populations" in
36

  any formal decision-making bodies at the
  national or local levels?


  B. Identification of Potential Impacts
  9. Will the project directly or indirectly benefit   √       The          Rakhain
  or target Indigenous Peoples?                                community will be
                                                               benefited. A specific
                                                               action    plan   for
                                                               enhancement        of
                                                               project benefits to
                                                               the TMRESC is
                                                               prepared.

  10. Will the project directly or indirectly affect       √
  Indigenous Peoples' traditional socio-cultural
  and belief practices? (e.g. child-rearing, health,
  education, arts, and governance)

  11. Will the project affect the livelihood               √
  systems of Indigenous Peoples? (e.g., food
  production      system,       natural    resource
  management, crafts and trade, employment
  status)
  12. Will the project be in an area (land or              √
  territory) occupied, owned, or used by
  Indigenous Peoples, and/or claimed as
  ancestral domain?
  C. Identification of Special Requirements
  Will the project activities include:
  13. Commercial development of the cultural               √
  resources and knowledge of Indigenous
  Peoples?
  14. Physical displacement from traditional or            √
  customary lands?
  15. Commercial development of natural                    √
  resources (such as
  minerals, hydrocarbons, forests, water,
  hunting or fishing grounds) within customary
  lands under use that would impact the
  livelihoods or the cultural, ceremonial,
  spiritual uses that define the identity and
  community of Indigenous Peoples?
  16. Establishing legal recognition of rights to          √
  lands and territories that are traditionally
  owned or customarily
  used, occupied or claimed by indigenous
  peoples?
  17. Acquisition of lands that are traditionally          √
 owned or customarily used, occupied or
 claimed by indigenous peoples?
                                                                                           37

 Appendix 3: Minutes of Focus Group Discussion FGD for: Contract Package
                               No. e-GP//KUAT/ DR-01.
                                                                      Date: 02.09.2025
 FGD for: Contract Package No. e-GP//KUAK/ DR-01
 Place: Panjupara, Kuakata Pourashava.
 District: Patuakhali.
 Number of Participants: 41
 Time: 11.30 a.m.
 Conducted by: Md. Mizanur Rahman
 Designation: Social Safeguard Expert
Discussion Made on FGD: CTCRP Social Safeguard Expert conducted a FGD session on
02 September, 2025. Participants including the surveyor of Kuakata Pourashava, local
leaders, people of various occupations from different locations of the proposed project area
were attended in the FGD session and express views, concerns and suggestions on the
proposed drains to be constructed.
The CTCRP Consultant discussed on the following Points of during the FGDs and requested
the opinions of the participants. Social Safeguard Issues:

       (i)     Position of land and trees and its ownership
       (ii)    Construction of roads and culvert, cyclone shelter and other municipal
               infrastructures which includes access roads, solid waste management plant,
               bus terminal, slum improvements, boat landing/ ferry ghats, markets/growth
               centres, etc.
       (iii)   Community support for constructing these proposed works.
       (iv)    Benefits from these infrastructures’ establishments by the community workers
               health and safety.
       (v)     Disseminate information about project implementation to the local stakeholders.
B.     Emergency and Gender Development Issues:

       (i)     Instructions for the Contractors to employ women workers with same wage
               scale and safeguard facilities (gloves, apron, sanitation, tube well, workers’
               shed equal and separate facility for men and women at work site).
       (ii)    Orientation/Training Program for women groups/ workers/ women headed
               family heads to promote understanding of women about interrelationship
               between environment, sanitation, solid waste management, health and hygiene
               (facility) and its use.
       (iii)   Advance Emergency Warning System
       (iv)    PIU safeguards and gender focal must monitor contractors’ assignments for
               gender development issues. Proper documentation as per LGED reporting
               format will be prepared.
38

A total number of 41 local people attended the short time meeting. During the questions and
answers session, the local people were informed that implementation of the subproject
components will not require land acquisition and involuntary resettlement impact is not
assessed. The local participants also conveyed that in case project implementation will cause
unanticipated involuntary resettlement impact during implementation, they must be properly
compensated and/or assisted as per the policy of the project. The CTCRP consultant with the
PIU reiterated the entitlements and other provisions in the resettlement framework and ensure
that affected persons, if any, will be compensated and assisted by the project. However, based
on assessment, the subproject will not involve structure or income loss to community people.

 The recommendations and suggestions of local stakeholders are as follows:

            •   The local stakeholder will be happy if the project is implemented within a
                short time.

            •   The project will contribute to the improvement of the roads and
                communication.

            •   In case of land acquisition and involuntary resettlement they will receive
                compensation as per ARIPA 2017 as well as ADB’s SPS 2009.

            •   The local people expect that local labor will be engaged in construction
                works.

            •   Requested to complete the construction works in the dry season.


The photo on FGD and attendance are attached separately.
                        39

FGD Session Pictures:
40
                         41

FGDs Attendance Sheets
42

     FGDs Attendance Sheets
                         43

FGDs Attendance Sheets
44

     Appendix 4: Sample Grievance Registration Format
                                                                                               45

     Appendix 5: Specific Action Plan for Project Benefit Enhancement of TMRESC/IP
                                     Households
 S    Specific Activities   Means of       Responsibility   Timeline    Status/Remark s
 l                          Verification
 N
 o
 .
1.    Identify and          Baseline       Contractor/P      Year 1
      include in project    data           MSC/Tow n
      benefits,             generated      level PIU
      IP/TMRESC             from primary
      households in         data
      project coverage      analysis*
      area

2.    Proposed benefits     Project        Contractor/P                 IEC      materials,
      to IP/ TMRESC         documents      MSC/Tow n                    information
      households (from      (subproject    level PIU/                   sharing,
      the subproject        scope/DMF      Divisional/Re                consultations
      scope/DMF             indicators     gional Level                 and           other
      indicators and        and GAP                                     activities stated
      GAP                   indicators)                                 in the CAPP will
      indicators if                                         1. Year 5   be        culturally
      applicable)                                           onwards     sensitive      and
      Number of IP/                                                     appropriate
      TMRESC                                                            when
      Households using                                      2. Year 5   implemented;
      improved roads;
      Participation of
      IP/ TMRESC in
      awareness
      campaigns
      Priority for
      employment to
      TMRESC
      in project
      construction jobs,
      if interested and
      available.




3.    Type of               Detailed       PMSC/Town        Year 1      Consultations
      consultations and     report on      level PIU/       onwards     with TMRESC
      other                 consultation   Divisional/Re                households will
                            in MPR/QPR     gional Level
46

 Sl.                           Means of           Responsibility      Timeline
         Specific Activities                                                     Status/Remarks
 No                            Verification

       participatory           (as                                               be conducted in all
       activities planned      submitted                                         subproject stages
       with IP/ TMRESC         by the                                            which shall help in
       households (stage of    project                                           identifying any
       project cycle)          consultants)                                      culture-specific
       1. Pre-Construction     / Semi-                                           requirements and
       2. Construction         annual                                            traditions like
       3. Post Construction    social                                            avoidance of any
       4. Other                monitoring                                        specific festival
                               reports with                                      days, and/or other
                               photograph                                        activities with
                               s                                                 cultural significance
                                                                                 to the TMRESC
                                                                                 communities during
                                                                                 civil work; and any
                                                                                 other TMRESC
                                                                                 related      issues
                                                                                 and      concerns
                                                                                 that may be of
                                                                                 importance to the
                                                                                 community.




 4.    Grievance Redress       Government          PMU/              Year 1      The chief of the
       Mechanism               order/notice/lit    Divisional/Regi               tribe or a member
       established at          tle specifying      onal Level                    of the tribal council
       different levels        inclusion IP/                                     as traditional
                               TMRESC                                            arbitrator (to
                               representation                                    ensure that
                               in first and                                      traditional
                               third Level                                       grievance redress
                               Grievance                                         systems are
                               redress team                                      integrated) and an
                               as described                                      NGO/CSO
                               in the project                                    working with
                               GRM                                               TMRESC will be
                                                                                 special invitees,
                               Report                                            when required.
                               related to                                        GRC will also
                               project                                           ensure that
                               grievance                                         grievance redress
                               reflected in                                      established is
                               the                                               gender inclusive in
                               monitoring                                        receiving and
                               reports of the                                    facilitating
                               Project                                           resolution of the
                                                                                 TMRESC
                                                                                 concerns;



 Monitoring – Project completion stage
 5.   End-line               End-line survey PMSC/Town               Year 6-7
      Survey including       report          level PIU
                             and
                             project
                                                                                          47




S.                              Means of                      Timeline
        Specific Activities                                              Status/Remarks
No                              Verificati   Responsibility
 .                              on
     assessment of            completi
     coverage and             on report
     satisfaction levels of   (PCR)
     IP/ TMRESC
     households with
     subproject work
     completed/ subproject
     intended benefits vs
     actual benefits to the
     IP/ TMRESC
     community.
48

     Appendix 6 : Land Ownership Certificate of Kuakata Pourashava
