                                    LOAN AGREEMENT
                            (Ordinary Operations [Concessional])


          LOAN AGREEMENT dated 26 December 2022 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
OF BANGLADESH ("Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB").

               WHEREAS

                (A)    by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB
("Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the
Borrower from ADB's ordinary capital resources ("Ordinary Operations Loan") in an amount of
ninety six million Dollars ($96,000,000) for the purpose of financing expenditures under the
Project described in Schedule 1 of the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement ("Project");

              (B)     by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and
ADB "(Grant Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB's Special
Funds resources ("Grant") in an amount of four million Dollars ($4,000,000) for the purpose of
financing expenditures under the Project;

                (C)    the Project will be carried out by the Borrower and the Pourashavas
identified in Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement ("Pourashavas"), and for this
purpose the Borrower shall make available to the Pourashavas the proceeds of the loan provided
for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

               (D)    ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the Project
Agreement of even date herewith between ADB and each Pourashava;

              NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:



                                           ARTICLE I

                                Loan Regulations; Definitions


               Section 1.01.           All the provIs1ons of AD B's Ordinary Operations
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2022 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby made
applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth
herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

              (a)     Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

                      "Project Agreement" means the Project Agreement of even date herewith
                      between ADB and each Pourashava, as such agreement may be amended
                      from time to time; and such Project Agreement includes all schedules to
                      the project agreement; and
                                                 2


               (b)    The term "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01(a),
                      8.01 (d), 8.01 (f), 8.01 (k), 9.01 (c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations shall
                      be substituted by the term "each Pourashava".

              Section 1.02.          Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several terms
defined in the Loan Regulations and the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement have the
respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise requires.



                                           ARTICLE II

                                            The Loan


               Section 2.01.        (a)    ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred and fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000).

               (b)    The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace period
as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

                (c)      The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means the
period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization schedule set
forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.

              Section 2.02.        The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the rate
of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan withdrawn
from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

             Section 2.03.          The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan shall
be payable semiannually on 15 April and 15 October in each year.

               Section 2.04.       The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the Loan
withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth in
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.



                                           ARTICLE Ill

                                 Use of Proceeds of the Loan


               Section 3.01.          The Borrower shall make an appropriate portion of the
proceeds of the Loan available to the Pourashavas upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB
and shall cause the Pourashavas to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing of
expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the
Project Agreement.
                                                   3


              Section 3.02.          The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and withdrawn
in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such Schedule may
be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

               Section 3.03.         Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of
the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Ordinary Operations Loan
Agreement.

             Section 3.04.          The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 of
the Loan Regulations shall be 31 December 2029 or such other date as may from time to time be
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.



                                             ARTICLE IV

                                       Particular Covenants


                Section 4.01.         In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project
facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in
Schedule 4 to the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement.

                Section 4.02.      The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to inspect
the Project, the Goods, Works and Services and any relevant records and documents.

                Section 4.03.          (a)      The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate accounts
and records for the Project and ensure that each Pourashava maintains separate accounts and
records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project and ensure that
each Pourashava prepares annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with
financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) consolidate its own annual financial
statements for the Project with the annual financial statements received from each Pourashava;
(iv) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (v) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare
a report, which includes the auditors' opinions on the financial statements and the use of the Loan
proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the
Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than
9 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements,
audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably
request.

               (b)     ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the Project
and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date of ADB's
confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.
                                                 4


                (c)     The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iv) hereinabove, and shall authorize
and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested
by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an
authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

                Section 4.04.       The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be necessary
on its part to enable the Pourashavas to perform their obligations under the Project Agreement,
and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the performance of such
obligations.



                                           ARTICLEV

                             Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity


              Section 5.01.         The following are specified as additional events for
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

               (a)     the Ordinary Operations Loan shall have become liable for suspension or
                       cancellation prior to the Loan Closing Date; and

               (b)     the Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation or shall
                       have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

               Section 5.02.          The following is specified as an additional event for
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of the
events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



                                           ARTICLE VI

                                          Effectiveness


               Section 6.01.        The following are specified as additional conditions to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01 (f) of the Loan Regulations:

               (a)     the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement shall have been duly executed
                       and delivered and all conditions to its effectiveness (other than the
                       effectiveness of this Loan Agreement and the Grant Agreement) shall have
                       been fulfilled; and
                                               5



              (b)     the Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered and all
                      conditions to its effectiveness (other than the effectiveness of this Loan
                      Agreement and the Ordinary Operations Loan Agreement) shall have been
                      fulfilled.

                Section 6.02.         A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the
Loan Regulations.



                                         ARTICLE VII

                                   Delegation of Authority

             Section 7.01.          The Borrower hereby designates the Project Executing
Agency and the Pourashavas as its agents for the purposes of taking any action or entering into
any agreement required or permitted under Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.04 of this Loan Agreement
and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 5.03 and 5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

                 Section 7.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the Project
Executing Agency and the Pourashavas pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01
of this Loan Agreement shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and
effect as if taken by the Borrower.

             Section 7.03. The authority conferred on the Project Executing Agency and
Pourashavas under Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by
agreement between the Borrower and ADB.



                                         ARTICLE VIII

                                        Miscellaneous


               Section 8.01.        The Senior Secretary or Secretary or any Additional
Secretary, Joint Secretary or Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary or Deputy Chief, Senior Assistant
Secretary or Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of the Economic
Relations Division of the Borrower's Ministry of Finance is designated as representative of the
Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.
                                                10


                                          SCHEDULE 2

                         Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds


General

1.             The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan proceeds
to each such Category ("Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a Category of
the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2.             Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated
to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of
expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3.               Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal percentages
set forth in the Table,

               (a)    if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
                      insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may,
                      in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the
                      extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan which
                      have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of ADB, are
                      not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation cannot
                      fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage
                      applicable to such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under
                      such Category may continue until all expenditures thereunder shall have
                      been made; and

               (b)    if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed all
                      agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation with the
                      Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4.           Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook, and detailed agreements agreed upon
between ADB and the Borrower.
                                                11
                                                                                      Schedule 2


Retroactive Financing

5.              Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible expenditures
incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 months before the
date of this Loan Agreement in connection with items 1 (Civil works and equipment), 2 (Civil works
and equipment (nature-based solutions)), 4 (Project management and capacity development) and
5 (Incremental administration costs) of the Table, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to
20% of the Loan amount.
