Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




INTERNAL


Project Number: 55307-001
June 2023




Proposed Results-Based Loan, Technical
Assistance Grant, and Administration of Loan and
Technical Assistance Grant
People’s Republic of Bangladesh: Improving Urban
Governance and Infrastructure Program




Distribution of this document is limited until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, this document will be reclassified as public and disclosed in accordance
with ADB’s Access to Information Policy.
                            CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                               (as of 22 May 2023)

                Currency unit      –     taka (Tk)
                      Tk1.00       =     $0.009
                       $1.00       =     Tk107.36


                                  ABBREVIATIONS

ADB            –       Asian Development Bank
AFD            –       Agence Française de Développement
COVID-19       –       coronavirus disease
DLI            –       disbursement-linked indicator
E&S            –       environmental and social
GDP            –       gross domestic product
GESI           –       gender equality and social inclusion
LGD            –       Local Government Division
LGED           –       Local Government Engineering Department
M&E            –       monitoring and evaluation
O&M            –       operation and maintenance
PAP            –       program action plan
RBL            –       results-based loan
TA             –       technical assistance
TASF           –       Technical Assistance Special Fund
TLCC           –       town-level coordination committee
UGIAP          –       urban governance improvement action plan
UGIIP          –       Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement Project

                                        NOTES

 (i)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of Bangladesh and its agencies ends on
        30 June. “FY” before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year
        ends, e.g., FY2023 ends on 30 June 2023.

 (ii)   In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars.
Vice-President                Shixin Chen, Operations 1
Director General              Kenichi Yokoyama, South Asia Department (SARD)
Deputy Director General       Cindy Malvicini, SARD
Director                      Norio Saito, Urban Development and Water Division (SAUW),
                                 SARD

Team leaders                  Laxmi Sharma, Senior Urban Development Specialist, SAUW,
                                 SARD
                              Amit Datta Roy, Senior Project Officer (Urban Infrastructure),
                                  Bangladesh Resident Mission (BRM), SARD
Team members                  Md. Monjurul Ahmed, Senior Financial Management Officer,
                                 BRM, SARD
                              Achyutha Rao Aleti, Environment Specialist, SAUW, SARD
                              Mikael Andersson; Financial Management Specialist; Public
                                 Financial Management Division; Procurement, Portfolio, and
                                 Financial Management Department (PPFD)
                              Saswati Belliappa, Senior Safeguards Specialist, SAUW, SARD
                              Liming Chen, Urban Economist, SAUW, SARD
                              Dawa Choki, Procurement Specialist, PFP1, PPFD
                              Dharmesh Mahendra Dawda, Senior Procurement Specialist,
                                 Procurement Division 1 (PFP1), PPFD
                              Donna Marie R. Melo, Operations Assistant, SAUW, SARD
                              Rabindra P. Osti, Principal Climate Change Specialist, Office of
                                 the Director General, SARD
                              Roshan Ouseph, Senior General Counsel, Office of General
                                 Counsel
                              Md. Sohel Rana, Project Analyst, BRM, SARD
                              Arghya Sinha Roy, Principal Climate Change Specialist
                                 (Adaptation), Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management
                                 Division, Sustainable Development and Climate Change
                                 Department
                              Angelica Julieta Sebastian-Mercader, Associate Project Analyst,
                                 SAUW, SARD
                              Nasheeba Selim, Senior Social Development Officer (Gender),
                                 BRM, SARD
Peer reviewer                 Ramola Naik Singru, Principal Urban Development Specialist,
                                 Urban Development and Water Division, Central and West
                                 Asia Department




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                        CONTENTS

                                                                                       Page
PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
MAP
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                                         1
II.    THE PROGRAM                                                                          1
       A.   Strategic Context                                                               1
       B.   Program Rationale                                                               4
       C.   Program Scope                                                                   5
       D.   Program Results                                                                 6
       E.   Value Added by ADB                                                              8
       F.   Expenditure Framework and Financing Plan                                        9
       G.   Capacity Development and Program Action Plan                                   10
       H.   Implementation Arrangements                                                    10
III.   ATTACHED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE                                                       11
IV.    SUMMARY OF ASSESSMENTS                                                              11
       A.  Program Technical Assessments                                                   11
       B.  Program Systems Assessments                                                     12
       C.  Sustainability                                                                  14
       D.  Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan                             14
V.     ASSURANCES                                                                          15
VI.    RECOMMENDATION                                                                      15

APPENDIXES
1.     Design and Monitoring Framework                                                     16
2.     List of Linked Documents                                                            20
3.     Disbursement-Linked Indicators, Verification Protocols, and Disbursement Schedule   21
                                                                                                   Project Classification Information Status: Complete


                                            RESULTS BASED PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
    1. Basic Data                                                                                   Project Number: 55307-001
       Project Name                      Improving Urban Governance and         Department/Division SARD/SAUW
                                         Infrastructure Program
       Country                           Bangladesh                             Executing Agency    Local Government Engineering
       Borrower                          People's Republic of Bangladesh                            Department, Local Govt
       Country Economic                  https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDo                     Div,Min of Local Govt Rural
       Indicators                        cs/?id=55307-001-CEI                                       Devt & Coop
       Portfolio at a Glance             https://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDo
                                         cs/?id=55307-001-PortAtaGlance
    2. Sector                            Subsector(s)                                                                ADB Financing ($ million)
       Water and other urban             Other urban services                                                                          20.00
       infrastructure and services       Urban flood protection                                                                        80.00
                                         Urban policy, institutional and capacity development                                         102.00
                                         Urban slum development                                                                        30.00
                                         Urban solid waste management                                                                  18.00
       Transport                         Urban roads and traffic management                                                            50.00
                                                                                                               Total                  300.00

    3. Operational Priorities                                                             Climate Change Information
        OP1: Addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities                       GHG reductions (tons per annum)                    15,000
        OP2: Accelerating progress in gender equality                                     Climate Change impact on the                      Medium
        OP3: Tackling climate change, building climate and disaster resilience,           Project
        and enhancing environmental sustainability
        OP4: Making cities more livable                                                   ADB Financing
        OP6: Strengthening governance and institutional capacity                          Adaptation ($ million)                             169.24
                                                                                          Mitigation ($ million)                              11.10

                                                                                          Cofinancing
                                                                                          Adaptation ($ million)                             120.90
                                                                                          Mitigation ($ million)                               0.00
       Sustainable Development Goals                                                      Gender
       SDG 11.2, 11.5, 11.7                                                               Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
       SDG 13.a
       SDG 14.1                                                                           Poverty Targeting
       SDG 16.6                                                                           General Intervention on Poverty
       SDG 17.1
    4. Risk Categorization:      Complex
.


    5. Safeguard Categorization                 Environment: B Involuntary Resettlement: B Indigenous Peoples: B
.


    6. Financing
        Modality and Sources                                                                            Amount ($ million)
        ADB                                                                                                                                 300.00
           Sovereign Results Based Lending (Concessional Loan): Ordinary capital                                                            300.00
        resources
        Cofinancing                                                                                                                         200.00
           Agence Francaise de Developpement - Results Based Lending (Partial ADB                                                           200.00
        Administration)
        Counterpart                                                                                                                         189.29
           Government                                                                                                                       189.29
        Total                                                                                                                               689.29
        Note: An attached technical assistance will be financed on a grant basis by the Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF-7) in the amount of
        $1,000,000; Japan Fund for Prosperous and Resilient Asia and the Pacific in the amount of $1,000,000.
       Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar




Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.           25052023090606429953                                 Generated Date: 09-Jun-2023 21:07:52 PM
                                           I.     THE PROPOSAL

1.      I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed results-
based loan (RBL) to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the Improving Urban Governance
and Infrastructure Program (program). The report also describes (i) the proposed technical
assistance (TA) for Supporting the Improving Urban Governance and Infrastructure Program, (ii)
the proposed administration of a loan to be provided by Agence Française de Dèveloppement
(AFD), and (iii) the proposed administration of TA to be provided by the Japan Fund for
Prosperous and Resilient Asia and the Pacific, and if the Board approves the proposed loan, I,
acting under the authority delegated to me by the Board, approve the TA and the administration
of the loan and TA.

2.       ADB and AFD will finance the RBL program of the Government of Bangladesh (the
government) to improve urban governance and services in 88 pourashavas (municipalities) of
Bangladesh from fiscal year (FY) 2024 to FY2028, benefiting 7.6 million people.1 The program
will (i) strengthen institutional capacity for inclusive municipal governance; and (ii) improve
municipal infrastructure in terms of quality, access, resilience, and gender responsiveness. The
program will support the government in improving the livability of pourashavas through integrated
and sustainable urban development, building on ADB’s 20 years of experience, lessons, and
engagement in improving municipal governance and infrastructure in Bangladesh.

                                           II.      THE PROGRAM

A.      Strategic Context

3.      Bangladesh is a lower middle-income economy with a rapidly growing urban population;
the urban population increased by 3.4% during 2011–2021, which is faster than the average rate
for South Asia (1.8%) in this period.2 Poverty has declined substantially, from 35.0% in FY2009
                                           F




to 20.5% in FY2019, 3 while gross domestic product (GDP) has grown steadily. GDP growth
increased from 7.1% in FY2016 to 8.2% in FY2019, for an average annual GDP growth of 7.6%
over this period.4 The country has successfully maintained macroeconomic stability despite the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with GDP growth of 6.9% in 2021 and 7.1% in 2022.5
The urban sector’s contribution to GDP increased from 25.0% in 1972–1973 to over 65.0% in
2019.6 In 2022 an estimated 31.5% of the country’s population lived in urban areas, equal to 52
million people. 7 Maintaining the country’s growth momentum and poverty reduction requires
sustainable urban development, given that urban areas (i) will be home to an estimated 60.0% of
the population, including climate migrants, by 2050; and (ii) will contribute significantly to the
economy.8
4.      Sector performance and gaps. Urban poverty declined from 21.3% in 2010 to 15.7% in

1 Pourashavas are the local government institutions established in secondary towns as per the Local Government
  (Pourashava) Act, 2009.
2 World Bank. Urban population growth (% of total population)–Bangladesh, South Asia. (Accessed date: 16 April 2023).
3 Government of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Planning Commission. 2020. Eighth Five-Year Plan 2021–2025. Promoting

  Prosperity and Fostering Inclusiveness. Dhaka.
4 ADB. 2021. Country Partnership Strategy: Bangladesh, 2021–2025—Sustain Growth, Build Resilience, and Foster

  Inclusion. Manila.
5 Government of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. 2023. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Bangladesh

  2021-22. Dhaka.
6 United Nations Development Programme. 2019. Why a national urban policy should be our top priority. Dhaka.
7 Government of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. 2022. Population and Housing Census (Preliminary

  Report). Dhaka.
8 The World Bank Group. 2022. Bangladesh: Country Climate and Development Report. Washington, DC.
2


2018.9 Bangladesh has universal access (99.4%) to improved drinking water sources, with 74.0%
of the urban population using an improved sanitation facility.10 However, the quality of drinking
water and sanitation access in low-income neighborhoods is a concern. Many urban poor live in
substandard conditions, often in hazard-prone areas with poor infrastructure and services
affecting the lives of women and vulnerable people. 11 Most cities have poor solid waste
management practices with only 45.0%–76.0% of generated waste collected, which is typically
transported to the disposal site and dumped without treatment. Open dumping contributes to
drainage blockage and other problems such as siltation in channels and rivers, which increases
flooding and public health risks. The lack of, and poor operation and maintenance (O&M) of solid
waste and septage systems result in polluted waterways, and public health and sanitation
problems. Drainage systems have not been developed to withstand high-intensity rainfall and are
poorly maintained, resulting in frequent water logging. Many roads are dilapidated and suffer from
high traffic volumes, congestion, and a lack of road maintenance. Traffic jams in city centers limit
economic productivity and access to social services and common destinations (e.g., schools,
hospitals, banks, and markets).12 The situation is exacerbated by climate change, inadequate
governance, and capacity constraints in pourashavas. The urban sector requires increased
investment to improve urban services by aligning with the government’s priorities.

5.       Governance and institutional capacity constraint in pourashavas. Bangladesh has
329 pourashavas and 12 city corporations. The Local Government (Pourashava) Act, 2009 gave
the pourashavas a wide range of responsibilities, including town planning, infrastructure
development, and service delivery. However, pourashavas have various challenges, including
(i) insufficient capacity to perform in accordance with their mandate; (ii) limited funding to cover
the cost of priority investments and O&M; (iii) low participation by citizens, including women and
the vulnerable, in pourashavas’ activities; and (iv) lack of integrated, risk-informed urban planning.
These lead to poor municipal infrastructures and services.13 In addition, pourashavas receive two-
thirds of their funding from intergovernmental transfers and have limited own-source revenues
because of low tax coverage and poor collection and accounting. The capacity of pourashavas
needs to be strengthened with respect to (i) inclusive municipal governance; (ii) participation of
women and vulnerable populations; (iii) managing climate change, disaster risk, and local revenue
generation; (iv) the size of the tax base, and tax collection and accounting; and (v) approval and
enforcement of risk-informed master plans. Strong local governance is key to addressing many
challenges confronting Bangladesh’s urban sector.

6.     Climate change and disaster risk. Bangladesh’s pourashavas are increasingly
vulnerable and exposed to climate change and disaster risks because of (i) low-lying topography
subject to flooding and waterlogging; (ii) landscape changes due to rapid and often unplanned
construction and urban expansion, with reduced capacity to buffer impacts from floods, tropical
cyclones, and landslides; (iii) poor awareness of vulnerable populations regarding climate and
disaster risk; and (iv) weak institutional and strategic planning capacity of pourashavas to manage
climate and disaster risks, and pursue risk-informed development. The risks facing urban areas

9  Government of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Planning Commission. 2020. Making Vision 2041 a Reality: Perspective
   Plan of Bangladesh 2021–2041. Dhaka.
10 National Institute of Population Research and Training and International Classification of Functioning, Disability and

   Health. 2020. Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey 2017–2018. Dhaka, Bangladesh and Rockville,
   Maryland, United States.
11 World Bank. 2012. Climate Change, Disaster Risk and Urban Poor-Cities Building Resilience for a Changing World.

   Washington, DC.
12 ADB. 2022. Incentivizing Change: How Governance Reforms are Changing the Urban Landscape of Bangladesh.

   Manila.
13 Government of Bangladesh, Local Government Division. 2017. National Strategy for Pourashava Governance

   Improvement (NSPGI) 2016–2025. Dhaka.
                                                                                                           3


are expected to increase as a result of climate-induced rural–urban migration, thereby further
burdening the pourashavas. The Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) and
pourashavas need strengthened capacity in (i) enabling urban resilience, including through risk-
informed technical planning skills; (ii) developing nature-based solutions; (iii) designing,
executing, and sustaining climate-resilient and gender equality and social inclusion (GESI)-
responsive infrastructure; and (iv) ensuring the climate resilience of services.

7.      Government-owned program. The Local Government Division (LGD) of Ministry of Local
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives has adopted a Municipal (Pourashava)
Development Plan, which provides a strategic framework and program for the development of
pourashavas that promotes performance-based incentives for improving governance and
infrastructure, financed by domestic public resources and development partners. 14 The
government’s urban program for 329 pourashavas calls for spending $18 billion during 2022–
2037 to improve municipal infrastructure and services, reduce urban poverty, and improve living
conditions. It is aligned with Bangladesh’s Perspective Plan, 2021–2041 (Vision 2041) (footnote
9) and Eighth Five-Year Plan 2021–2025 (footnote 3), which clearly articulate the country’s vision
and perspective on urban development, including pourashava development. Bangladesh’s Vision
2041 is the government’s long-term strategy that includes institutional pillars of governance,
decentralization, and capacity building, and calls for a properly managed urban transition and
building resilience. The Eighth Five-Year Plan was adopted as part of the road map to realize
Vision 2041. It prioritizes institutional reforms to develop strong local government institutions, and
investment in critical urban infrastructure and services to improve quality of life and build climate
resilience. The government’s urban sector financing strategy promotes (i) criteria-based transfers
of public funds, (ii) improved tax revenues resulting from reforms such as modernization of the
property tax regime, (iii) mobilization of private financing, and (iv) cost recovery for urban services.
LGED supports the development of pourashavas following an integrated approach to deliver
resilient infrastructure facilities and improve service delivery. Risks to urban areas from climate
change are highlighted in the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 and the National Adaptation Plan
2023–2050.15

8.     Overview of ADB-supported urban governance and infrastructure improvement
projects. ADB has supported enhancements in pourashavas’ service delivery capacity and
effectiveness through a series of sector projects to reduce regional disparities and encourage
local economic development: the Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement Project
(UGIIP) in 2002, the second UGIIP (2008), and the third UGIIP (2014). 16 The UGIIPs’
performance-based fund allocation (pourashavas receive funding for infrastructure improvement
upon meeting governance performance criteria) has proven an effective approach.17 The UGIIPs
demonstrated that urban services can be improved by addressing local governance and
institutional capacity.18 Major successes achieved under the UGIIPs include (i) establishment of
town-level coordination committees (TLCCs) and ward committees in all project pourashavas

14 Government of Bangladesh, Local Government Division. 2022. Municipal (Pourashava) Development Plan (2022–

   2037). Dhaka.
15 Government   of Bangladesh. 2018. Delta Plan 2100. Dhaka; and Government of Bangladesh, Ministry of
   Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 2022. National Adaptation Plan of Bangladesh (2023–2050). Dhaka.
16 ADB. 2002. Bangladesh: Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project; ADB. 2008.

   Bangladesh: Second Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project; ADB. 2014 Bangladesh:
   Third Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project. ADB. 2017. Bangladesh: Third Urban
   Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project – Additional Financing. Manila.
17 ADB. 2012. The Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement Project in Bangladesh: Sharing Knowledge on

   Community-Driven Development. Manila.
18 ADB. 2022. Incentivizing Change: How Governance Reforms are Changing the Urban Landscape of Bangladesh.

   Manila.
4


(these are key institutions to ensuring citizens’ participation, and include representation of women
and the poor); (ii) development and implementation of pourashava-level gender action plans and
poverty reduction action plans using earmarked fund from pourashavas’ own-revenue generation;
(iii) computerization of tax and accounting records; (iv) increased average collection of taxes; and
(v) climate change design considerations introduced in the road, drainage, water supply, and
sanitation design standards.19 The approach adopted under the UGIIPs has been recognized in
                                  1




Bangladesh for its effectiveness, and there is high demand among pourashavas to participate in
the UGIIP scheme. The government has replicated performance-based resource allocation in
their annual budget allocation to pourashavas with set minimum criteria. Many externally funded
projects are increasingly adopting this approach with customized criteria.20 However, governance
reforms need to be further advanced to ensure the quality and resilience of municipal
infrastructure, use of information technology in monitoring and evaluating pourashavas’
performance, risk-informed urban planning, financial sustainability, and results-based municipal
management, all of which are needed to facilitate sustainable delivery of resilient basic services
and controlled urban development.

B.       Program Rationale

9.       With ADB’s support, the government has been strengthening municipal governance in
Bangladesh since 2002 (footnote 16). The RBL program will support a slice of the government
program by improving urban governance and services for 88 pourashavas at an estimated cost
of $689.29 million, in line with the government plan and policies.21 It contributes to pillar 1 (boost
competitiveness, employment, and private sector development); pillar 2 (promote green growth
and climate resilience); and crosscutting themes (accelerate GESI, strengthen governance and
institutional capacity) of ADB’s country partnership strategy for Bangladesh, 2021–2025 (footnote
4). The RBL program is aligned with ADB’s Strategy 2030 and supports its five operational
priorities (OP): (i) addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequalities (OP 1); (ii) accelerating
progress in gender equality (OP 2); (iii) tackling climate change, building climate and disaster
resilience, and enhancing environmental sustainability (OP 3); (iv) making cities more livable
(OP4); and (v) strengthening governance and institutional capacity(OP 6).22 The RBL program is
also expected to be fully aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement. 23 The program will
contribute to ADB’s Healthy Oceans Action Plan by controlling pollution.24              2




10.    Lending modality. ADB’s due diligence confirmed that the program meets the
requirements for the RBL modality: 25 (i) the government has demonstrated satisfactory
leadership, commitments, and high-level support for its municipal development plan to improve

19 ADB. 2012. Completion Report: Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project in Bangladesh.

   Manila; and ADB. 2017. Completion Report: Second Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector)
   Project in Bangladesh. Manila.
20 Japan International Cooperation Agency. 2013. Northern Bangladesh Integrated Development Project. Tokyo; World

   Bank. 2013. Municipal Governance and Basic Urban Services Improvement. Washington, DC.
21 Pourashavas are selected based on the following criteria: (i) inadequate investment with no major projects by

   development partners and no government transfers, (ii) strong willingness and agreement on abiding with
   performance criteria, (iii) initiatives undertaken for public financial management improvement, and (iv) located in
   areas identified in national government policy and plans for future strategic growth.
22 ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific.

   Manila; and Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities (accessible from the list of linked documents in
   Appendix 2).
23 The Paris Agreement Alignment assessment was conducted as a part of the preliminary climate and disaster risks

   screening.
24 ADB. 2019. Action Plan for Healthy Oceans. Manila. The project through DLI 6 (ii) supports one of the ocean

   objectives, i.e., Focus Area B (Pollution control), item 1. Solid waste management.
25 ADB. 2021. Result-Based Lending for Programs. Operations Manual. OM section D18. Manila.
                                                                                                                      5


urban governance and infrastructure; (ii) LGED has demonstrated satisfactory institutional
capacity and gained adequate experience working with ADB and other development partners; (iii)
LGED has prior experience in implementing a World Bank project;26 (iv) the RBL modality lowers
                                                                                F




the government’s transaction costs in implementing small-value contracts (as compared to inputs
in a sector loan), and helps ADB rely on and strengthen the government’s practices, systems,
and institutional capacity; (v) the program creates incentives for delivering results, given that ADB,
AFD, and central government disbursements will be based on the achievement of RBL program
results as measured by disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs); and (vi) given the Eighth Five-Year
Plan directives to diversify urban sector funding sources, the RBL modality will leverage
contributions by other development partners to the common framework. AFD will provide $200
million in cofinancing, and ADB and AFD have coordinated their due diligence assessments and
have harmonized key DLIs.

11.     Lessons. The program design incorporates lessons from ADB’s RBL program
experience, UGIIP operations, and other ADB urban sector projects in Bangladesh. These
lessons include: (i) DLIs should be within the control of the program, and not be strongly affected
by external factors;27 (ii) it is essential that capacity development support be carefully designed
                      2




and well-resourced in order to achieve minimum standards of fiduciary control;28 (iii) the reforms
supported by the RBL should be carefully sequenced and complemented with other instruments
or modalities to provide appropriate capacity development and institutional strengthening, and to
ensure the effectiveness of ADB strategies (footnote 22); (iv) the use of governance performance
as a basis for the allocation of investment is an effective approach; (v) the involvement of citizens
in pourashava planning and development helps establish transparent decision-making and
improve the quality of works; and (vi) implementation of the infrastructure component of the
project coupled with timely technical support and capacity building is pivotal to ensuring project
readiness and implementation progress in a highly challenging context. 29

C.      Program Scope

12.     Table 1 summarizes the scope of the broader government program and the RBL program.

                                          Table 1: Program Scope
Item                           Broader Government Programa                Results-Based Lending Program
Outcome                   Urban poverty reduced and living           Municipal services and governance in target
                          conditions improved through planned,       pourashavas improved.
                          inclusive, and sustainable urbanization,
                          better city governance, and improved
                          infrastructure and services.
Key outputs               (i) Improved governance.                   (i) Institutional capacity for inclusive municipal
                          (ii) Improved infrastructure and service   governance strengthened.
                          provisions.                                (ii) Municipal infrastructure improved in quality,
                                                                     access, resilience, and gender equality and
                                                                     social inclusion responsiveness.
Activity types            Improve urban governance, basic urban      Prepare UGIAP, develop a web-based
                          infrastructure and services,               revenue management system, prepare central


26 World Bank Group. 2018. Operation for Supporting Rural Bridges Project. Washington, DC.
27 Independent  Evaluation Department (IED). 2021. Validation Report: Electricity Grid Strengthening—Sumatra
   Program in Indonesia. Manila: ADB.
28 IED. 2017. Corporate Evaluation: Results-Based Lending at the Asian Development Bank: An Early Assessment.

   Manila: ADB.
29 IED. 2018. Validation Report: Second Governance and Infrastructure Improvement Project in Bangladesh. Manila:

   ADB; and IED. 2021. Validation Report: City Region Development Project in Bangladesh. Manila: ADB.
6


Item                           Broader Government Programa                      Results-Based Lending Program
                           transportation, disaster management,         government fund transfers, construct municipal
                           climate resilience, and implementation       and low-income neighborhood infrastructure
                           of urban poverty reduction programs.         civil works, undertake capacity development
                                                                        activities, and prepare GESIAP preparation
                                                                        and budgeting.
Expenditure size           $18.00 billion                               $689.29 million
Main financiers and        Government: $16.40 billion; ADB: $0.83       Government: $189.29 million
their respective total     billion;b AFD: $0.20 billion; AIIB: $0.30    ADB: $300.00 million
amounts                    billion; IsDB: $0.10 billion; JICA: $0.20    AFD: $200.00 million
                           billion; World Bank: $0.3 billionc
 Geographic coverage       Nationwide (329 pourashavas)              88 pourashavas
 Implementation period     2022–2037                                 2023–2028 (5 years)
ADB = Asian Development Bank, AFD = Agence Française de Dèveloppement, AIIB = Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank, GESIAP = gender equality and social inclusion action plan, IsDB = Islamic Development Bank, JICA = Japan
International Cooperation Agency, UGIAP = urban governance improvement action plan.
a Government of Bangladesh, Local Government Division. 2022. Municipal (Pourashavas) Development Plan (2022–

   2037). Dhaka.
b Includes ADB-financed projects: ADB. Bangladesh: Coastal Towns Climate Resilience Project ($0.25 billion); ADB.

   Bangladesh: Second City Region Development Project ($0.15 billion); ADB. The proposed Bangladesh: Improving
   Urban Governance and Infrastructure Program ($0.30 billion); and ADB. The proposed Bangladesh: Chattogram Hill
   Tracts Inclusive and Resilient Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project ($0.13 billion).
c Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services (accessible from the list of linked

   documents in Appendix 2).
Source: Asian Development Bank.

D.       Program Results

13.     The RBL program’s impacts will be: urban poverty reduced and living conditions improved
(footnote 9). The outcome will be: improved municipal services and governance in target
pourashavas in terms of increased holding tax collection efficiency (DLI 1) and improved livability
(non-DLI). Selected DLIs, identified under each output described below, will create incentives to
achieve the program’s expected outcome.30

14.      Output 1: Institutional capacity for inclusive municipal governance strengthened.
Output 1 contributes to achieve the program outcome by (i) institutionalizing the criteria-based
government development budget transfer to pourashavas (DLI 2); (ii) implementing urban
governance improvement action plans (UGIAPs) in 88 pourashavas (DLI 3);31 (iii) computerizing
(web-based) revenue management systems in 88 pourashavas (DLI 3); (iv) establishing a gender
and climate-responsive O&M management system in 88 pourashavas (DLI 6);32 (v) training 1,570
staff (including 90% of eligible women staff and female councilors of pourashavas, LGED, and
LGD) on urban governance, tax management, technical, climate-resilient urban planning, and
GESI Action Plan (DLI 3 and DLI 5); (vi) earmarking at least 1% of the municipal revenue budget
for implementation of pourashava-specific GESI action plans by 88 pourashavas (DLI 7); (vii)
training 5,100 residents (including 50% women) of low-income neighborhoods on resilient
livelihood skills (DLI 7); (viii) forming at least 252 low-income neighborhood improvement

30 The design and monitoring framework is in Appendix 1.
31 UGIAP is under implementation in 26 pourashavas. UGIAP covers (i) citizen’s awareness and participation; (ii) urban

   planning; (iii) equity and inclusiveness of women and urban poor; (iv) enhancement of local resource mobilization;
   (v) financial management, accountability, and sustainability; (vi) gender-responsive O&M and management systems;
   (vii) condition surveys and preparation of infrastructure assets inventory; (viii) administrative transparency; and (ix)
   maintenance of essential pourashava services.
32 Includes O&M of waste management system in 25 pourashavas. This will reduce about 2,400 tons per annum of

   carbon dioxide emissions.
                                                                                                              7


committees with at least 50% women members in 63 pourashavas (DLI 7); (ix) approving 63
climate and disaster risk-informed master plans by respective pourashava councils (DLI 5); (x)
completing at least 300 resilient and gender-responsive municipal infrastructure component
detailed designs (DLI 4); and (xi) adopting climate-resilient and socially inclusive public open
space guidelines (DLI 5).

15.     Output 2: Municipal infrastructure improved in quality, access, resilience, and
gender responsiveness. The RBL program will support the development of priority municipal
infrastructure and essential services for improving livability in 63 target pourashavas by
(i) rehabilitating and reconstructing stormwater drainage, including natural drainage, to reduce
climate and disaster risk (DLI 8); (ii) rehabilitating or reconstructing roads with stormwater
drainage, bridges, and culverts for improved connectivity and access to municipal services that
meet standards for GESI responsiveness, safety, resilience, and accessibility (DLI 9); (iii)
improving other infrastructure, including community facilities and climate-resilient and socially
inclusive public open spaces (DLI 10); and (iv) implementing low-income neighborhood
improvement programs, including the construction of elderly (old age), women, and child-friendly
sanitation facilities for poor households (non-DLI).

16.     The 10 DLI areas agreed upon with the government, and disbursement allocations are
summarized in Table 2. The DLIs include an appropriate mix of outcome, output, and institutional
indicators. All output DLIs contribute to achieving the program outcome (non-DLI and DLI).33 The
DLIs are sufficiently ambitious as they ensure a gradual and sustained expansion of results,
implementation of criteria-based fund transfers, governance and infrastructure development,
equity and inclusiveness, O&M sustainability, and use of information and communication
technology. Financing of prior results DLIs includes adopting the government’s Municipal
(Pourashavas) Development Plan (footnote 14) as the pourashava development framework and
program. The program action plan (PAP) includes key actions required to achieve the targets in
the DLI framework and the results framework.34

                                 Table 2: Disbursement-Linked Indicators
                                                                                  Disbursement    Share of Total
                                                                                    Allocated     ADB Financing
Indicator a                                                                         ($ million)        (%)
Outcome
1. Holding tax collection efficiency increased to at least 80% by 88               20.0              6.7
    pourashavas.b
Outputs
Output 1: Institutional capacity for inclusive municipal governance strengthened.
2. Criteria-based development fund transfer to pourashavas institutionalized      34.00             11.3
3. At least 88 pourashavas’ governance and planning improved.                     27.00              9.0
4. At least 300 detailed designs of resilient and gender-responsive municipal       6.00             2.0
    infrastructure subproject completed.
5. Financial management, and resilient and inclusive planning capacity of         30.00             10.0
    LGED improved.
6. Gender-responsive operation and maintenance management systems                  12.00             4.0
    established in 88 pourashavas.
7. Equity and inclusiveness of women and the poor in at least 88                  21.00              7.0
    pourashavas ensured.
Output 2: Municipal infrastructure improved quality, access, resilience, and gender responsiveness.


33 Outcome level non-DLI is at least 80% of citizen report improved livability.
34 Program Action Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
8


                                                                               Disbursement       Share of Total
                                                                                 Allocated        ADB Financing
Indicator a                                                                      ($ million)           (%)
8. At least 900 km of stormwater drainage rehabilitated or reconstructed            95.59               31.9
9. At least 1,500 km of roads rehabilitated or reconstructed.                       33.25               11.1
10. At least seven climate-resilient and socially inclusive public facilities        6.00                2.0
     developed or remodeled.
Financial charges during implementation                                                  15.16            5.0
                                       Total                                            300.00          100.0
 ADB = Asian Development Bank, km = kilometer, LGED = Local Government Engineering Department.
 a DLI indicators, verification protocols, and disbursement schedule are in Appendix 3.
 b 2022 average baseline tax collection efficiency is 50%.

 Sources: Asian Development Bank and Local Government Engineering Department.

17.      A rigorous verification protocol was developed (Appendix 3), and LGED’s Office of the
Chief Engineer will engage a competent and credible independent verification agency, a private
entity, to verify and confirm the achievement of targets against the protocol. An indicative timeline
for DLI achievement has been set, and partial disbursement is allowed for selected DLIs
(Appendix 3, Table A3.2). The government has institutionalized mechanisms to receive people's
feedback in each pourashava for their activities, particularly in tax collection, budget execution,
and implementation of the pourashava development plan.35 The TLCC, ward committee, and low-
income neighborhood improvement committees of target pourashavas represent the beneficiaries
and will provide feedback on the RBL results. ADB and AFD will undertake at least two review
missions annually to (i) review the achievement of DLIs, financial management reports, and audit
reports; (ii) review annual work plans and budgets; and (iii) conduct sample spot checks of
verifications.

E.      Value Added by ADB

18.     The RBL program will scale up ADB’s 20 years of successful engagement with the
government through the UGIIPs (footnote 16) in support of urban governance and infrastructure
improvement by incorporating the approach within the government’s program. The UGIIPs have
proven that putting governance improvement as a condition for receiving development funds
incentivizes the pourashavas to become more accountable, transparent, citizen-centric, poverty-
oriented, and gender-responsive. Building on experiences from the Coastal Towns Climate
Resilience Project, the program supports the government in expanding climate solutions.36 ADB
lending through the RBL modality will provide much-needed finance for investments in institutional
and capacity development, and infrastructure. ADB will also introduce technology and innovations
to strengthen the web-based program monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system by integrating
monitoring of pourashavas’ governance, asset management, and resource mobilization
performance. ADB financing enabled the government to leverage cofinancing and inputs through
a common results framework. ADB will assist with risk mitigation and management, and support
capacity development through the attached TA (para. 26). Lessons learned, good practices, and
experiences in implementing governance-led infrastructure improvement, GESI features of the
UGIIPs, and the RBL program will be captured and disseminated through the recently established
ADB Capacity Development Resource Center in Bangladesh for replication in Bangladesh and

35 TLCC and ward coordination committees are established by the pourashavas as per Articles 15 and 14 of the Local

   Government (Pourashava) Act, 2009. Each TLCC includes maximum of 50 members who represent citizens from
   different interest groups, and ward coordination committees include a maximum of 10 members from the respective
   ward, with at least 40% female members. Low-income neighborhood improvement committees are formed by the
   pourashavas with representation from those neighborhoods that will undertake neighborhood improvement works.
36 ADB. Bangladesh: Coastal Towns Climate Resilience Project.
                                                                                                                    9


other economies across Asia and the Pacific. ADB closely collaborated with the Global Center on
Adaptation for the capacity development of LGED and pourashavas on climate solutions.

F.       Expenditure Framework and Financing Plan

19.     Program expenditures. The RBL program expenditures are estimated to be $689.29
million from FY2023 to FY2028 (Table 3). Development expenditures, primarily capital
expenditures, account for 87.1% of the RBL program expenditure, while nondevelopment
expenditures, mainly recurrent expenditures, account for 12.9%.

           Table 3: Summary of Program Expenditure Framework, FY2023–FY2028
                                     (in 2022 prices)
  Item                                                        Amount ($ million)             Share of Total (%)
  I. Development expenditures
  A. Investment cost
      1. Training and capacity development                            9.00                             1.31
      2. Land acquisition                                           50.00                              7.25
      3. Civil worksa                                              378.20                             54.87
      4. Operation and maintenance                                  34.40                              4.99
      5. Goods and equipment                                        19.50                              2.83
      6. Consultant                                                 30.60                              4.44
      7. Wages and salaries (including outsourcing                    9.80                             1.42
           staff)
  Total base cost                                                  531.50                             77.11
  B. Contingenciesb                                                 37.82                              5.49
  C. Financial charges during implementation                        30.68                              4.45
  Total development expendituresc (A+B+C)                          600.00                             87.05
  II. Nondevelopment expendituresd                                  89.29                             12.95
                                 Total expenditures (1+2)          689.29                            100.00
a
    The results-based lending program includes stormwater drains; roads, including streetlights, footpath, market, and
    socially inclusive public space improvement; and slum improvement works.
b This could be applied to other planned cost items.
c Excludes discrete development projects under the management of the Local Government Engineering Department

    and pourashavas.
d Includes the Local Government Engineering Department’s management costs, such as the salaries for existing

    personnel.
Sources: Local Government Engineering Department and Asian Development Bank estimates.

20.    Program financing. The government has requested a concessional loan of $300.0 million
from ADB’s concessional ordinary capital resources to help finance the program, and an attached
TA grant of $2.0 million (para. 26). The loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period of
5 years; an interest rate of 2.0% per year during the grace period and thereafter; and such other
terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan agreements. The AFD will provide a loan
cofinancing equivalent to $200.0 million, to be partially administered by ADB.

21.      The summary program financing plan is in Table 4.

                                     Table 4: Program Financing Plan
                                                                            Amount                 Share of Total
Source                                                                     ($ million)                  (%)
Government of Bangladesh                                                     189.29                     27.46
10


                                                                   Amount                          Share of Total
Source                                                            ($ million)                           (%)
Development partners
    Asian Development Bank ordinary capital resources
    (concessional loan)                                             300.00                              43.52
    Agence Française de Développement (loan)                        200.00                              29.02
        Total                                                       689.29                             100.00
Sources: Asian Development Bank and Agence Française de Développement.

22.     Climate mitigation is estimated to cost $11.1 million and climate adaptation is estimated
to cost $290.14 million. ADB will finance 100% of climate mitigation costs ($11.1 million) and
58.3% of adaptation costs ($169.24 million). AFD will finance 41.7% of adaptation costs ($120.9
million). This amount will contribute towards advancing climate actions (mitigation and adaptation)
through activities identified under relevant DLIs, and will support urban areas to pursue low-
carbon and climate- and disaster-resilient development.37

G.      Capacity Development and Program Action Plan

23.     The RBL program will strengthen capacity in the urban sector, particularly for the LGD,
LGED, and pourashavas. The capacity development activities in the PAP (footnote 34) are
summarized in five areas: (i) technical, (ii) financial, (iii) environmental and social (E&S)
safeguards, (iv) GESI, and (v) climate change. The PAP will be reviewed and updated as needed
during implementation. The design of the PAP considers how best to use RBL program
opportunities to strengthen institutions and results in combination with a realistic and feasible
scope for implementation. The attached TA (para. 26) will help achieve the program results by
supporting the government in implementing the PAP and addressing the policy gaps. The recently
established ADB Capacity Development Resource Center in Bangladesh will also coordinate with
the National Institute for Local Government to strengthen LGD, LGED, and pourashavas.

H.      Implementation Arrangements

24.     The RBL program will be implemented from July 2023 to June 2028. 38 LGED is the
executing agency responsible for overall coordination, assisted by technical and program
management experts. The LGD of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and
Cooperatives will provide overall guidance and supervision of the RBL program. LGED has more
than 30 years of experience and a good track record of working with development partners,
including ADB, the Islamic Development Bank, the Japan International Cooperation Agency, and
the World Bank. The 88 pourashavas are the implementing agencies and are governed by the
Local Government (Pourashava) Act, 2009. They are responsible for planning and implementing
local infrastructure development, revenue enhancement plans, and low-income neighborhood
improvement works. On behalf of the LGD, LGED monitors and evaluates the performance of
pourashavas and provides technical guidelines and design standards.

25.     Disbursement arrangements. Disbursement of the loan proceeds, including ADB-
administered cofinancer funds, will follow ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2022, as
amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements agreed upon between the government
and ADB. The loan proceeds, including the ADB-administered cofinancer fund, will be disbursed
to the government’s designated account as described in the program implementation document.39

37 Climate Change Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
38 Implementation period is reviewed as part of the soundness assessment.
39 Program Implementation Document (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                   11


ADB disbursement will be made upon the achievement of DLIs and their subsequent verification
by the independent verification agency following the verification protocol (para. 17). Where
achievements are partial, partial disbursements may be made as per the verification protocol. The
RBL program includes a provision for financing for prior results of $15.0 million and advance
financing of a maximum of $25.0 million considered to achieve the initial set of DLIs and the
subsequent DLIs during the RBL program implementation.40 The government will ensure that the
total eligible expenditures equal or exceed the total disbursement amount from ADB and AFD.
The prior results will support the expedient implementation of pourashava reforms by
institutionalizing criteria-based development fund transfer (DLI 2).

                              III.     ATTACHED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

26.      The TA is estimated to cost $2,000,000, of which (i) $1,000,000 will be financed on a grant
basis by ADB’s Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF 7); and (ii) $1,000,000 will be financed
on a grant basis from the Japan Fund for Prosperous and Resilient Asia and the Pacific to be
administered by ADB. The government will provide counterpart support in the form of counterpart
staff, office space, office supplies, secretarial assistance, and other in-kind contributions. The TA
will support the implementation of the RBL program by (i) strengthening sector guidance, including
institutionalizing criteria-based development fund transfers to pourashavas and results
management; and (ii) improving RBL program management capacity. 41

                                     IV.   SUMMARY OF ASSESSMENTS

A.       Program Technical Assessments

27.      Program soundness and results assessment. The RBL program design and
implementation arrangements are sound and the DLIs are critical indicators for achieving the
expected RBL program results, which will benefit 7.6 million people through improved
governance, municipal services, and livability of 88 program pourashavas. The program is highly
relevant to the country’s development needs as the selected pourashavas are the government’s
priorities under its overall program. LGED has demonstrated its ability to manage resources and
monitor the performance of pourashavas to achieve output- and outcome-level results. LGED’s
web-based management information system developed with World Bank support is capable of
monitoring the pourashavas’ performance against revenue enhancement-related indicators.42
The LGED confirmed to upgrade the existing performance management information system to
make it a fit-for-purpose internet-based management information system. The expenditure
framework and financing plan are simple, robust, and linked to economic codes. The RBL
program expenditures can be recorded through the Integrated Budget and Accounting, which can
easily generate interim financial statements as needed. The RBL program design has been
informed by existing relevant climate assessments (footnotes 11 and 37).

28.     Economic analysis. The infrastructure improvement and urban governance outputs in
the RBL are expected to collectively assist the government in systematically implementing its own
program to provide strengthened municipal governance, and sustainable and inclusive services
to the people; thereby contributing to a climate-resilient and inclusive path to economic growth.
Specifically, for the improved urban infrastructure services output, the identified quantifiable

40 The advance will meet the program’s need for on-time budget allocations to trigger the progress for achieving early-

  year DLIs. The advance will be liquidated at the end of the RBL program.
41 Attached Technical Assistance Report (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
42 Key indicators include holding tax, nonholding tax (trade license management and nonmotorized vehicles), water

  tariff, and accounting and budget.
12


economic benefits include: (i) for the drainage subsector, reduced income loss of residents related
to the reduction in flood water stagnation, savings in infrastructure maintenance expenses in
flood-affected areas, and savings in household health expenditures for waterborne diseases; and
(ii) for the urban roads subsector, savings in vehicle operating costs, savings in travel time, and
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. A cost–benefit analysis for the infrastructure
improvement output, conducted in accordance with ADB guidelines, shows that in the
representative pourashavas, the economic internal rates of returns (12%–19.7%) exceed the
economic opportunity cost of capital of 9.0%, and are robust under various adverse sensitivity
scenarios.43 Strengthening of institutional capacity and governance is expected to improve public
service delivery and inclusiveness of economic benefits and thereby support and enhance the
potential economic returns from municipal infrastructure improvements. The RBL’s program
outputs and DLIs are complementary, and collectively strengthen the institutional capacity and
improve the municipal infrastructure of pourashavas, thereby supporting the government’s
program for achieving integrated and sustainable urban development and enhancing the quality
of public services.

29.     Poverty, social, and gender. Key social issues for women and vulnerable groups are
their weak participation and representation in pourashava governance and lack of access to basic
urban services. In addition, pourashavas generally do not allocate funds for gender development
and poverty reduction.44 The RBL program supports pourashavas in enhancing equity and social
inclusion by earmarking 1% of the budget from their own-source revenues for the adoption and
implementation of GESIAP. The implementation of the poverty reduction action plan, including
the pourashavas’ budget allocation, will be monitored through the implementation of the UGIAPs
(DLI 3) and GESIAP (DLI 7).

30.     The program is categorized effective gender mainstreaming. There are 252 elected
women pouracouncil (elected municipal council) members (33% of the total elected members)
from 88 pourashavas. The program will ensure women’s effective participation in planning,
infrastructure design and implementation, decision-making, and committee leadership. One
outcome indicator and other relevant output-level gender performance indicators are included in
the design and monitoring framework, DLIs, and PAP (footnote 34). Specific interventions include
(i) ensuring women’s effective participation in decision-making and leadership under DLI 3; (ii)
strengthening a gender-responsive O&M management system under DLI 6; (iii) ensuring equity
and inclusiveness of women and the poor under DLI 7 by earmarking at least 1% of each
municipality’s budget for implementing activities outlined in the poverty reduction action plan and
GESIAP by all pourashavas; (iv) meeting standards of gender responsiveness, safety, and
accessibility in roads rehabilitation or construction under DLI 9; and (v) remodeling or developing
climate-resilient and socially inclusive public spaces under DLI 10. The program will enhance the
capacity of women staff, TLCC members, and ward councilors to actively participate in the
decision-making and development activities of pourashavas.

B.      Program Systems Assessments

31.    Monitoring and evaluation system. LGED has a sound M&E system for pourashavas’
revenue enhancement-related indicators.45 LGED is developing a governance-led infrastructure
development information system to monitor pourashava-level infrastructure and support their
43 Program  Soundness Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). ADB. 2017.
   Guidelines for the Economic Analysis of Projects. Manila.
44 Only 74 out of 329 pourashavas allocate dedicated funds for gender and poverty reduction.
45 Program Monitoring and Evaluation System Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix

   2).
                                                                                                                    13


O&M functions. The M&E system will be further strengthened by using an internet-based platform
to integrate master plans, infrastructure asset management, climate data, and governance-
related indicators; this platform will be used for reporting and verifying DLI achievements. The
enhanced system will enable LGD and LGED to create a performance profile for each pourashava
and consolidate RBL performance reports. The achievement result will be verified by the third
party and reviewed by ADB.

32.    Fiduciary systems. The program fiduciary system assessment was undertaken in
accordance with ADB’s staff guidance on RBL and covers financial management, procurement,
and anticorruption. The RBL program will use country systems for financial management,
procurement, and anticorruption measures, with improvements as agreed between ADB and the
government.46

33.     Financial management. The overall pre-mitigation financial management risk is
substantial. The main risks include (i) complex financial management arrangements with
numerous implementing agencies; (ii) lack of capacity to conduct effective internal audits; (iii)
challenges related to compliance with the government’s financial regulations, resulting in
numerous, long-outstanding audit observations; and (iv) weak financial management capacity of
pourashavas, including the use of outdated and manual accounting systems. Mitigating measures
are included in the DLIs and PAP (footnote 34). These include (i) strengthening the internal audit
capacity of LGED; (ii) conducting periodic risk-based internal audits of the RBL program; (iii)
performing rigorous follow-ups of audit observations; (iv) assigning dedicated accounts staff to
the RBL program, who will be supported by consultants; and (v) providing capacity building to the
pourashavas in financial management, including the use of computerized (web-based) financial
management systems. Moreover, the Controller General of Accounts will record the RBL program
expenditures in the Integrated Budget and Accounting system, in accordance with accounting
standards acceptable to ADB. The program financial statements will be audited annually by the
auditor general’s office in accordance with audit standards acceptable to ADB.

34.     Procurement and anticorruption. The program will achieve the best value for money
and achieve efficiency gains through pourashavas’ use of national bidding documents suitable for
local contractors and e-government procurement systems. This will lower transaction costs and
enhance process efficiency and transparency. The RBL program scope excludes high-value
procurement contracts. 47 All procurement (which is mainly for works) will be low-value and
implemented by pourashavas. The LGED has demonstrated satisfactory capacity to support
pourashavas in procurement. Entities and individuals debarred or temporarily suspended by ADB
are ineligible to participate in RBL programs for the duration of their debarment or suspension. As
ADB will administer cofinancing resources for ordinary capital resources-financed operations,
universal procurement will apply to the RBL program. The Guidelines to Prevent or Mitigate Fraud,
Corruption, and Other Prohibited Activities in Results-Based Lending for Programs were
explained and discussed with the government.48

35.      Safeguards systems. The program safeguard systems assessment was conducted to

46 Program Fiduciary Systems Assessment (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
47 High-value contracts are $50.0 million for works, $30.0 million for goods, $15.0 million for consulting services, and

   $20 million for information and communication technology and non-consulting services. The exclusion of high-value
   contracts is to maintain the precautionary measures (being the first RBL to LGED) to minimize risk in procurement-
   related issues.
48 ADB. 2021. Guidelines to Prevent or Mitigate Fraud, Corruption, and Other Prohibited Activities in Results-Based

   Lending for Programs. Attachment in ADB. 2021. Staff Instruction on Business Processes for Results-Based Lending
   for Programs. Manila.
14


appraise applicable laws and regulations, and institutional capacity for mitigating E&S risks.49 The
assessment confirms the categorization for the environment as B (i.e., activities are not likely to
have significant adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on the environment
and/or affected people), for involuntary resettlement as B (i.e., no physical displacement or
permanent economic displacement of any individual, household, or community), and for
indigenous peoples as B (i.e., limited but only positive impacts on tribes, minor races, ethnic sects
and communities). The weaknesses of the safeguard system mainly consist of inadequate
capacity and resources to implement measures to address safeguard concerns in program
implementation and monitoring. An E&S management framework and related safeguard
monitoring tools for the RBL program have been agreed upon with LGED. Safeguard focal
persons at LGED and its divisional offices will coordinate safeguard training, monitoring, and
reporting. LGED will specify key safeguard-related risks and mitigation measures in contracts for
compliance by contractors. LGED and the pourashavas are committed to implementing the
actions included in the PAP. LGED will submit E&S monitoring reports semiannually during
program implementation until the submission of the completion report.

36.     Other relevant systems and institutions. The pourashavas conduct meaningful
consultations with the public through the TLCCs, ward committees, and low-income neighborhood
improvement committees. The existing grievance redress mechanism in pourashavas is
assessed as sound. Grievances, including complex complaints, are addressed within a maximum
of 4 weeks. Potential grievances, including E&S complaints, will be handled following the
established grievance redress mechanism (footnote 49).

C.      Sustainability

37.      The government has committed to providing sufficient funds and supporting all
components during implementation. The pourashavas are responsible for O&M. Financial
analysis was conducted for three representative pourashavas: (i) Araihazar, (ii) Chowmuhuni, and
(iii) Naohata. The analysis of financial statements for FY2018–FY2022 shows that Araihazar has
adequate capacity to operate and maintain the proposed subprojects from its own-revenue
sources, while Chowmuhuni and Naohata require additional financial support from the
government. The financial sustainability analysis shows that additional sources of income should
be identified for pourashavas to reduce central government support for sustainable O&M. The
program’s capacity development component is designed to enhance pourashavas’ revenue by
assessing the potential for revenue enhancement from existing sources and regulations, and from
additional sources; and identifying needed amendments to the pourashavas’ regulatory
requirements to enable them to increase their revenue sources.

D.      Summary of Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan

38.     Major risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 5 and described in detail in
the risk assessment and risk management plan.50 The mitigating measures reflect that country
systems, with necessary enhancements, will be widely applied to implement the RBL program.
The overall benefits and impacts are expected to outweigh the costs of mitigation.




49 Program Safeguard Systems Assessment document (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
50 Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
                                                                                                                     15


                         Table 5: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
Risks                                                                       Mitigating Measures
Outcome. Weak human resource capacity of              The RBL program and attached technical assistance support
pourashavas on municipal governance, planning         human resource capacity improvement of pourashavas in areas
and monitoring, and resilient livelihoods in low-     such as municipal governance, planning, monitoring, resilient
income communities, resulting in poor municipal       livelihoods in low-income neighborhoods, and service delivery.
service delivery.
Operating environment. Multiple implementing            LGED will sign memorandums of understanding and
agencies may make program management                    agreements with implementing agencies, and monitor these
complex.                                                using performance indicators and a web-based program
                                                        monitoring and evaluation system.
 Fiduciary. Financial management capacity is            The capacity and practices of the LGED’s internal audit function
 constrained, and internal control and governance and audit committee will be strengthened, and financial
 practices are suboptimal, which may result in          management capacity in pourashavas improved through
 mismanagement of funds, material                       capacity building. Periodic risk-based internal audits and annual
 misstatements in the financial statements, as          independent audits will be conducted, and audit observations
 well as audit qualifications and long-outstanding      and recommendations will be systematically monitored and
 and recurring audit observations.                      addressed through DLI 5.
 Expenditures and financing. Slow execution of LGED will prepare timely annual procurement plans as part of
 the development budget may delay program               the annual development plan supporting budget planning and
 implementation.                                        execution (DLI 2). ADB, LGD, and LGED will monitor budget
                                                        execution and timely disbursement of advances and quarterly
                                                        fund releases.
 Sustainability of infrastructure assets                The RBL program supports each pourashava to adopt a
 maintenance and services. Financial and O&M revenue enhancement plan to achieve 80% holding tax
 capacity of some pourashavas may be                    collection efficiency (DLI 1), setting up a computerized
 inadequate to ensure the sustainability of             accounting and billing system, expanding tax coverage, and
 infrastructure assets.                                 determining a tax rate (DLI 5). LGED will also support each
                                                        pourashava with respect to asset management, and strengthen
                                                        the O&M system to improve the condition of infrastructure.a
 Overall RBL program risk                               Substantial
ADB = Asian Development Bank, LGD = Local Government Division, LGED = Local Government Engineering
Department, O&M = operation and maintenance, RBL = results-based lending.
a For example, the program will pilot and institutionalize government support to better-performing pourashavas through

   grants to sustain the pourashavas' waste management O&M expenditures.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                                V.    ASSURANCES

39.   The government and the LGED have agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the RBL
program, which are set forth in the draft loan agreement.

                                          VI.        RECOMMENDATION

40.     I am satisfied that the proposed results-based loan would comply with the Articles of
Agreement of the Asian Development Bank and recommend that the Board approve the loan of
$300,000,000 to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the Improving Urban Governance and
Infrastructure Program, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in concessional terms, with an
interest charge at the rate of 2% per year during the grace period and thereafter; for a term of 25
years, including a grace period of 5 years; and such other terms and conditions as are
substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft loan agreement presented to the
Board.

                                                                          Masatsugu Asakawa
                                                                          President
16 June 2023
16     Appendix 1



                           DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK

Impacts the Program is Aligned with
Urban poverty reduced and living conditions improved (Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2021–2041)a
                                                                    Data Sources
                                                                          and
                                                                      Reporting     Risks and Critical
Results Chain                 Performance Indicators                Mechanisms        Assumptions
Outcome            By 2029:
Municipal          a. 80% of citizens (33% women) reported         a. Citizen      A: Population
services and       improved livability. (2022 baseline: 30% of     perception      growth remains
governance in      surveyed citizens reported improved livability) surveyb         within design
target             (non-DLI) (OP 4.1)                                              projections.
pourashavas
improved           By 2028:                                                        R: A pandemic
                   b. 80% holding tax collection efficiency        b. Annual M&E and/or natural
                   achieved in RBL program pourashavas (2022 reports               hazards destroys
                   baseline: 50%) (DLI 1) (OP 4.2)                                 program-built
                                                                                   infrastructure and
                                                                                   disrupts delivery of
                                                                                   municipal services.
Outputs            By 2028:
1. Institutional   1a. [TA Output] Criteria-based development      1a. LGD         R: Alternative
capacity for       fund transfer to pourashavas institutionalizedc instruction to  funding sources
inclusive          (2022 baseline: Not applicable) (DLI 2) (OP     pourashavas     become available,
municipal          4.2.2)                                                          undermining the
governance                                                                         incentive
strengthened       1b. UGIAP approved and implemented in 88        1b.–k. Annual   mechanism of
                   (cumulative) pourashavasd (2022 baseline:       M&E report      performance-
                   26 approved UGIAP) (DLI 3) (OP 6.2)                             based fund
                                                                                   allocation.
                   1c. Computerized (web-based) revenue
                   management systems made operational in 88
                   pourashavase (2022 baseline: 0) (DLI 3) (OP
                   6.2.2)

                    1d. Gender- and climate-responsive O&M
                    management system established in 88
                    pourashavasf (2022 baseline: 0) (DLI 6) (OP
                    2.3.2)

                    1e. At least 1,570 staff (including 90% of      1e. Training
                    eligible women staff and female councilors of   completion
                    pourashavas, LGED, and LGD) reported            report
                    increased knowledge on urban governance,        containing pre-
                    GESIAP, urban resilience, and technical         and post-
                    issuesg (2022 baseline: 0) (DLI 3, DLI 5, PAP   training
                    1.8) (OP 2.2, OP 6.1.1)                         assessment

                    1f. At least 88 pourashavas adopted and
                    implemented GESIAP with 1% budget
                    earmarked from own-source revenuesh (2022
                    baseline: 0 pourashava) (DLI 7) (OP 2.3.2)
                                                                                      Appendix 1     17


                                                                     Data Sources
                                                                          and
                                                                      Reporting      Risks and Critical
Results Chain                 Performance Indicators                 Mechanisms        Assumptions
                   1g. 5,100 residents (at least 50% women) of
                   low-income neighborhoods reported
                   increased resilient livelihood skills (2022
                   baseline: 0) (DLI 7) (OP 1.1.1, OP 2.1.1, OP
                   2.5.1)

                   1h. At least 252 low-income neighborhood
                   improvement committees in 63 pourashavas
                   formed with at least 50% women membersi
                   (2022 baseline: 0) (DLI 7) (OP 2.3)

                   1i. 63 climate and disaster risk-informed
                   master plans prepared and approved by
                   respective pourashava councils (2022
                   baseline: 0) (DLI 5) (OP 4.2.1)

                   1j. Climate-resilient and socially inclusive
                   public open space guidelines adopted by the
                   LGED and disseminated to pourashavasj
                   (2022 baseline: not applicable) (DLI 5)

                   1k. At least 300 detailed designs of resilient
                   and GESI responsive municipal infrastructure
                   subprojects completed in 63 pourashavask
                   (2022 baseline: 0) (DLI 4)
2. Municipal       By 2028:                                                          A: UGIAP
infrastructure                                                                       requirements are
improved in        2a. At least 900 km of stormwater drainage        2a.–d. Annual   fulfilled by most
quality, access,   rehabilitated or reconstructed in at least 63     M&E report      program
resilience, and    pourashavas (2022 baseline: 0 km) (DLI 8)                         pourashavas.
gender             (OP 4.1.2)
responsiveness                                                                       R: Extreme climate
                   2b. At least 1,500 km of roads rehabilitated or                   and natural hazard
                   reconstructed to meet standards of gender-                        events in
                   responsiveness, resilience, safety, and                           Bangladesh may
                   accessibility in at least 63 pourashavasl (2022                   delay construction.
                   baseline: 0) (DLI 9) (OP 2.4.1, OP 3.2.5, OP
                   4.1.2)

                   2c. At least seven climate-resilient, and
                   GESI-inclusive public facilities remodeled or
                   developedm (2022 baseline: not applicable)
                   (DLI 10) (OP2.5.2, OP 3.2.5, OP 4.1.2)

                   2d. Low-income neighborhood improvement
                   program implemented with at least 50%
                   participation by women in at least 63
                   pourashavas under the RBL program (2022
                   baseline: 0) (non-DLI) (OP 1.1.1, OP 2.3.1)
18       Appendix 1


Key Program Actions
Area 1: Technical Aspects
1.1 LGED and pourashavas supported under the RBL program sign memorandum of understanding (June 2023).
1.2 Issue a directive to pourashavas on standard operating procedures and provide orientation on the criteria-based
     development fund transfer (January 2024).
1.3 Each pourashava prepares UGIAP to strengthen governance.
1.4 Confirm total tax (holding and nonholding) collection demand in accordance with pourashavas’ latest tax
     assessment or reassessment report.
1.5 Develop, adopt, and notify each pourashava on the guidelines for climate-resilient and socially inclusive public
     open spaces.
1.6 Update pourashava poverty reduction action plans to incorporate climate change and resilient livelihoods.
1.7 In 63 pourashavas, adopt and scale up the low-income neighborhood improvement model developed under
     UGIIP.n
1.8 Complete training of at least 20 staff of LGD on standard operating procedure on criteria-based budget transfer,
     and the web-based revenue management system (2024).
1.9 Form mobile maintenance teams in each pourashava and equip them for road maintenance, aligned with
    approved O&M plan (2024–2028).
Area 2: Fiduciary Management
2.1 Assign an accountant as a program focal point in each pourashava to ensure timely preparation and flow of
    financial information between LGED, Comptroller of Audit and Accounting General, and each pourashava.
2.2 Create a separate program code for the development expenditures under the RBL program to be used to record
    all expenditures in IBAS++ as identified under the development project proforma and the annual development
    plan.
2.3 Provide timely and adequate government financing in accordance with the development project proforma and the
    annual development plan to ensure timely achievement of the results and DLIs.
2.4 Use national bidding documents with annex(es) (as agreed with the Central Procurement Technical Unit) for
    open competitive bidding following e-GP. A lottery system shall not be used to determine the successful bidder,
    including for the purpose of resolving deadlocks.
2.5 Conduct annual procurement review using a sample size of 20% of the total contracts awarded in the respective
    year.
Area 3: Environmental and Social Safeguards
3.1 Share the E&S monitoring framework with 88 pourashavas and orient their staff to operationalize it.
3.2 88 pourashavas adopt and operationalize water quality test requirement practiced in the third UGIIP.n
3.3 Renew Department of Environment clearance on program activities yearly.
3.4 Assign E&S safeguard focal persons or specialists to LGED Program Management Unit, divisional offices of
    LGED, and pourashavas to strengthen the coordination for E&S safeguards compliance.
3.5 Adopt and operationalize model for social safeguards compliance for market development under the third UGIIP.n
3.6 Include a specific action plan for the effective participation of small ethnic communities (if any) in the design of
    proposed infrastructures in applicable social safeguards documents and ensure their inclusion in the program
    benefits.
Area 4: Gender and Social Inclusion
4.1 Conduct midterm annual perception survey.
4.2 Prepare, adopt, monitor, and report implementation of pourashava-level gender and social inclusion action plans
    in all 63 pourashavas following the template in the Program Implementation Document.b
4.3 Ensure women’s participation in the pourashava decision-making process through the TLCCs.
Area 5: Monitoring and Evaluation
5.1 Establish web-based M&E system and integrate with (i) the governance-led infrastructure development
    information system to monitor pourashava infrastructure and support their O&M functions and (ii) LGED’s M&E
    system for pourashavas’ revenue enhancement-related indicators.
Financing Plan
Total program financing (2023–2028): $689.29 million
Government of Bangladesh: $189.29 million
Asian Development Bank: $300.00 million (concessional ordinary capital resources lending)
Agence Française de Développement: $200.00 million (loan)
A = assumption, DLI = disbursement-linked indicator, e-GP = electronic government procurement, E&S = environmental
and social, GESI = gender equality and social inclusion, GESIAP = gender equality and social inclusion action plan,
IBAS++ = Integrated Budget and Accounting System, km = kilometer, LGD = Local Government Division, LGED = Local
Government Engineering Department, M&E = monitoring and evaluation, O&M = operation and maintenance, PAP =
program action plan, OP = operational priority, R = risk, RBL = results-based lending, TA = technical assistance, TLCC
= town level coordination committee, UGIAP = Urban Governance Improvement Action Plan, UGIIP = Urban
Governance and Infrastructure Improvement Project.
                                                                                                     Appendix 1       19

a Government of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Planning Commission. 2020. Making Vision 2041 a Reality: Perspective
  Plan of Bangladesh 2021–2041. Dhaka.
b Citizen perception survey using the following indicators: (i) improved municipal infrastructure and services (drainage

  system, road, and public spaces)—accessibility (including women’s safety), quality, availability, and maintenance;
  and (ii) governance—citizens’ participation, citizens’ charter (comprehensive information), inclusiveness, and
  transparency with pourashava development plan, master plan, gender action plan, poverty reduction action plan, and
  annual budget developed through consultation and disclosed to the public. The TLCCs of respective pourashavas
  represent the citizens residing in the pourashava concerned. TLCCs are established by the pourashava in
  accordance with Article 115 of the Local Government (Pourashava) Act 2009. TLCCs can have a maximum of 50
  members representing citizens from various interest groups. The perception survey questionnaire is in the Program
  Implementation Document (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2).
c Criteria-based fund transfers are government funds transferred to pourashavas based on criteria that will be defined

  by the LGD in the standard operating procedures to be approved by the government.
d The UGIAP is considered implemented when a Pourashava’s overall performance score is at least 80%.
e The system is considered operational when a Pourashava uploads revenue and expenditure information in the

  LGED’s web-based platform, and this is confirmed by the LGED’s Urban Division.
f O&M plans will include specific targets for women members (33%) in committees, provision for regular monitoring

  and maintenance of gender-responsive infrastructure, specific targets for women’s employment in O&M, and use of
  climate information. At least 50% of the annual budget allocated for gender- and climate-responsive O&M in 88
  pourashavas is spent each year starting from 2024 (year 2).
g Technical training will be provided on road design, including standards and cost estimates; quality control and

  construction management; contract management; and application of geographic information systems.
h GESIAP is considered implemented if at least 70% of activities or targets are achieved or on track, with 1% budget

  allocation from own-source revenues.
I At least four low-income neighborhood improvement committees formed in each of the 63 pourashavas.
j ADB provided technical inputs in preparing the guidelines through ADB. 2021. Technical Assistance for Advancing

  the Transformative Gender Equality Agenda in a Post–COVID-19 Asia and the Pacific. Manila (TA 6737-REG); and
  ADB. 2019. Technical Assistance for Integrated and Innovative Solutions for More Livable Cities. Manila (TA 9919-
  REG).
k Municipal infrastructure (drainage, roads, and public facilities) designs prepared with climate change considerations,

  and at least two gender-responsive features (e.g., drains with covers, culverts, roads with water management, road
  crossings, footpaths, and streetlights).
l Designs are to incorporate climate change considerations. Features that enhance people’s safety include roads with

  proper pedestrian pavements, safe crossings, streetlights, visible, and clear road marking, and signage.
m
  Public facilities include four public spaces and three community facilities. Design and construction of gender-
  responsive and socially inclusive community facilities and public open spaces will consider the perspective of the
  elderly (older persons), women, children, and persons with disabilities as the end-users, i.e., with features such as
  safety measures, lighting, and separate washroom facilities.
n ADB. Bangladesh: Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project; ADB. Bangladesh: Second

  Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project; and ADB. Bangladesh: Third Urban
  Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project.
Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities
The expected values and methodological details for all OP indicators to which this operation will contribute results are
detailed in Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix
2). In addition to the OP indicators tagged in the DMF, this operation will contribute results for:
OP 3.1: Total annual greenhouse gas emissions reduction (tCO2e/year).
Source: Asian Development Bank.
20     Appendix 2



                               LIST OF LINKED DOCUMENTS
                    http://www.adb.org/Documents/RRPs/?id=55307-001-3

 1.      Loan Agreement
 2.      Sector Assessment (Summary): Water and Other Urban Infrastructure and Services
 3.      Program Soundness Assessment
 4.      Program Results Assessment
 5.      Program Results Framework
 6.      Program Expenditure and Financing Assessment
 7.      Program Monitoring and Evaluation System Assessment
 8.      Program Fiduciary Systems Assessment
 9.      Program Safeguard Systems Assessment
 10.     Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan
 11.     Contribution to Strategy 2030 Operational Priorities
 12.     Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy
 13.     Program Implementation Document
 14.     Attached Technical Assistance Report
 15.     Program Action Plan
 16.     Climate Change Assessment
                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 3       21


                       DISBURSEMENT-LINKED INDICATORS, VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS, AND DISBURSEMENT SCHEDULE

                                                         Table A3.1: Disbursement-Linked Indicators
  Disbursement-          Base line  Base                                                              Target Values
 Linked Indicators        Value      line    Advance     Prior Results      2023               2024              2025             2026              2027             2028
                                     Year   Financing                     QIII-QIV                                                                                   QI-QII
 Outcome: Municipal services and governance in target pourashavas improved.
DLI 1. By 2028,       50%           2022    NA           NA                                Holding tax      Holding tax       Holding tax       Holding tax       Holding tax
Holding tax                                                                                collection       collection        collection        collection        collection
collection efficiency                                                                      efficiency       efficiency        efficiency        efficiency        efficiency
increased to at least                                                                      increased to     increased to at   increased to      increased to      maintained to
80% by 88                                                                                  at least 60%.    least 65%.        at least 70%      at least 80%      at least 80%
pourashavas.

Output 1: Institutional capacity strengthened for inclusive governance.
DLI 2. Criteria-       Ad hoc          2022    Yes          Municipal       i. SOP of      i. At least 60   i. At least 100   i. At least 250   i. At least 329
based development      development                          (Pourashavas)   Developmen     pourashavas      pourashavas       pourashavas       pourashavas
fund transfer to       fund transfer.                       Development     t Fund         received         received          received          received
pourashavas                                                 Plan approved   transfer       development      development       development       development
institutionalized.a                                                         approved by    funds,           funds,            funds,            funds,
                                                                            LGD and        following SOP    following SOP     following SOP     following SOP
                                                                            notified to                                                         ii. ADP
                                                                            pourashavas    ii. ADP          ii. ADP aligned   ii. ADP           aligned with
                                                                                           aligned with     with the          aligned with      the program
                                                                            ii. ADP        the program      program           the program       budget
                                                                            aligned with   budget           budget            budget            forecast to
                                                                            the program    forecast to      forecast to       forecast to       meet DLIs
                                                                            budget         meet DLIs        meet DLIs         meet DLIs         approved
                                                                            forecast to    approved         approved.         approved
                                                                            meet DLIs
                                                                            approved
DLI 3. 88               26             2022   Yes          NA                              At least 88      At least 40       At least 60       88 UGIAP
Pourashavas’            pourashavas                                                        (cumulative)     UGIAP             UGIAP             implemented
governance and          has approved                                                       UGIAP            implemented       implemented
planning improved.      UGIAP                                                              approved.
(i) At least 88
(cumulative) UGIAP
approved and 88
(cumulative) UGIAP
implemented.b
(ii) 88 pourashavas’    Manual         2022   NA           NA                              At least 30      At least 40       At least 60       88
computerized            system                                                             computerized     computerized      computerized      computerized
revenue                 standalone                                                         revenue          revenue           revenue           revenue
          22       Appendix 3


     Disbursement-        Base line       Base                                                          Target Values
    Linked Indicators      Value          line   Advance     Prior Results      2023             2024              2025              2026             2027       2028
                                          Year   Financing                     QIII-QIV                                                                          QI-QII
management              computer-                                                            management       management         management        management
systems (web-           based                                                                systems          systems (web-      systems           systems
based) established.     revenue                                                              (web-based)      based)             (web-based)       (web-based)
c                       management                                                           established      established        established       established
                        system
(iii) At least 1,350    Inadequate        2022   NA          NA                              At least 120     At least 150       At least 120
staff of pourashavas    knowledge on                                                         participants     staff (total 620   staff (total of
staff (including 90%    governance,                                                          (total 360       staff and          370 staff and
of eligible women       urban                                                                staff and        councilors)        councilors)
staff and female        resilience, tax                                                      councilors)      complete           received
councilors of           reforms,                                                             complete         training each      training on
municipalities)         GESIAP, risk-                                                        training on      on UGIAP, tax      Risk-informed
complete trainings      informed                                                             Climate          assessment,        Master
                        master                                                               Resilience,      financial          Planning and
                        planning and                                                         GESI Public      management,        gender-
                        O&M                                                                  Open Space,      and waste          responsive
                                                                                             Urban            management         O&M of
                                                                                             Resilience,      system O&M         infrastructure,
                                                                                             and UGIAP                           web-based
                                                                                                                                 revenue
                                                                                                                                 management
DLI 4. By 2025, at      100 draft         2022   Yes         NA              At least 100    At least 200     At least 300
least 300               detailed                                             detailed        detailed         detailed
(cumulative) detailed   designs                                              designs of      designs of       designs of
designs of resilient    prepared.                                            infrastructur   infrastructure   infrastructure
and gender                                                                   e completed     completed        completed
responsive
municipal
infrastructure
subprojects
completed. d
                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 3     23


  Disbursement-              Base line   Base                                                          Target Values
 Linked Indicators            Value      line   Advance     Prior Results       2023            2024              2025              2026              2027           2028
                                         Year   Financing                      QIII-QIV                                                                              QI-QII
DLI 5. Financial         NA                                                 LGED’s          The number       (i) At least 1     (i) LGED’s        (i) At least 2
management, and                                                             audit           of internal      risk-based         audit             risk based
resilient and                                                               committee to    audit staff      internal audit     committee to      internal audits
inclusive planning                                                          meets at        positions in     of the RBL         have met at       of the RBL
capacity of LGED                                                            least           the LGED’s       program has        least             program
improved.                                                                   biannually      internal audit   been               biannually        undertaken
                                         2022               NA              (twice a        unit increased   undertaken by      (twice a year)    by the LGED
(i) LGED’s financial                            Yes                         year) to take   by at least      LGED’s             in year 1–3 of    internal audit
management                                                                  corrective      10%              internal audit     the RBL           unit during
systems improved                                                            actions in      compared to      unit during the    program to        the RBL
and sustained.                                                              resolving       the 2022/23      RBL program        take              program and
                                                                            audit           baseline of 12   implementation     corrective        audit reports
                                                                            observations    staff            and a report       actions in        issued.
                                                                                                             has been           resolving         (ii) At least
                                                                                                             issued.            audit             70 % of the
                                                                                                                                observations.     cumulative
                                                                                                             (ii) At least                        audit
                                                                                                             50% of the         (ii) At least     observations,
                                                                                                             audit              50% of the        as identified
                                                                                                             observations       audit             by OCAG in
                                                                                                             as identified by   observations      the three first
                                                                                                             OCAG in the        as identified     audit reports
                                                                                                             first audit        by OCAG in        of the RBL
                                                                                                             report for the     the first audit   program have
                                                                                                             RBL program,       report for the    been resolved
                                                                                                             have been          RBL program,
                                                                                                             resolved           have been
                                                                                                                                resolved.
(ii) Climate resilient   Draft           2022   Yes         NA              Climate                          At least 30        At least 63
and socially             guideline                                          Resilient and                    risk-informed      risk-informed
inclusive public open    prepared                                           Socially                         master plans       master plans
space guidelines                                                            inclusive                        approved           approved
and 63 risk-informed                                                        Public Open
master plans                                                                Space
(cumulative)                                                                Guidelines
approved                                                                    approved
(iii) At least 200       0               2022   NA          NA                              At least 50      At least 50        At least 100
LGED staff                                                                                  LGED staff       LGED staff         LGED staff
completed training                                                                          completed        completed          completed
on urban resilience                                                                         training on      training on        training on
and GESIAP                                                                                                   urban              urban
        24       Appendix 3


  Disbursement-          Base line     Base                                                         Target Values
 Linked Indicators        Value        line   Advance     Prior Results      2023            2024              2025             2026              2027              2028
                                       Year   Financing                     QIII-QIV                                                                                QI-QII
                                                                                         on urban         resilience and    resilience and
                                                                                         resilience and   GESIAP            GESIAP
                                                                                         GESIAP
DLI 6. Gender-                                                                           At least 30      At least 88       At least 50%      At least 50%      At least 50%
responsive              Ad hoc O&M                                                       gender-          gender-           of the annual     of the annual     of the annual
operation and           practice.                                                        responsive       responsive        allocated         allocated         allocated
maintenance                                                                              O&M plans        O&M plans         budget for        budget for        budget for
management                                                                               approved         approved          O&M is spent      O&M is spent      O&M is spent
systems established                                                                                                         by at least 60    by at least 88    by 88
in 88 pourashava.                                                                                         At least 50% of   pourashavas.      pourashavas.      pourashavas
                                       2022   Yes         NA                                              the annual                                            (non-DLIs)
(i) 50% of the annual                                                                                     allocated
budget allocated for                                                                                      budget for the
gender-responsive                                                                                         O&M is spent
O&M spent in 88                                                                                           by at least 30
pourashavas.                                                                                              pourashavas
(ii) WM O&M budget      An incentive   2022   Yes         NA              Standard                        Annual            Annual            Continue          Continue
received by at least    to                                                WM O&M                          pourashava        pourashava        annual            annual
25 pourashavas.         pourashavas                                       performance                     WM                WM                pourashava        pourashava
                        for                                               evaluation                      performance       performance       WM                WM
                        satisfactory                                      procedure                       ranking           ranking           performance       performance
                        O&M of the                                        developed                       prepared, and     prepared, and     ranking           ranking
                        WM system                                         and adopted                     budget            budget            prepared, and     prepared, and
                        does not                                          by LGED.                        allocated to at   allocated to at   budget            budget
                        exist.                                                                            least 25          least 25          allocated to at   allocated to at
                                                                                                          pourashavas       pourashavas       least 25          least 25
                                                                                                          following the     following the     pourashavas       pourashavas
                                                                                                          standard          standard                            (non-DLI)
                                                                                                          procedure         procedure



DLI 7. Equity and       Pourashavas    2022               NA              At least 88                     At least 40       At least 50       At least 88
inclusiveness of        do not have                                       (cumulative)                    GESIAPs           GESIAPs           GESIAPs
women and poor in       GESIAP                                            GESIAPs                         implemented       implemented       implemented
at least 88                                                               approved by                     with 1%           with 1%           with 1%
pourashava ensured                                                        pourashavas                     budget from       budget from       budget from
                                                                                                          own revenue       own revenue       own revenue
(i) GESIAP adopted
and implemented
with 1% budget
                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 3        25


  Disbursement-            Base line   Base                                                            Target Values
 Linked Indicators          Value      line    Advance      Prior Results       2023            2024              2025                2026               2027              2028
                                       Year    Financing                       QIII-QIV                                                                                    QI-QII
earmarked from own
revenue by at least
88 pourashavas.
(ii) 5,100 residents   0               2022                NA                              At least 1400      At least 1450      At least 1450      At least 800
of LIN reported                                                                            residents of       additional         additional         additional
increased resilient                                                                        LIN reported       residents of       residents of       residents of
livelihood skill.                                                                          increased          LIN reported       LIN reported       LIN reported
                                                                                           resilient          increased          increased          increased
                                                                                           livelihood skill   resilient          resilient          resilient
                                                                                                              livelihood skill   livelihood skill   livelihood skill
(iii) At least 252 (4  25             2022                 NA                               At least 100      At least 160       At least 252
committees x 63        pourashavas                                                          LIN               LIN                LIN
pourashavas) lLIN      has slum                                                             improvement       improvement        improvement
improvement            improvement                                                          committees        committees         committees
committees formed      committees                                                           formed            formed             formed
with at least 50%
women members.
Output 2: Municipal infrastructure improved in quality, access, resilience, and gender-responsiveness.
DLI 8. At least 900    Infrastructure 2022    NA           NA                At least 25% 100%                At least 250       At least 500       At least 800       At least 900
km (cumulative)        inadequate                                            of contracts   contracts         km of drains       km of drains       km of drains       km of drains
drainage                                                                     (by number)    awarded           rehabilitated/     rehabilitated/     rehabilitated/     rehabilitated/
rehabilitated or                                                             for            through e-GP      reconstructed      reconstructed      reconstructed      reconstructed
reconstructed in at                                                          rehabilitation
least 63                                                                     /
pourashavas.                                                                 reconstructio
                                                                             n of drains
                                                                             awarded
                                                                             through
                                                                             e-GP
DLI 9. At least 1,500 Infrastructure  2022    NA           NA                At least 25% All contracts       At least 250       At least 500       At least 1,000     At least 1,500
km (cumulative) of     inadequate                                            road           award             km of roads        km of roads        km of roads        km of roads
roads                                                                        contracts for through e-GP       rehabilitated/     rehabilitated/     rehabilitated/     rehabilitated/
rehabilitated/reconst                                                        rehabilitation                   reconstructed      reconstructed      reconstructed      reconstructed
ructed in at least 63                                                        /reconstructi
pourashavas. f                                                               on awarded
                                                                             through e-
                                                                             GP.
DLI 10. At least       Infrastructure 2022    NA           NA                               4 contracts       At least 2         At least 2         At least 3
seven climate          inadequate or                                                        for               climate            additional         community
resilient and socially nonexistent.                                                         construction      resilient and      climate            facilities
inclusive public                                                                            or remodeling     socially           resilient and      reconstructed
         26       Appendix 3


  Disbursement-           Base line      Base                                                                  Target Values
 Linked Indicators         Value         line     Advance        Prior Results        2023              2024              2025              2026             2027             2028
                                         Year     Financing                          QIII-QIV                                                                                 QI-QII
facilities developed                                                                               of climate       inclusive public   socially
or remodeled.g                                                                                     resilient and    spaces             inclusive
                                                                                                   socially         demonstration      public spaces
                                                                                                   inclusive        remodeled or       demonstratio
                                                                                                   public open      reconstructed      n remodeled
                                                                                                   spaces                              or
                                                                                                   awarded           3 targeted        reconstructed
                                                                                                   through eGP       contracts for
                                                                                                                     community
                                                                                                                     facilities
                                                                                                                     awarded
                                                                                                                     through e-GP
    ADP = Annual Development Plan, DLI = disbursement-linked indicator, e-GP = electronic government procurement, GESIAP = gender equality and social inclusion action
    plan, km = kilometer, LGD = Local Government Division, LGED = Local Government Engineering Department, LIN = low income neighborhood, O&M = operation and
    maintenance, OCAG = Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General, NA = not applicable, Q = quarter, RBL = results-based lending, SOP = standard operating procedure,
    UGIAP = Urban Governance Improvement Action Plan, WM = waste management.
    a LGD approves municipal development plan, standard operating procedures for criteria-based transfer, development fund transfer will follow the standard operating

      procedures and annual development plan for timely implementation.
    b Pourashava’s overall performance score of at least 80% is considered UGIAP implemented. UGIAP is under implementation in 26 pourashavas.
    c Pourashava uploads revenue and expenditure information in the LGED’s web-based platform and is confirmed by the Urban Division of LGED.
    d Municipal infrastructure (drainage, roads, and public facilities) design prepared with climate change consideration and at least 2 gender responsive features (e,g., drain

      with cover, culverts, road with water management, road crossing, footpath, streetlights, considered).
    e
      O&M plans will include specific targets for women members in committees, provision for regular monitoring and
      maintenance of gender-responsive infrastructures, and specific targets for women employment in O&M. At least 50% of the annual budget allocated for gender-
      responsive O&M in 88 pourashavas is spent each year starting from 2024 (year 2).
    f Design incorporates climate change considerations, features that enhance people’s safety include roading with proper pedestrian pavements, safe crossing, street

      lights, visibility, and clear signages.
    g Public facilities include four public spaces and three community facilities. Design and construction of gender-responsive and socially inclusive community facilities and

      public open spaces will consider the perspective of the elderly (older persons), women, children, and persons with disabilities as the end-users. These include, among
      others, safety measures, lighting, and separate washroom facilities.
      Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 3     27


                                                            Table A3.2: Verification Protocols
                                                                                                          Information
                                                                                                          Source and       Verification Agency         Verification
   Disbursement-Linked Indicators                 Definition and Description of Achievement                Frequency         and Procedure             Timeframe
Outcome: Municipal services and governance in target pourashavas improved.
DLI 1. By 2028, tax collection efficiency Definition: DLI1 is the define by the formula below:           Pourashava        PMU submits               Latest by June
increased to at least 80% by 88           Tax collection efficiency = (Arrear collection + Current       yearly            evidence of the           and November
pourashavas.                              collection) / (Arrear Demand + Current Demand)                 statement,        achievement as            every year
2022 Baseline: Target pourashavas’ on     Demand for the tax collection for that year is determined in   LGED,             reported in the annual
average holding tax collection efficiency the latest tax assessment or reassessment. Arrear demand       Municipal         progress report
is 50%.                                   is the total accumulated arrears of holding tax dues in the    Urban Support     derived from the web-
Target:                                   preceding years. Arrear collection is the collection of such   Unit              based M&E system.
Average holding tax collection efficiency arrear demand.                                                                   The IVA will verify the
achieved by 88 pourashavas.               Condition for disbursement. Considered met if the              The report will   achievement based
2024: 60%                                 targets in the first column are achieved.                      be submitted      on the report
2025: 65%                                 Partial disbursement. The DLI is scalable and partial          twice in a year   generated from the
2026: 70%                                 disbursement is allowed. The following formula will be         from 2024–        web-based M&E
2027: 80%                                 applied:                                                       2028              system and will
2028: 80% (maintained)                    Partial DLI disbursement = planned DLI disbursement for                          include a spot-check
                                          the period (actual achievement of the current period-                            in the field, as
                                          targeted achievement of the previous period)/ (targeted                          needed, to access the
                                          achievement of the current period-targeted achievement of                        quality of data
                                          the previous period). Disbursements are allowed for the                          collection
                                          early or late achievement of the DLI. Consequently, the
                                          planned disbursement amount for a given year can be
                                          released when the set target is fully achieved, even if the
                                          achievement is late, as long as the achievement is during
                                          the program’s duration.

Output 1: Institutional capacity for inclusive municipal governance strengthened
DLI 2. By 2028, Criteria-based            Definition: LGD approves Municipal Development Plan to         PMU will          IVA will verify the       2023
development fund transfer to              provide strategic approaches, including criteria-based fund    collect           achievement based
pourashavas institutionalized.            transfer to pourashavas, adopts SOP for development fund       information       on desk review
                                          transfer to pourashavas, development fund to 329               from the LGD      consolidated reports
Target:                                   pourashavas transferred, and annual development plan of        and LGED and      and sample
Prior results: Municipal (Pourashavas)    the RBL program approved annually.                             consolidate for   interviews with LGD,
Development Plan, 2022–2037               Prior results. Municipal (Pourashavas) Development Plan        2023 prior        LGED, and
                                          (2022–2037) approved by LGD provides key strategic             results, 2023     pourashavas.
                                          approaches based on evidence and sector learning for           and 2024–
                                          future interventions and subsequent investments required       2027 targets.
                                          for governance and infrastructure development in the           By 2023
                                          pourashavas, provided to LGED through a letter directive.
28       Appendix 3


                                                                                                        Information
                                                                                                        Source and       Verification Agency       Verification
   Disbursement-Linked Indicators              Definition and Description of Achievement                 Frequency           and Procedure         Timeframe
By 2023. SOP for development fund      2023 (i) SOP is a document that describes the procedure        LGD’s letter to   Achievement report       July 2023–June
transfer to pourashavas approved and   for the government transfers the development budget to         LGED              for 2023 will include    2024
notified to pourashavas.               the local government (pourashava) based on predefined          transmitting      (i) SOP document, (ii)
                                       performance criteria. LGD ranks the pourashava based on        the approved      a letter from LGD        Once a year
2024–2027                              the performance assessment, endorses the ranking report,       SOP               confirming the           from 2023–2027
Development budget received in year    and transfers the development budget to pourashavas,                             approval of SOP, and
by number of pourashavas.              respectively. (LGD will access the web-based financial         LGED M&E          (iii) a copy of the
2024: 60 pourashava                    management system at LGED to generate the ranking).                              notification letter to
2025: 100 pourashava                                                                                                    pourashavas.
2026: 250 pourashava                   2023 condition for disbursement. The target is                                   For 2024–2027,
2027: 329 pourashava                   considered achieved when the LGD prepares the SOP,                               attested performance
                                       LGD has approved it, and notified each pourashava                                ranking (by LGD)
                                       through a notification. Partial disbursement is not allowed.                     report and fund
                                       2024–2027 condition for disbursement. Considered                                 transfer statement in
                                       achieved when the pourashavas confirms receipt of the                            accordance with the
                                       budget in writing.                                                               SOP.

                                       Partial disbursement from 2024–2027.
                                       The following formula will be applied for partial
                                       disbursement: Partial DLI disbursement = planned DLI
                                       disbursement for the period (actual achievement of the
                                       current period-targeted achievement of the previous
                                       period)/ (targeted achievement of the current period-
                                       targeted achievement of the previous period).
                                                                                                                        IVA verify and confirm
Target 2023–2027: ADP approved and     Condition for disbursement. This target is considered                            published ADP
aligned with the RBL program budget    achieved when the Chief Engineer, LGED (i) approves the
forecast to meet DLIs.                 RBL program budget forecast to meet the DLIs and (ii)
                                       Approves the ADP aligned with the approved program
                                       budget.
DLI 3: 88 Pourashavas’ governance      Definition: DLI 3 is defined that (i) each pourashava is       Pourashava        PMU submits              Twice a year
and capacity improved.                 implementing UGIAP, (ii) a web-based revenue                   records and       achievement reports      from 2024–
                                       management system established and (iii) capacity-building      LGED M&E.         including UGIAP,         2028.
(i) By 2024, 88 UGIAP (cumulative)     activities have been implemented.                                                pourashava council’s
approved and 88 (cumulative) UGIAP     Each pourashava’s UGIAP should use well-defined                                  meeting minutes and
implemented.                           activities and indicators to assess the pourashava’s                             UGIAP
                                       governance improvement performance. There are nine                               implementation
Target number of UGIAP implemented     activities with twenty-nine indicators. UGIAP must be                            assessment report
2024: 88 UGIAP approved (cumulative)   approved by each pourashava council and TLCC before                              attested by TLCC.
2025: 40 UGIAP implemented             implementation begins. UGIAP is considered implemented                           The IVA will the
2026: 60 UGIAP implemented             if the pourashava achieves a score of at least 80%.                              achievement by (a)
                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 3     29


                                                                                                           Information
                                                                                                           Source and     Verification Agency         Verification
  Disbursement-Linked Indicators                   Definition and Description of Achievement                Frequency        and Procedure            Timeframe
2027: 88 UGIAP implemented                 Condition for disbursement. This is considered met if the                     desk review, (b)
2028:88 UGIAP implemented (non-DLI)        targets in the first column are achieved.                                     sample interviews
                                           Partial disbursement. Allowed 100% will be disbursed if                       with key stakeholders
                                           the target is met; or if the achievement is lower.                            in TLCC.
                                           The following formula will be applied: Partial DLI
                                           disbursement = planned DLI disbursement for the period
                                           (actual achievement of the current period-targeted
                                           achievement of the previous period)/ (targeted
                                           achievement of the current period-targeted achievement of
                                           the previous period).
(ii) 88 Pourashavas’ computerized          Definition: Pourashavas commence using the web-based           LGED, UMSU     PMU prepares               Within 1 month
revenue management systems (web-           revenue management system developed by LGED and                whenever the   achievement reports        of receiving the
based) established.                        pourashavas complete data (financial management)               DLI is met.    generated by web-          validation
2022 Baseline: Manual system in 88         migration to the system.                                                      based revenue              report, ADB will
(cumulative) pourashavas.                  Condition for disbursement. Target is considered                              management system          confirm that the
Target: Number of pourashava               achieved when the target in the first column is met.                          and submits. The IVA       target has been
completes data migrations completed        Partial disbursement from 2024–2026. Partial                                  will verify the            met.
2024: 30                                   disbursement is allowed, according to the number of                           achievement by (a)
2025: 40                                   pourashava that have completed data migrations. The                           desk review, (b)
2026: 60                                   following formula will be applied: Partial DLI disbursement                   sample interviews
2027: 88                                   = planned DLI disbursement for the period (actual                             with key stakeholders
2028: 88 (maintained)                      achievement of the current period-targeted achievement of                     in Pourashavas and
                                           the previous period)/(targeted achievement of the current                     UMSU.
                                           period-targeted achievement of the previous period).
(iii) Pourashavas staff completing         Definition: Trainings are provided on multiple topics to the   Pourashava,    LGED submits               Semi-annually.
training (urban governance including       pourashava participants (90% eligible women staff and          LGED           attested training
tax, GESIAP, urban resilience, and         councilor), including staff, members of TLCC and WCC.          Once a year    completion reports to
technical)                                 2024 training on Urban Resilience, GESIAP, Climate                            ADB.
Target: 1,350 participants (90% eligible   Resilience and Socially Inclusive Public Open Space
women staff and councilor) complete        Guidelines.
training by:                               2025 training on UGIAP, tax assessment, financial
2024: 360                                  management, and waste management system O&M.
2025: 620                                  2026 training on gender-responsive operation and
2026: 370                                  maintenance plan.
                                           Condition for disbursement. This target is achieved
                                           when the first column’s target is met.
                                           Partial disbursement. 100% will be disbursed if the target
                                           is met, or pro-rata basis if the achievement is lower.
DLI 4: By 2025, 300 Detailed designs of    Definition. Detailed design reports, including feasibility     LGED           LGED submits               Semiannually
resilient and gender responsive            study, Detailed Design, Bill of Quantity, IEE, and safeguard                  approved sub-project
                                           assessment following the standards and guidelines of the                      appraisal reports and
30        Appendix 3


                                                                                                             Information
                                                                                                             Source and       Verification Agency      Verification
  Disbursement-Linked Indicators                   Definition and Description of Achievement                  Frequency         and Procedure          Timeframe
municipal infrastructure subprojects        government. The reports are approved by the appropriate                          IVA will verify the
completed.                                  authority. Climate change consideration (as appropriate)                         achievement on
                                            and gender-responsive features (at least two features)                           sample basis.
Target:                                     incorporated.
By 2023: 100 detailed design reports
completed.                                  Partial disbursement. 100% will be disbursed if the target
2024: 150 detail design completed           is met, or pro-rata basis if the achievement is lower.
2025: 300 detail design completed.          The following formula will be applied: Partial DLI
                                            disbursement = planned DLI disbursement for the period
                                            (actual achievement of the current period-targeted
                                            achievement of the previous period)/ (targeted
                                            achievement of the current period-targeted achievement of
                                            the previous period).
DLI 5: Financial management, and            Definition: LGED’s audit committee will meet biannually to      Minutes of       PMU submits the          Semiannually
resilient and inclusive planning capacity   resolve audit observations outstanding until the last year of   biannual         letter of achievement
of LGED improved.                           the RBL program.                                                meetings or      to ADB with dossier
                                            Condition for disbursement. This is considered achieved         equivalent.      The AVA will verify
(i) LGED’s Financial management             when LGED submits the minutes of the audit committee.                            the submitted
systems improved and sustained.             Partial disbursement. Not applicable                                             documents.
Target by 2023 LGED’s audit
committee to meet at least biannually
(twice a year) to take corrective actions
in resolving audit observations.
By 2024 The number of internal audit        Definition: LGED’s internal audit department lacks              Payroll          PMU will submit to
staff positions in the LGED internal        sufficient staff. At least 2 more staff members need to be      certificate      ADB a payroll. The
audit unit increased by at least 10% (2     appointed.                                                                       IVA will verify the
persons) compared to the baseline of                                                                                         submitted documents
12 staff.                                   Condition for disbursement. Proof of payroll to at least                         on sample basis and
                                            14 total staff members                                                           interviews.
                                            Partial disbursement. 100% if 2 additional staff members
                                            are recruited, 75% If 1 additional staff member is recruited.
By 2025 (i) At least 1 risk-based           Definition: Risk based audit report on RBL to be prepared       Internal audit   PMU will submit the      Once a year
internal audit of the RBL program have      by the internal audit team of LGED. At least 50% of the         report           internal audit report
been undertaken by the LGED internal        audit observations are to be settled.                                            and summary of the
audit unit during the RBL program                                                                                            APFSs. IVA will verify
implementation and a report has been        Condition for disbursement. LGD internal audit team                              the submitted
issued.                                     submits a report on risk-based audit. 50% outstanding                            documents.
                                            audit observations are resolved.
(ii) At least 50% of the audit
observations as identified by OCAG in
                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 3        31


                                                                                                           Information
                                                                                                           Source and      Verification Agency         Verification
   Disbursement-Linked Indicators                   Definition and Description of Achievement               Frequency        and Procedure             Timeframe
the first audit report for the RBL          Partial disbursement. (i) 60% if the risk based internal
program, have been resolved.                audit is undertaken, and (ii) 40% if at least 50% audit
                                            observations are resolved.
By 2026 (ii) LGED’s audit committee to      Definition: (i) LGED’s audit committee to meet at least       Internal audit   PMU will submit the        Once a year
have met at least biannually (twice a       biannually in year 1–3 of the RBL program to take             report,          internal audit report,
year) in year 1–3 to take corrective        corrective actions in resolving audit observations given by   Payroll          summary of the
actions in resolving audit observations.    OCAG and FAPAD. (ii) At least 4 more staff members are                         APFSs. IVA will verify
                                            appointed from the baseline of 12 staff.                                       the submitted
(i) The number of internal audit staff                                                                                     documents.
positions in the LGED internal audit unit   Condition for disbursement. (i) Broadsheet reply
increased by 4 persons compared to          submitted by LGED on the unresolved audit observations.
the 2022/23 baseline of 12 staff.           (ii) Proof of payroll to at least 14 staff members

                                            Partial disbursement. (i) 60% if the committee meets
                                            biannually, 40% if the committee meets annually; and (ii)
                                            40% if 4 additional staff members are recruited, 35% if 3
                                            additional staff members are recruited, 30% if 2 additional
                                            staff members are recruited.
By 2027, At least two risk-based            Condition for disbursement. LGD internal audit team           LGED, OCAG       IVA will verify at least   Once in 2027
internal audits of the RBL program          submits reports on risk-based audit. 70% outstanding audit                     2 risk based internal
undertaken by the LGED internal audit       observations are resolved.                                                     audits conducted by
unit during the RBL program                                                                                                reviewing the internal
implementation and report issued.           Partial disbursement. (i) 60% if two risk-based internal                       report and
At least 70% of the cumulative audit        audits are undertaken and 50% if one risk-based internal                       Report from OCAG
observations, as identified by OCAG in      audits are undertaken; and (ii) 40% if at least 70% audit                      on the status of
the three first audit reports of the RBL    observations are resolved, 35% if at least 60% are                             cumulative audit
program have been resolved.                 resolved, 30% if at least 50% are resolved.                                    observations.

(ii) Climate Resilient and Socially         Definition: LGED adopts the guidelines and each               Pourashava,      IVA will verify the
inclusive Public Open Space Guidelines      pourashava is notified through LGED’s notification. Risk-     LGED             LGED documents
and 63 Risk-informed master plans           informed master plan for at least 15 years will be prepared                    that state the
approved.                                   for the pourashavas following the LGED’s prescribed                            guideline is approved
By 2023. Climate Resilient and Socially     processes and template. Recruitment of consultants                             and notified to
Inclusive Public Open Space Guidelines      completed by issuing notice to proceed.                                        pourashavas by the
approved by LGED.                                                                                                          LGED.
                                            2023 Condition for disbursement. This target is considered                     IVA will verify the
By 2023. Consultant recruitment             achieved when the LGED has approved the guidelines and                         following documents:
following ADB’s Procurement Policy          notified each pourashava through a notification. Partial                       (i) pourashava letter
completed and notice to commence            disbursement. Not applicable.                                                  to LGED on the
issued. Preparation.                                                                                                       approval of the
                                                                                                                           master plan together
32        Appendix 3


                                                                                                           Information
                                                                                                           Source and     Verification Agency       Verification
   Disbursement-Linked Indicators                  Definition and Description of Achievement                Frequency        and Procedure          Timeframe
By 2025. 30 Risk-informed master            2023 Condition for disbursement. This target is considered                   with the approved
plans                                       achieved when the LGED issued notice to proceed to the                       risk-informed master
2026. At least 63 risk-informed master      consultants for the risk-informed master plan. Partial                       plan and (ii) minutes
plans                                       disbursement. Not applicable.                                                of pourashava
                                                                                                                         council.
                                            2025–2026 Condition for disbursement. This target is
                                            considered achieved when the pourashava approves the
                                            risk-informed master plan. Partial disbursements allowed.
(iii) 50, 100, and 200 (cumulative) staff   Definition: Training will be provided on urban resilience     LGED           PMU will submit to        Annually 2024-
trained in 2024, 2025, and 2026             and Gender Action Plan.                                       PMU M&E        LGED a letter of          2026
respectively, on urban resilience and       2024–2026. The DLI is scalable and partial disbursement is    report         achievement. The
GESIAP.                                     allowed. The following formula will be applied: Partial DLI                  ADB mission, along
                                            disbursement = planned DLI disbursement for the period                       with LGED, will verify
                                            (actual achievement of the current period-targeted                           the submitted
                                            achievement of the previous period)/ (targeted                               documents.
                                            achievement of the current period-targeted achievement of
                                            the previous period).
DLI 6: Gender-responsive O&M                Definition. DLI 6 defined if each pourashava includes         Pourashava     IVA verifies by: Desk     2024–2025
management established in 88                gender dimensions in the approved O&M plan, spent 50%         LGED MIS       review and interview
pourashavas.                                of the annual O&M budget, and 25 pourashavas received a                      with key pourashavas
                                            budget for waste management O&M following the                                staff and TLCC
(i) At least 50% of the annual allocated    performance ranking.                                                         members on the
budget for gender responsive O&M is         Each pourashava council approves the gender-responsive                       minutes of
spent in 88 pourashavas.                    O&M plan. Implementation of the plan is defined if 50% of                    pourashava.
Target:                                     the annual budget allocated for the O&M is spent by the
By 2024 = 30 pourashavas O&M plan           target pourashava starting from the second year of the plan                  PMU submits to the
approved                                    approvals. The ratio of actual expenditure to the yearly                     ADB (i) O&M SOP
2025 = 88 pourashavas O&M plan              budget provision. Expenditure of implementation is                           document, (ii) a letter
approved                                    recorded, aligning the activities in the approved O&M plan.                  from LGD confirming
2025 = 30 pourashavas spend at least                                                                                     the approval of SOP,
50% of the annual allocated budget.                                                                                      and (iii) a copy of
2026 = 88 pourashavas spend at least                                                                                     notification letter to
50% of the annual allocated budget.                                                                                      pourashavas. PMU
(ii) WM O&M fund received by at least       A SOP will be developed for the pourashavas for solid                        submits submit to the
25 pourashavas.                             waste and fecal sludge management. PMU will prepare a                        ADB (i) the
By 2023. Standard WM O&M                    performance assessment following the performance                             performance ranking
performance evaluation procedure            evaluation procedure and performance ranking attested by                     and (ii) interim
developed and adopted by LGED.              LGED and the fund allocated to pourashavas is done                           financial statement.
By 2025–2026. Annual pourashava             accordingly. This component will cover 25 pourashavas
WM performance ranking prepared, and        where the waste management value chain is established
                                            under different ADB-financed LGED projects.
                                                                                                                                              Appendix 3       33


                                                                                                         Information
                                                                                                         Source and       Verification Agency      Verification
  Disbursement-Linked Indicators                  Definition and Description of Achievement               Frequency         and Procedure          Timeframe
budget allocated to at least 25
pourashavas for WM O&M

following standard procedure                Condition for disbursements. This is considered met if
                                            the targets in the first column are achieved.
                                            Partial disbursement. The DLI is scalable and partial
                                            disbursement is allowed. The following formula will be
                                            applied:
                                            Partial DLI disbursement. Planned DLI disbursement for
                                            the period (actual achievement of the current period-
                                            targeted achievement of the previous period)/(targeted
                                            achievement of the current period-targeted achievement of
                                            the previous period).
DLI 7: Equity and inclusiveness of          Definition: DLI 7 requires each pourashava to approve a     Semiannual        IVA verifies by: Desk   Semiannual
women and poor ensured in at least 88       GESIAP, implemented it with a 1% budget allocated from      progress report   review and interviews
pourashavas                                 own revenue, and low-income resilient livelihood skills     on GESIAP         with pourashavas
                                            training completed for 5,000 residents of low-income        implementation    staff, LINC members,
(i) GESIAP adopted and implemented          neighborhood, and LINIC discuss climate resilient issues                      and LGED staff.
with 1% budget earmarked from own           and priorities.
revenue by at least 88 pourashavas.         Implementation is defined as when at least 70% of targets
                                            of GESIAP are achieved or on track to achieve with 1%
Target:                                     budget allocation from own revenue.
Pourashava-wise GESIAP approved:
By 2023: 59
GESIAP implemented:
By
  2025: 40
  2026: 50
  2027: 88
(ii) 5,100 residents of low-income          Recipients of training should include residents of a low-   Semiannual        IVA verifies by desk    Semiannual
neighborhood reported increased             income neighborhood of each pourashava. A list of low-      progress          review and interviews
resilient livelihood skill.                 income neighborhoods should be maintained by each           report.           of LINIC member and
Target: 1400, 1450, 1450, and 800           pourashava.                                                                   pourashavas staff.
residents trained on resilient livelihood   The target is considered achieved when the pourashava
skill in the years 2024, 2025, 2026, and    publishes official notice on LINIC formation in 252 low-
2027, respectively.                         income neighborhoods. Minutes of committee records
(iii) 252 (4 committees x 63                discussions on climate resilient issues.                    Contract                                  Semiannual
pourashavas) LINIC in 63 pourashavas        Condition for Disbursements: This is considered met if      document
formed with at least 50% women              the targets in the first column are achieved.               between LINIC
members. Target: 100, 160, and 252          Partial disbursements. Partial disbursement is allowed.     and
                                            The following formula will be applied for each target.      pourashava
34       Appendix 3


                                                                                                        Information
                                                                                                        Source and      Verification Agency      Verification
   Disbursement-Linked Indicators                Definition and Description of Achievement               Frequency        and Procedure          Timeframe
LINIC (cumulative) formed in 2024,       Partial disbursement is allowed, and the following formula
2025, and 2026.                          will be applied: Partial DLI disbursement = planned DLI
                                         disbursement for the period (actual achievement of the
                                         current period-targeted achievement of the previous
                                         period)/ (targeted achievement of the current period-
                                         targeted achievement of the previous period).
Output 2: Municipal infrastructure improved in quality, access, resilience, and gender responsiveness
DLI 8: At least 900 km of drains         Definitions: Drains rehabilitated or reconstructed as per    Quarterly         IVA will verify the
rehabilitated or reconstructed           technical specification/ guidelines requirements issued by   Progress          length and whether
                                         LGED.                                                        Reports and       the work was
(i) Civil works (drain) contract awarded Rehabilitation/reconstruction defined as: Catchment          Annual M&E        executed as per BOQ
through e-GP.                            identified (design). Main drain and distributary channel and Report.           and attached
50% by 2023                              outfalls constructed/ rehabilitated as designed. Water                         technical
100% by 2024                             retention and detention system to be installed as per        On-site           specifications/require
                                         design. Outfall to outfall sections to be established for    verification of   ments of LGED for all
(ii) Length of drains rehabilitated or   partial disbursement (runoff to be allowed to reach outfall  randomly          the subprojects
reconstructed in 63 target pourashavas. from all the catchments under consideration)                  selected          requested for
250 km – 2025                            Partial disbursement. Applicable for this DLI upon           sections at       verification.
500 km – 2026                            submission of verification report by IVA lengthwise.         different times
800 km –2027                             The following formula will be applied: Partial DLI           of the year.
900 km –2028                             disbursement = planned DLI disbursement for the period
                                         (actual achievement of the current period-targeted
                                         achievement of the previous period)/ (targeted
                                         achievement of the current period-targeted achievement of
                                         the previous period).
DLI 9: At least 1,500 km of roads        Definition: Existing road alignments rehabilitated or        QPR and           IVA will verify the
rehabilitated or reconstructed.          constructed to meet standards of gender responsiveness,      Annual M&E        length and whether
                                         safety, resilience, and accessibility. The rehabilitation or Report.           the work was
Baseline:                                reconstruction of existing road alignment shall be executed                    executed as per BOQ
Infrastructure inadequate.               as per the BOQ and attached technical                        On site           and attached
                                         specifications/project requirements of LGED.                 verification of   technical
2023–2024                                                                                             randomly          specifications/require
(a) All civil works (road) contracts     Partial disbursement applicable for this DLI upon            selected          ments of LGED for all
awarded through e-GP.                    submission of verification report by IVA on a yearly basis   sections at       the subprojects
2025–2028                                lengthwise. 100% will be disbursed if at least 250 km of     different times   requested for
(b) At least 1,500 km of roads           roads have been rehabilitated/ reconstructed.                of the year.      verification
rehabilitated or reconstructed to meet   The following formula will be applied: Partial DLI
standards of gender responsiveness,      disbursement = planned DLI disbursement for the period
safety, and accessibility in 63 target   (actual achievement of the current period-targeted
pourashavas.                             achievement of the previous period)/ (targeted
250 km – 2025
                                                                                                                                             Appendix 3     35


                                                                                                        Information
                                                                                                        Source and      Verification Agency       Verification
   Disbursement-Linked Indicators                 Definition and Description of Achievement              Frequency        and Procedure           Timeframe
800 km – 2026                              achievement of the current period-targeted achievement of
1,250 km – 2027                            the previous period).
1,500 km – 2028


DLI 10: At least seven climate resilient   Definitions: Gender-responsive public spaces and            QPR and          IVA will verify the
and socially inclusive public facilities   community centers designed as per relevant design           Annual M&E       length and whether
developed or remodeled.                    guidelines and constructed as per signed contract           report           the work was
                                           agreement (technical specifications, and BOQ)                                executed as per BOQ
Baseline: Climate resilient and socially                                                                     Field visitand the attached
inclusive public facilities = 0              Condition of disbursement. The disbursement condition is        reports    technical
By 2024: 4 contracts for construction or     met if the target in the first column is met.                              specifications/
remodeling of climate resilient and                                                                                     requirements of
socially inclusive public open spaces        Disbursements are allowed for advance or late                              LGED for all the
awarded through e-GP.                        achievement of the DLI. It means that the planned                          subprojects
By 2025: (i) Construction or remodeling      disbursement amount for a given year can be released                       requested for
of at least 2 climate resilient and          when the set target is fully or partially achieved, even if the            verification.
socially inclusive public open spaces        achievement is late, as long as the achievement is during
demonstration facilities completed.          the RBL program’s duration.
(ii) At least 3 targeted contracts for
community facilities awarded through e-
GP.
By 2026: Construction or remodeling of
at least 2 additional climate-resilient
and gender-responsive public open
spaces completed.
By 2027: 3 Community facilities (market
centers) constructed.
 ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADP = Annual Development Plan, APFS = audited project financial statements, BOQ = bill of quantity, DLI = disbursement-linked
 indicator, e-GP = electronic government procurement, FAPAD = Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate, GESIAP = gender action plan, GESI = gender equality and
 social inclusion, IEE = initial environmental examination, IVA = independent verification agency, km = kilometer, LGD = Local Government Division, LGED = Local
 Government Engineering Department, LINIC = Low-income Neighborhood Improvement Committees, M&E = monitoring and evaluation, O&M = operation and
 maintenance, PMU = project management unit, OCAG = Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General, M&E = monitoring and evaluation, QPR = quarterly progress
36      Appendix 3


report, RBL = results-based lending, SOP = standard operating procedures, TLCC = Town Level Coordination Committee, UGIAP = Urban Governance Improvement
Action Plan, UMSU = urban management support unit, WCC = ward coordination committee, WM = waste management.
Source: ADB.

                                                       Table A3.3: Expected Disbursement Schedule
                                                                          Financin
                                                                          g of Prior
                                                    Total ADB Share of    Results
                                                    Financing   Total ADB 2023           Advance
                                                    Allocation Financing  ($             Financing
 Disbursement-Linked Indicators                     ($ million) (%)       million)       ($ million)   2023     2024     2025     2026    2027    2028
 Outcome: Municipal services and governance in target 88 pourashavas improved.
 DLI 1: Holding tax collection efficiency increased    20.0         6.7                                           2.5      2.5     5.0     5.0      5.0
 to at least 80% achieved.
 Output 1: Institutional capacity for inclusive municipal governance strengthened

 DLI 2: Criteria-based development fund transfer
 to pourashavas.
 Municipal (pourashavas) Development Plan (prior           15.0      5.0       15.0
 results)
    i. SOP for development fund transfer approved          10.0      3.3                     2.0         2.0      2.0      2.0     2.0     2.0
       and 329 pourashavas received development
       funds following SOP.
   ii. ADP aligned with the program budget                 9.0       3.0                     2.0         4.0      2.0      1.0     1.0     1.0
       forecast to meet DLIs.
 DLI 3: 88 Pourashavas’ governance and planning
 improved.
    i. At least 88 UGIAPs (cumulative) approved            9.0       3.0                     2.0         2.0      2.0      1.0     2.0     2.0
         and 88 UGIAP implemented.
   ii. 88 Pourashavas’ computerized revenue                9.0       3.0                                          1.0      3.0     3.0     2.0
       management systems (web-based)
       established.
  iii. At least 1,350 staff of pourashavas staff           9.0       3.0                                          2.0      3.5     3.5
       (including 90% of eligible women staff and
       female councilors of municipalities) complete
       training (governance, financial management,
       urban resilience, risk-informed master
       planning, GESIAP).
 DLI 4: By 2025, 300 detailed designs of resilient         6.0       2.0                     2.0         2.0      2.0      2.0
 and gender responsive municipal infrastructure
 subprojects completed
 DLI 5: Financial management and resilient and
 inclusive planning capacity of LGED improved.
                                                                                                                                 Appendix 3    37


                                                                           Financin
                                                                           g of Prior
                                                Total ADB     Share of     Results
                                                Financing     Total ADB    2023         Advance
                                                Allocation    Financing    ($           Financing
Disbursement-Linked Indicators                  ($ million)   (%)          million)     ($ million)   2023    2024    2025    2026    2027    2028
   i. LGED’s Financial management systems           5.0           1.7                       1.0         1.0     1.0    1.0     1.0     1.0
      improved & sustained.
  ii. Climate Resilient and Socially inclusive        20.0          6.6                     4.0        5..0     3.0    7.0     5.0
      Public Open Space Guidelines and 63 Risk-
      informed master plans approved.
 iii. At least 200 LGED staff (cumulative)              5.0         1.7                                  0      2.0    2.0     1.0
      completing training (urban resilience and
      GESIAP).
DLI 6: Gender-responsive operation and
maintenance management system established in
88 pourashavas.
   i. 50% of the annual budget for gender-              5.0         1.7                                         1.0    1.0     1.5     1.0     0.5
      responsive operation and maintenance spent
      in 88 pourashavas.
  ii. Waste management O&M fund received by             7.0         2.3                     1.0         1.0            2.0     2.0     2.0
      25 pourashavas.
DLI 7: Equity and inclusiveness of women and
poor in 88 pourashavas ensured.
   i. GESIAP adopted and implemented with 1%            8.0         2.6                     1.0         2.0            2.0     2.0     2.0
      budget earmarked from own revenue by at
      least 88 pourashavas.
  ii. 5,100 residents of low-income neighborhood        8.0         2.6                                         1.0    3.0     2.0     2.0
      reported increased resilient livelihood skill.
 iii. 252 (4 committees x 63 pourashavas) low-          5.0         1.8                                 1.0     1.0    1.0     1.0     1.0
      income neighborhood improvement
      committees in 63 pourashavas formed with at
      least 50% women members.
Output 2: Municipal infrastructure improved in quality, access, resilience, and gender-responsiveness
DLI 8: Length of drains rehabilitated or              95.59        31.9                                9.83   10.00   20.00   20.00   18.78   16.98
reconstructed.
DLI 9: Length of paved (flexible/concrete) and        33.25       11.10                                2.00    3.00   3.00    10.01   11.22   4.02
unpaved roads rehabilitated or reconstructed.
DLI 10: Gender-responsive municipal facilities         6.00         2.0                                        1.00   2.00    2.00    1.00
developed or remodeled.
Subtotal                                             284.84         5.0                               31.83   36.50   59.00   64.01   52.0    26.50

Interest charges during implementation             15.16                                              0.24     1.32   2.31    3.60    4.84    2.85
38      Appendix 3


                                                                           Financin
                                                                           g of Prior
                                                Total ADB Share of         Results
                                                Financing     Total ADB 2023             Advance
                                                Allocation Financing       ($            Financing
 Disbursement-Linked Indicators                 ($ million)   (%)          million)      ($ million)   2023    2024       2025     2026      2027     2028
                                        Total       300          100           15             15       32.07    37.82     61.31 67.61 56.84 29.35
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADP = annual development plan, DLI = disbursement linked indicator, GESIAP = gender equality and social inclusion action plan,
LGED = Local Government engineering department, O&M = operation and maintenance, SOP = standard operating procedure, UGIAP = urban governance
improvement action plan.
Source: ADB.
