Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




INTERNAL


Project Number: 56182-001
September 2024




Proposed Results-Based Loan
People’s Republic of China: Chongqing Gaoxin
District Green and Low-Carbon Urban Development
Program




Distribution of this document is limited until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, this document will be reclassified as public and disclosed in accordance
with ADB’s Access to Information Policy.
                        CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                         (as of 13 September 2024)

                       Currency unit – yuan (CNY)
                           CNY1.00 = $0.1404
                              $1.00 = CNY7.1175


                              ABBREVIATIONS

ACGD   –   Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin District
ADB    –   Asian Development Bank
APMO   –   Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin District Program Management
           Office
CGD    –   Chongqing Gaoxin District
CGDG   –   Chongqing Gaoxin Development and Construction Investment Group
           Co., Ltd.
CMG    –   Chongqing Municipal Government
CO2    –   carbon dioxide
COD    –   chemical oxygen demand
DLI    –   disbursement-linked indicator
GDP    –   gross domestic product
IVA    –   independent verification agency
M&E    –   monitoring and evaluation
OP     –   operational priority
PAP    –   program action plan
PID    –   program implementation document
PRC    –   People’s Republic of China
PRF    –   program results framework
PSSA   –   program safeguard systems assessment
RBL    –   results-based lending
SDG    –   Sustainable Development Goal
WWTP   –   wastewater treatment plant


                                     NOTE

               In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars.
Vice-President   Scott Morris; Office of the Vice-President (East and Southeast Asia, and the
                    Pacific)
Director         Muhammad Ehsan Khan, East Asia Department (EARD)
General
Directors        Jingmin Huang, Water and Urban Development Sector Office, Sectors
                     Group (SG-WUD)
                 Safdar Parvez, Country Director, People’s Republic of China Resident
                     Mission (PRCM), EARD

Project team     Hinako Maruyama, Senior Urban Development Specialist, SG-WUD
leaders          Lan Wang, Senior Project Officer, SG-WUD
Project team     Tsolmon Begzsuren, Social Development Specialist (Gender and
members              Development), Gender Equality Division, Climate Change and
                     Sustainable Development Department (CCSD)
                 Xueliang Cai; Senior Water Resources Specialist; Agriculture, Food, Nature,
                     and Rural Development Sector Office; Sectors Group (SG-AFNR)
                 Jinqiang Chen, Urban Development Specialist (Climate Change), SG-WUD
                 Maria Lorena Cleto, Social Development Specialist (Resettlement), Office of
                     Safeguards (OSFG)
                 Dongmei Guo, Senior Environment Specialist, OSFG
                 Chen Huang, Operations Assistant, PRCM, EARD
                 Okju Jeong; Climate Change Specialist; Climate Change, Resilience, and
                     Environment Cluster; CCSD
                 Jude Kohlhase, Principal Portfolio Management Specialist, Office of the
                     Director General and Group Chief, Sectors Group
                 Danhui Li, Project Analyst, PRCM, EARD
                 Leah A. Luna, Associate Project Analyst, SG-WUD
                 Doniyor Mukhammadaliyev, Senior Project Officer, SG-WUDa
                 Kiyoshi Nakamitsu, Principal Urban Development Specialist, SG-WUD
                 Irina Novikova, Principal Social Development Specialist (Safeguards), OSFG
                 Aysha Qadir, Principal Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                 Stefan Rau, Principal Urban Development Specialist, SG-WUD
                 Aoxue Ren; Senior Procurement Officer; Procurement Division 2 (PFP2);
                     Procurement, Portfolio, and Financial Management Department (PPFD)
                 Mark Allister Robis, Financial Management Specialist, Public Financial
                     Management Division 2, PPFD
                 Marcelle Anne Luna Santos, Senior Operations Assistant, SG-WUD
                 Eleanor Sarapat, Project Analyst, SG-WUD
                 Shotaro Sasaki, Principal Environment Specialist, OSFG
                 Aaron Sexton, Environment Specialist, OSFG
                 Rubina Shaheen, Principal Procurement Specialist, PFP2, PPFD
                 Gohar Tadevosyan, Senior Social Development Specialist, Human and
                     Social Development Sector Office, Sectors Group
                 Rochelle Villanueva, Associate Project Analyst, SG-WUD
                 Lei Wang, Principal Treasury Specialist, Client Solutions Division, Treasury
                     Department
                 Lei Zhang; Unit Head, Project Administration; Energy Sector Office; Sectors
                     Group
                 Yuxuan Zhao, Senior Investment Officer, Infrastructure Finance Division 2,
                     Private Sector Operations Department
Peer reviewers          Kristina Katich, Senior Urban Development Specialist, SG-WUD
                        Geoffrey Wilson, Senior Water Resources Specialist, SG-AFNR
a   Assigned to the Procurement, Portfolio, and Financial Management Department on a short-term assignment.




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                       CONTENTS

                                                                                     Page
PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
MAP
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                                      1
II.    THE PROGRAM                                                                        1
       A.   Rationale                                                                     1
       B.   Program Scope                                                                 6
       C.   Program Results                                                               7
       D.   ADB Value Addition                                                            9
       E.   Expenditure Framework and Financing Plan                                     10
       F.   Capacity Development and Program Action Plan                                 11
       G.   Implementation Arrangements                                                  11
III.   DUE DILIGENCE                                                                     12
       A.    Program Technical Assessments                                               12
       B.    Gender Equality                                                             13
       C.    Poverty and Social Dimensions                                               13
       D.    Program Systems Assessments                                                 14
       E.    Sustainability                                                              16
       F.    Summary of Risk Assessment                                                  16
IV.    ASSURANCES                                                                        16
V.     RECOMMENDATION                                                                    16

APPENDIX
Design and Monitoring Framework for the Program                                          17

ANNEXES
1.   Disbursement-Linked Indicators, Verification Protocols, and Disbursement Schedule
2.   Legal Agreements
3.   Program Technical and Systems Assessments
4.   Program Implementation Document
5.   Climate Change Assessment
                                                                            Project Classification Information Status: Complete




                                RESULTS BASED PROGRAM AT A GLANCE

1. Project Data
   Project number 56182-001                                 Project name          Chongqing Gaoxin District Green and
                                                                                  Low-Carbon Urban Development
                                                                                  Program
   Country           China, People's Republic of            Executing or          Chongqing Municipal Government /
   Borrower          People's Republic of China             implementing agency Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin
                                                                                  District
   Sector office     Water and Urban Development            Geographical location Country
                     Sector Office
   Sector            Water and other urban infrastructure   Subsector               Other urban services
                     and services                                                   Urban flood protection
                                                                                    Urban housing
                                                                                    Urban policy, institutional and capacity
                                                                                    development
                                                                                    Urban sewerage
                                                                                    Urban water supply
   Country           https://www.adb.org/Documents/Linke Portfolio at a Glance      https://www.adb.org/Documents/Linke
   economic          dDocs/?id=56182-001-CEI                                        dDocs/?id=56182-001-PortAtaGlance
   indicators
   Operational       OP1: Addressing remaining poverty    Sustainable               SDG 4.4
   priorities        and reducing inequalities            Development Goals         SDG 5.5
                     OP2: Accelerating progress in gender                           SDG 6.3, 6.6, 6.a
                     equality                                                       SDG 7.3
                     OP3: Tackling climate change,                                  SDG 9.1
                     building climate and disaster                                  SDG 10.2
                     resilience, and enhancing                                      SDG 11.3, 11.7, 11.b
                     environmental sustainability                                   SDG 13.3, 13.a
                     OP4: Making cities more livable
                     OP5: Promoting rural development
                     and food security
                     OP6: Strengthening governance and
                     institutional capacity
   Lending           Results Based Lending
   modality
2. Financing
    ADB Financing                                                                 Amount ($ million)
    Regular ordinary capital resources loan                                           200.00
    Cofinancing                                                                   Amount ($ million)
    None                                                                               0.00
    Counterpart                                                                   Amount ($ million)
    Government                                                                        641.90
            Total                                                                     841.90
    {ADB Climate Financing}
    ADB
      Adaptation                                                                         51.25
      Mitigation                                                                         72.75
    Cofinancing
      Adaptation                                                                         0.00
      Mitigation                                                                         0.00
                Total                                                                   124.00

    Currency of ADB Financing: CNY
 3. Climate Change
     Absolute GHG emissions (tCO2e per year)                                         157018
     Relative GHG emissions (tCO2e per year)                                         -206538
     Climate change risk on the project without adaptation measures                  Medium
 4. Private Sector Development
     Private capital mobilized ($):             0
     PSD Classification:                        High-PSD
 5. Safeguards
     Category           Environment:                       ¨ A þ B ¨ C ¨ FI
                        Involuntary resettlement:          ¨ A þ B ¨ C ¨ FI
                        Indigenous peoples:                ¨ A ¨ B þ C ¨ FI
 6. Gender Equality
     Category           ¨ GEN (gender equity theme)        þ EGM (effective gender mainstreaming)
                        ¨ SGE (some gender elements)       ¨ NGE (no gender elements)
 7. Poverty Targeting
    Category         þ General intervention                ¨ Individual or household (TI-H)
                     ¨ Geographic (TI-G)
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.                                         Generated Date: 03-Sep-2024 0:17:07 AM
                                          I.       THE PROPOSAL

1.     I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed results-
based loan to the People’s Republic of China (PRC) for the Chongqing Gaoxin District Green and
Low-Carbon Urban Development Program.

2.       The Asian Development Bank (ADB) will finance the results-based lending (RBL) program,
which is a time and sector slice of the Chongqing Gaoxin District Green Low-Carbon and High-
Quality Development Program, 2023–2035, launched by the Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin
District (ACGD). 1 The RBL program will benefit 0.84 million people in Chongqing Gaoxin District
(CGD) of Chongqing Municipality, PRC by (i) enhancing institutional capacity and human capital
for green and low-carbon urban development, (ii) establishing green and low-carbon urban
infrastructure and services in CGD, and (iii) implementing nature-based solutions for urban
ecology and climate resilience. The program supports the ACGD in establishing a green, low-
carbon, and nature-based district and contributing to the PRC’s carbon dioxide (CO2) peaking and
carbon neutrality targets through an integrated and sustainable urban development approach.
The program’s knowledge management action plan will help replicate the program’s innovative
features and knowledge solutions. 2

                                           II.      THE PROGRAM

A.      Rationale

3.       Climate change impact. Chongqing is a centrally administered municipality at the upper
reaches of the Yangtze River in the north subtropical humid monsoon climate zone. It covers a
land area of 82,400 square kilometers, 70% of which is covered by mountainous terrain.
Chongqing has experienced severe climate events, such as extreme temperatures above 40°C,
mountain fires, heavy rain, and droughts. During the extremely hot summer, power peak demand
is high, resulting in power disruptions. During the heatwave in 2022, the government implemented
blackouts to limit peak usage. By 2050, the extreme heatwave risk of Chongqing is estimated to
be four times the present risk level. 3 CGD is a special nationally designated district of Chongqing,
with an area of 316 square kilometers. Being the main flood-prone area in Chongqing, it faces
increasing flood risk management challenges amid rapid socioeconomic development. It has
been vulnerable to floods, experiencing floods every year, including major flood events during
1981–2018, each significantly impacting the region’s infrastructure, economy, and communities. 4
These floods and power outages adversely affected the health and quality of life of CGD residents,
especially older people, women, children, and people with disabilities. Such events also increase
women’s unpaid care burden while impacting their productivity and income. 5 Climate change and
urbanization are deeply interconnected phenomena, each influencing and exacerbating the
impacts of the other.


1 ACGD. 2024. Chongqing Gaoxin District Green Low-Carbon and High-Quality Development Program, 2023–2035
  (in Chinese). The ACGD is the government of CGD.
2 The knowledge management action plan is included in the Program Implementation Document (PID) (Annex 4).
3 Extreme heatwave means the number of average annual days with a maximum daily temperature of more than 38°C.
4 ACGD. 2021. Flood Control Plan of Chongqing Gaoxin District (2019–2035) (in Chinese). The major flood events in

  1981, 1996, 1999, 2002, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2018 had serious impacts on people and the economy.
  The number of affected individuals (including fatalities) ranged from 1,020 to 167,000; and economic losses ranged
  from CNY2.11 million to CNY359.09 million.
5 Studies show that, when factoring in unpaid work, women’s heat-related productivity losses increase by 260%, in

  contrast to 76% for men. Adrienne Arsht-Rockefeller Foundation Resilience Center. 2023. The Scorching Divide:
  How Extreme Heat Inflames Gender Inequalities in Health and Income.
2


4.       Urbanization challenges. Chongqing had a population of 32.1 million in 2022, and an
urbanization rate of 71.0%. 6 It was developed as one of the main industrial bases of the inland
PRC. A large portion of Chongqing’s gross domestic product (GDP) is derived from the secondary
sector, so the share of heavy industries (such as iron, steel, manufacturing, construction, and
chemical industries) in the economy is high. This resource-based and inefficient economy is
impacting the environment. 7 Chongqing’s rapid economic growth and population influx have
aggravated urban sprawl, traffic congestion, and environmental degradation. 8 In 2019, the
Chongqing Municipal Government (CMG) established CGD in the current physical territory to
accelerate the area’s integrated urban–rural development as Chongqing’s primary strategic
development area. 9 CGD’s population was 837,712 in 2023, 86.5% of them urban residents. The
development of CGD is imbalanced, lagging, and of low quality compared with Chongqing’s
central urban areas because integrated urban–rural management has been absent in the area.
The ACGD aims to make CGD a green and livable place for people, home to a national-level high-
tech zone, and an academic and scientific hub of the western PRC. The scale, density, and
intensity of CGD’s rapid urbanization pose significant challenges for the ACGD, making it difficult,
for instance, to create enough green spaces to ensure public health and a sustainable living
environment for residents. A survey conducted in February 2024 revealed that only 69% of CGD
residents were satisfied with their living environment. 10 This underscores the substantial
opportunity to boost residents’ satisfaction by further improving urban–rural services and
enhancing CGD’s overall livability. Raising awareness and fostering a green culture and lifestyle
in the local communities is critical.

5.       Environmental degradation. CGD’s water quality consistently ranks the worst in
Chongqing. 11 The surface water quality of the Liangtan River, CGD’s main river, and of its
tributaries including the Huxi and the Lianhuatan rivers, is generally class V and sometimes class
IV or V+. 12 The types of pollution sources identified in the Liangtan River Basin include domestic
and industrial tailwater discharge. These rivers originate in CGD, and a degraded environment
and river quality in CGD impacts downstream rivers’ quality. Since the 2000s, the Government of
the PRC has striven to rehabilitate the river environment and ecology and redress the
environmental degradation. However, the interventions have not yet reached the small and

6  Chongqing Bureau of Statistics. 2023. Chongqing Statistical Yearbook 2023. China Statistics Press.
7  Chongqing’s CO2 emissions per unit of GDP were estimated to be 7.8 tons, compared with Shanghai’s 4.0 tons,
   Beijing’s 3.5 tons, or the PRC average of 7.4 tons. World Bank. 2019. Chongqing 2035: Spatial and Economic
   Transformation for a Global City—Overview.
8 Chongqing had average annual growth rates of 11.0% (GDP) and 3.8% (urban population) between 2001 and 2022.

   Its urbanization rate in 2001 was only 37.4% (footnote 6).
9 CGD is one of the first 27 national high-tech industrial development areas designated by the PRC State Council in

   1991. Since its establishment, CGD has undergone several adjustments to its institutional management system and
   physical development territory, leading to unbalanced growth with a developed urban built-up area and a less
   developed rural area. In April 2019, the CGD’s current configuration (including 10 former outskirt subdistricts and
   towns of Chongqing’s Shapingba and Jiulongpo districts) was established to enhance the area’s integrated urban–
   rural development with the strategic role to be the science hub in the western PRC.
10 This refers to those who selected “very satisfied” and “relatively satisfied” from among five options (very unsatisfied,

   unsatisfied, general, relatively satisfied, very satisfied) as answers to the questions relating to the living environment,
   which covered (i) wastewater discharge, collection, and treatment system; (ii) wastewater and rainwater collection
   system; (iii) domestic waste facilities for disposal and recycling; (iv) river and wetland system; (v) parks and public
   spaces; and (vi) building energy efficiency, use of renewable energy, and sponge city aspects.
11 Chongqing Ecology and Environment Bureau. 2024. Environmental Quality Ranking of Surface Water in Various

   Districts and Counties (Autonomous Counties) of Chongqing Municipality, January–December 2023 (in Chinese).
12 Class I water is of the highest quality and class V+ water is the worst. Class IV is suitable for use as general industrial

   water supply and for recreational use involving no direct human contact with the water, class V is suitable only for
   agricultural water supply and general landscaping use, and class V+ is unsuitable for any use. Ministry of Ecology
   and Environment of the PRC. 2002. Environmental Quality Standards for Surface Water (GB 3838–2002) (in
   Chinese).
                                                                                                                     3


medium-sized tributaries and channels in mountainous and hilly areas. Although the overall water
quality in the Liangtan River Basin is improving, pollution sources are not effectively controlled,
and water quality fluctuates depending on the season and water level. Further actions are
required for the improvement of the river environment.

6.        Unsustainable and carbon-intensive urban development. CGD’s urban infrastructure
was developed with the rapid urbanization of CGD, most of which were less-developed rural
areas. The current state of the infrastructure is of subpar quality, and prolonged use has led to
significant problems. Many areas of CGD use combined stormwater and wastewater collection
systems, which pose the risk of sewer overflow during heavy rainfall. Even in areas with separate
sewer systems, wastewater and stormwater often mix, polluting the environment and endangering
people’s health. Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in CGD have a low treatment efficiency—
inefficiencies of the existing wastewater collection system are caused by pipelines that permit the
infiltration of groundwater, which dilutes the concentration of pollutants (i.e., chemical oxygen
demand [COD]), thereby adversely impacting the effectiveness of wastewater treatment
process. 13

7.      About 18% of the CO2 emissions in CGD in 2021 were produced by people’s daily energy
consumption. The building and construction industry needs to achieve energy efficiency and
reduce CO2 for climate mitigation; however, progress has been very slow. In addition, most CGD
buildings rely on individual space cooling and heating, and district cooling or heating is not
adopted. Green buildings can be an integrated solution for reducing buildings’ energy
consumption and carbon emissions. 14 The CMG and the ACGD are promoting green buildings
with enhanced energy efficiency and building management using digital technologies. 15 Apart
from requiring individual buildings to be green, the CMG and the ACGD also encourage the
development of green eco-districts, which is an area-based approach where local infrastructure
and buildings are developed or upgraded to be energy- and resource-efficient, and resilient
against flooding and climate events, while high-quality urban services and management make the
areas more livable. 16

8.     Fragmented institutions and capacities required for low-carbon and climate actions.
Climate mitigation faces fragmentation and policy coordination challenges, such as in urban
planning and the advancement of nature-based solutions. As seen in CGD’s development legacy
since 1991, which caused imbalanced, polluted, and inefficient development of CGD, there is a
need to strengthen local capacity for a multidisciplinary green and low-carbon approach. Capacity
for and awareness of green, low-carbon, and climate-resilient urban development and lifestyles
is low among public employees and residents, which shows how crucial it is to provide the


13 A WWTP is usually designed for an influent concentration of COD of 300–350 milligrams per liter. Site investigations

   and due diligence have revealed that the COD concentration within the WWTPs in CGD is sometimes even lower
   than 160 milligrams per liter (based on the data provided by the ACGD of COD concentrations of influent and effluent
   at the Baihan WWTP in CGD, from January 2022 to November 2023).
14 C. Xi and S.J. Cao. 2022. Challenges and Future Development Paths of Low-Carbon Building Design: A Review.

   Buildings. 12 (2). 163.
15 Chongqing Housing and Urban–Rural Development Commission. 2021. Chongqing Green Building 14th Five-Year

   Plan (in Chinese).
16 “Green eco-district” refers to an area that has been selected by the ACGD to be developed in accordance with the

   Evaluation Standard for Green Low-Carbon Eco-District Development in Chongqing (DBJ50/T–203–2023) and
   certified by the Chongqing Housing and Urban–Rural Development Commission based on an independent third-
   party evaluation conducted in accordance with the standard. Chongqing Housing and Urban–Rural Development
   Commission. 2023. Evaluation Standard for Green Low-Carbon Eco-District Development in Chongqing (DBJ50/T–
   203–2023) (in Chinese).
4


necessary training, education, public awareness building as well as the resources to effectively
support and implement green and low-carbon initiatives.

9.      Governments’ climate strategies. The PRC is shifting its economic growth strategy
away from quantity toward quality and sustainability, adopting a low-carbon development path to
tackle climate change and address environmental degradation. 17 In response to the increasing
urban flooding and waterlogging, the sponge city concept was introduced in urban planning,
design, and construction to manage urban water. 18 The government has committed to (i) its
nationally determined contributions, which aim for CO2 emissions to peak before 2030 and carbon
neutrality to be achieved before 2060; and (ii) a strategy for climate change adaptation. 19
Accordingly, the government announced a policy framework that covers various sectors and
themes, including the transition to low-carbon urban–rural construction and management. 20
Responding to these national commitments and strategies, provincial, municipal, and district-level
governments have formulated or are formulating their own plans, programs, and strategies to
contribute to national government targets and results. The CMG also prepared plans and
programs to adapt the national policy to the local context. 21

10.      Governments’ urban strategies. The PRC’s 14th Five-Year Plan requires cities to
(i) develop livable, innovative, intelligent, green, people-centered, and resilient cities; (ii) promote
intelligent operation and management of cities, buildings, and infrastructures; (iii) develop low-
carbon cities with green spaces, public transport systems, walking and nonmotorized
transportation paths and networks, and green materials and construction methods; (iv) reduce
emissions and pollution at source; and (v) mitigate flood risks and enhance resilience and
response to climate events (footnote 17). Chongqing’s 14th Five-Year Plan aims to respond to
climate change proactively, demonstrate low-carbon cities and communities, advocate green
lifestyles, innovate institutional capacity to realize low-carbon cities, reduce pollution, and

17 Government      of the PRC. 2021. The Outline of the 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social
   Development of the People’s Republic of China and the Long-Range Objectives through the Year 2035 (in Chinese).
18 A sponge city is an urban area that sustainably manages rainwater using nature-based solutions to (i) detain, store,

   and slow down stormwater masses to reduce the risk of urban flooding; and (ii) slowly release them into surface
   water bodies and infiltrate into the ground. These green systems should be integrated as systems with gray
   infrastructure such as drainage pipes. Ministry of Housing and Urban–Rural Development of the PRC. 2014.
   Technical Guidelines for Sponge City Construction in the People’s Republic of China (in Chinese).
19 Government of the PRC. 2021. China’s Achievements, New Goals and Measures for Nationally Determined

   Contributions; and Ministry of Ecology and Environment of the PRC et al. 2022. National Climate Change Adaptation
   Strategy 2035.
20 Referred to as 1+N policy framework. The State Council issued two guiding policies in 2021: (i) Working Guidance

   for Carbon Dioxide Peaking and Carbon Neutrality in Full and Faithful Implementation of the New Development
   Philosophy, and (ii) Action Plan for Carbon Dioxide Peaking Before 2030 as the guiding policy “1” of the 1+N policy
   framework. Subsequently, line ministries and provincial governments issued implementation plans for various
   sectors, including energy, transport, urban and rural development, industry, circular economy, technology
   innovations, and carbon sink. These documents collectively form the 1+N policy framework.
21 Referred to as 1+2+6+N Policy System for Carbon Peaking and Carbon Neutrality. This includes (i) the executive

   comments; (ii) two carbon peaking implementation plans in urban construction and industry sectors, launching more
   than 20 green low-carbon actions, and the carbon peaking action plan, detailing the goals and tasks of low-carbon
   actions; (iii) action plans for six priority sectors—energy, industry, transport, urban construction, rural and village
   development, and infrastructure; and (iv) several implementation plans and policy tools for carbon-accounting,
   carbon sinks, pollution reduction, and improved performance of the regulatory framework and public institutions,
   among other actions. Chongqing Municipal Committee of the Communist Party of China and CMG. 2022. Working
   Guidance for Carbon Dioxide Peaking and Carbon Neutrality in Full and Faithful Implementation of the New
   Development Philosophy (in Chinese); CMG. 2023. Chongqing Municipality Carbon Peaking Implementation Plan in
   Urban Construction Sector (in Chinese); CMG. 2023. Chongqing Municipality Carbon Peaking Implementation Plan
   in Industry Sector (in Chinese); and CMG. 2021. Chongqing Municipality Carbon Peaking Action Plan, 2022–2025
   (in Chinese). The CMG also issued a plan for climate change adaptation. Chongqing Ecology and Environment
   Bureau. 2022. Chongqing Climate Change Adaptation 14th Five-Year Plan, 2021–2025 (in Chinese).
                                                                                                                        5


increase climate resilience and disaster responsiveness. 22 CGD, in its own 14th Five-Year Plan,
committed to establish itself as a low-carbon city with green corridors, zero-waste measures, and
transit-oriented development; and to become an incubation cluster for green and low-carbon
industry innovation. 23

11.     Chongqing Gaoxin District Green Low-Carbon and High-Quality Development
Program, 2023–2035. Aligned with its 14th Five-Year Plan targets on climate change and carbon
reduction and to implement green, nature-based, low-carbon, climate-resilient, and cross-sector
urban development measures, the ACGD launched the Chongqing Gaoxin District Green Low-
Carbon and High-Quality Development Program, 2023–2035 (the broader government program)
(footnotes 1 and 23). The ACGD is thus committed to establishing green, nature-based, low-
carbon, and climate-resilient urban areas where people and nature coexist harmoniously; and to
transforming CGD into a leading district of Chongqing and a main contributor to the achievement
of the PRC’s national climate goals and strategies (para. 9).

12.      Lending modality. ADB’s due diligence confirmed the appropriateness of using the RBL
modality. 24 RBL is deemed most suitable because (i) the nature of the development challenges
related to low-carbon and nature-based development in CGD requires a results- and system-
based approach that is holistic and coordinated between various bureaus, agencies, and
investors—and the RBL program will serve as a vehicle to support this; (ii) the ACGD has
demonstrated satisfactory leadership, commitment, and high-level support for the broader
government program and is delivering results with satisfactory institutional capacity; (iii) the
potential to achieve long-term sustainability of the program results and system improvements is
high since the government is committed to achieving the environmental and climate-related
targets and will prioritize them for financing; (iv) there is strong government ownership of the
program with a defined expenditure framework and specific results targets that directly respond
to national and municipal plans; and (v) the RBL modality will ensure a high level of emphasis on
institutional strengthening and capacity-building activities where ADB involvement adds particular
value. The RBL program will have knowledge-sharing opportunities and demonstration and
replication impacts within and beyond the PRC, which will be achieved through a strong focus on
knowledge generation as one of the key objectives of the program.

13.    Strategic fit. The RBL program aligns with six operational priorities (OPs) of ADB’s
Strategy 2030. 25 It also aligns with two strategic priorities of ADB’s country partnership strategy,
2021–2025 for the PRC: environmentally sustainable development, and climate change
adaptation and mitigation. 26 The program will contribute to achieving eight Sustainable


22 CMG. 2021. The Outline of the 14th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development of Chongqing and the

  Long-Range Objectives through the Year 2035 (in Chinese).
23 CMG. 2022. The Outline of the 14th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development of Chongqing Gaoxin

  District and the Long-Range Objectives through the Year 2035 (in Chinese).
24 ADB. 2024. Staff Instruction on Business Processes for Results-Based Lending for Programs; and ADB. 2023.

  Technical Staff Guidance for Results-Based Lending for Programs.
25 ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific. OP1:

   enhancing human capital and social inclusion, generating quality jobs, and increasing access to opportunities for the
   vulnerable; OP2: increasing women’s economic empowerment, enhancing women’s participation in decision-making
   and leadership, reducing women’s time poverty and drudgery, and strengthen women’s resilience to external shocks;
   OP3: increasing mitigation of climate change, building climate and disaster resilience, and enhancing environmental
   sustainability; OP4: improving coverage, quality, efficiency, and reliability of services in urban areas; strengthening
   urban planning; and improving cities’ urban environment, climate resilience, and disaster management; OP5:
   enhancing rural development; and OP6: improving public sector management and effective delivery of services.
26 ADB. 2021. Country Partnership Strategy: People’s Republic of China, 2021–2025—Toward High-Quality, Green

   Development.
6


Development Goals (SDGs). 27 It will also provide support to strengthen institutions and the
capacities of cities to create development synergies; foster green communities, buildings, and
land areas; adopt robust disaster risk management; introduce clean heating, and wastewater
treatment and reuse; and upscale climate investment and impacts—all of which is fully compatible
with Paris Agreement Alignment, ADB’s Climate Change Action Plan, and ADB’s urban sector
directional guide. 28

14.     Private sector. The potential for private sector participation was assessed, and some
opportunities in infrastructure operation, such as renewable-energy-powered district heating and
cooling supply, were identified. During program implementation, the ACGD will conduct policy
studies to improve the enabling environment for private sector participation and green financing,
which is one of the indicators of the program results framework (PRF). CGD hosts private and
state-owned enterprises and academic institutions that play critical roles in the global supply
chain, and in science and technology research and development. Offering a green and low-carbon
living and operating environment through public investment in infrastructure and human capital,
and partnering with local enterprises and institutions will contribute to greening the global supply
chain and economy.

15.       Lessons. The program design incorporates lessons from ADB’s experience with other
RBL programs and urban development projects in Chongqing. These lessons highlight the
importance of (i) incorporating adequate capacity-building activities in the program design and
establishing an effective coordination mechanism at the early stage of program implementation,
(ii) setting results-based disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) with targets that are within the
government’s direct control and cannot be strongly affected by external factors, (iii) using
institutional strengthening DLIs to maximize the potential of RBL to improve institutional capacity,
(iv) setting realistic and achievable DLIs aligned with the government’s targets and limiting their
number for administrative efficiency, (v) including well-articulated DLIs that play a crucial role in
integrating climate change into the program and maximize its climate outcomes, and (vi) engaging
in dialogue with government agencies to ensure that robust systems are in place for monitoring
and evaluation (M&E), and maintaining safeguard standards and fiduciary controls. 29

B.      Program Scope

16.     The RBL program will support a time and sector slice of the broader government program
(footnote 1). The scope of the broader government program and the RBL program is summarized
in Table 1.




27 SDG 4 on inclusive and equitable quality education and learning opportunities; SDG 5 on gender equality; SDG 6 on

   clean water and sanitation; SDG 7 on affordable and clean heating; SDG 9 on building resilient infrastructure,
   promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and foster innovation; SDG 10 on promoting social inclusion;
   SDG 11 on sustainable cities and communities; and SDG 13 on taking climate action.
28 ADB. 2023. MDBs Agree Principles for Aligning Financial Flows with Paris Agreement Goals. News release. 20 June;

   ADB. 2023. Climate Change Action Plan, 2023–2030; and ADB. 2022. Strategy 2030 Urban Sector Directional Guide.
29 ADB. 2022. Completion Report: Guizhou Vocational Education Development Program in the People’s Republic of

   China; ADB. 2021. Completion Report: Electricity Grid Strengthening—Sumatra Program in Indonesia; ADB. 2019.
   Completion Report: Chongqing Urban–Rural Infrastructure Development Demonstration Project in the People’s
   Republic of China; ADB. India: Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0–Comprehensive Municipal Waste Management in Indian
   Cities Program; ADB. People’s Republic of China: Guangxi Wuzhou Healthy and Age-Friendly City Development
   Program; and Independent Evaluation Department. 2017. Corporate Evaluation: Results-Based Lending at the Asian
   Development Bank: An Early Assessment. ADB.
                                                                                                                   7


                                          Table 1: Program Scope
Item                            Broader Government Programa                  Results-Based Lending Program
Outcome                      Green and low-carbon urban                Green and low-carbon urban development
                             development in CGD established            in CGD improved
Key outputs                  Capacity enhancement and systems          Output 1: Institutional capacity and human
                             support                                   capital for green and low-carbon urban
                                                                       development enhanced
                             Green and low-carbon livable              Output 2: Green and low-carbon urban
                             environment                               infrastructure and services in CGD
                                                                       established
                             Eco-friendliness and climate resilience   Output 3: Nature-based solutions for urban
                                                                       ecology and climate resilience implemented
Activities                   Enhancement of policies, scientific and   Institutional strengthening, human capital
                             technological innovation support,         development, awareness-raising, and public
                             collaboration mechanisms,                 participation
                             digitalization, green financing, and
                             public participation                      Green and low-carbon urban and rural
                                                                       development (i.e., green and ultra-low-
                             Green and low-carbon urban and rural      energy buildings, green eco-district,
                             development                               wastewater collection and treatment, reuse
                                                                       of reclaimed wastewater, renewable-
                             Green and low-carbon transition of        energy-powered district heating and
                             energy                                    cooling)

                             Industry symbiosis                        Sustainable and climate-resilient
                                                                       infrastructure development with nature-
                             Green and low-carbon transportation       based solutions incorporating sponge city
                                                                       principles (i.e., surface water quality
                             Capacity improvement of carbon            improvement, flood risk management,
                             sequestration of ecosystem                urban green spaces)
Expenditure size             CNY58,998.00 million                      CNY6,001.43 million
Main financiers and their    Government: CNY57,572.32 million          Government: CNY4,575.75 million
respective total amounts     ADB: CNY1,425.68 million                  ADB: CNY1,425.68 million
Geographic coverage          CGD                                       CGD
Implementation period        2023–2035                                 2024–2030
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CGD = Chongqing Gaoxin District.
a Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin District. 2024. Chongqing Gaoxin District Green Low-Carbon and High-Quality

  Development Program, 2023–2035 (in Chinese).
Sources: Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin District, and ADB.

C.           Program Results

17.     The RBL program’s impacts will be (i) green, low-carbon, and nature-based city
established; and (ii) CGD’s contribution to CO2 peaking and carbon neutrality targets supported
(footnotes 1 and 17). The outcome will be green and low-carbon urban development in CGD
improved. 30 The PRF with agreed indicators and annual targets is in the program implementation
document (PID). 31

18.      Output 1: Institutional capacity and human capital for green and low-carbon urban
development enhanced. This output will focus on (i) establishing and operationalizing a cross-
bureau steering committee in the ACGD for multidisciplinary green and low-carbon initiatives;
(ii) establishing at least eight partnership agreements between the ACGD, academic institutions,
and enterprises that result in at least 2,500 students (40% of them female) obtaining certifications
in green, low-carbon, and climate-resilient practices; (iii) engaging at least 300,000 CGD

30 The design and monitoring framework for the program is in the Appendix.
31 Program Implementation Document (Annex 4).
8


residents (at least 50% of them women) in awareness raising activities to enhance knowledge
and understanding of key environmental topics; (iv) facilitating the participation of at least
5,000 public employees (at least 50% of them women) in activities designed to enhance their
skills regarding key environmental topics; (v) conducting policy studies relating to climate change
adaptation and mitigation, green finance, and private sector participation; and (vi) publishing at
least three knowledge products on best practices from the program.

19.      Output 2: Green and low-carbon urban infrastructure and services in CGD
established. This output will focus on (i) expanding and improving the wastewater treatment
network to increase the annual centralized domestic wastewater collection rate in the urban areas
of CGD to at least 75%; (ii) promoting sustainable water resource management, such as reuse of
reclaimed wastewater, so that at least 30% of the reclaimed water in CGD’s WWTPs is reused;
(iii) demonstrating at least two three-star green buildings and/or ultra-low-energy buildings in
CGD; 32 (iv) achieving a one-star or higher green building rating for at least 30% of all new
buildings in CGD; and (v) establishing 1.06 million square meters of renewable-energy-powered
district heating and cooling supply serviced area in CGD.

20.      Output 3: Nature-based solutions for urban ecology and climate resilience
implemented. This output will focus on (i) developing a green eco-district (footnote 16) in CGD
that holistically incorporates sustainable urban development principles—e.g., efficient land
utilization, good ecological environment and nature-based solutions, green buildings, efficient use
of resources and reduction in carbon emissions, green mobility and transport, urban information
management, industry–city integrated development, and an inclusive and people-oriented green
lifestyle—into design, construction, and operation; (ii) securing flood mitigation capacity for a 100-
year return period flood by incorporating nature-based solutions, such as wetlands and green
buffer zones, for key river sections in the urban areas of CGD; (iii) increasing green spaces,
including parks, gardens, walkways, and grasslands in the urban areas in CGD to at least 40%;
and (iv) generating at least 3,000 job opportunities under the program, including at least 20% for
women during construction and at least 30% for women during operation.

21.      Disbursement-linked indicators. Two DLIs at the outcome level will improve green and
nature-based urban development and enhance the quality of climate-resilient infrastructure and
of the water environment. Five output-level DLIs will build institutional capacity to enhance the
implementation of green and low-carbon initiatives; educate and prepare students for roles in
green, low-carbon, and climate-resilient urban development, especially in terms of female student
participation; improve domestic wastewater management; create and demonstrate a green eco-
district; and increase urban green spaces in CGD. These DLIs were selected from the PRF to
improve the urban living environment (DLIs 1 and 2), enhance institutional capacity and human
capital development (DLIs 3 and 4), and scale up low-carbon and climate-resilient facilities (DLIs
5, 6, and 7). The DLIs represent key actions to minimize risks and constraints and achieve the
program’s development results. The DLIs are practical and clearly defined, and can be reliably
measured and independently verified. Their achievement is under the control of the CMG and the
ACGD, and their financing level creates incentives for the program implementation unit to deliver

32 Green buildings are rated basic, one-star, two-star, or three-star. When all the prerequisite requirements of the

    standard are met, the building is rated a basic green building, while a three-star building is the most technically
    demanding and meets higher green requirements. Ministry of Housing and Urban–Rural Development of the PRC.
    2019. Assessment Standard for Green Building (GB/T 50378–2019) (in Chinese). According to the technical standard,
    an ultra-low-energy building is the primary form of a nearly zero-energy building. The energy consumption of an ultra-
    low-energy building should be reduced by more than 50% compared with the specified four national standards.
    Ministry of Housing and Urban–Rural Development of the PRC. 2019. Technical Standard for Nearly Zero Energy
    Buildings (GB/T 51350–2019) (in Chinese).
                                                                                                        9


while being aligned with financing needs. The number of DLIs and disbursements is streamlined
to improve administrative efficiency. The annual DLI targets, verification protocols, and
disbursement schedule are in Annex 1. The DLIs and their disbursement allocations are
summarized in Table 2.

                            Table 2: Disbursement-Linked Indicators
                                                                                           Share of Total
                                                               Disbursement Allocated      ADB Financing
Indicator                                                      (CNY million) ($ million)        (%)
Outcome
1. 72% of the urban areas in CGD comply with the sponge city                285.136  40.000     20
     standards
2. Water quality of the Liangtan River, the Lianhuatan River, and           213.852  30.000     15
     the Huxi River improved
Outputs
3. A cross-bureau steering committee established and operational             71.284  10.000      5
     in the ACGD for multidisciplinary green and low-carbon initiatives
4. At least eight partnership agreements between the ACGD,                  142.568  20.000     10
     academic institutions, and enterprises established resulting in at
     least 2,500 students (40% of them female) obtaining
     certifications in green, low-carbon, and climate-resilient practices
5. Annual centralized domestic wastewater collection rate in the            213.852  30.000     15
     urban areas of CGD increased to at least 75%
6. Green eco-district developed in CGD                                      285.136  40.000     20
7. Green spaces, including parks, gardens, walkways, and                    213.852  30.000     15
     grasslands in the urban areas in CGD increased to at least 40%
                                   Total                                  1,425.680 200.000    100
ACGD = Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin District, ADB = Asian Development Bank, CGD = Chongqing Gaoxin
District.
Source: ADB estimates.

22.    Verification protocols include verification by a credible and independent verification
agency (IVA). The IVA will develop a clear verification methodology for each DLI to be agreed
with ADB, and the selection of the IVA will be subject to ADB’s prior approval. Draft terms of
reference for the IVA are in the PID (footnote 31).

D.     ADB Value Addition

23.      ADB’s involvement in the program adds value along four main dimensions: results,
innovation, knowledge, and institutional development. The use of the RBL modality has
transformed the program from a conventional construction-focused one to a program that
promotes strong results and reform culture and provides incentives for performance that
otherwise would be missing in the government’s broader program. Innovations were introduced
through the program design, including the incorporation of technically sound climate mitigation
and adaptation measures—such as support for the adoption of sponge city design principles,
green eco-district development, nature-based solutions, sustainable procurement principles, and
best international and domestic practices—as well as institutional capacity-building activities
(footnotes 16 and 18). The knowledge component was recommended during program preparation
and is captured in the program result target, knowledge management action plan, and program
action plan (PAP); and lessons from this program will be disseminated through knowledge-sharing
events and publications to promote national and local replication in the PRC and in other
developing member countries facing similar challenges. In dialogues with ADB, the government
prioritized institutional strengthening and a capacity-building framework in the program to achieve
better cross-sector and interagency coordination, transparency, and sustainability. This will also
10


lead to a green and low-carbon living and operating environment through public investment in
infrastructure and human capital, while partnerships with local enterprises and institutions will
contribute to greening the global supply chain and economy. The program adopts an integrated
climate-resilient and low-carbon urban development approach, ensuring cohesive planning and
inclusive municipal services. This will lead to a more sustainable use of resources, improved
connectivity, and a better quality of life for CGD residents.

E.      Expenditure Framework and Financing Plan

24.    Program expenditures. The RBL program expenditures are estimated to be
CNY6,001.43 million ($841.90 million equivalent) from 2024 to 2030 (Table 3). 33 The program
expenditure and financing assessment indicates a strong likelihood of adequate budget resources
being available for the program.

              Table 3: Summary of Program Expenditure Framework, 2024–2030
                                       (2024 prices)
                                                                                 Amount            Share of Total
Item                                                                     (CNY million) ($ million)       (%)
A. Recurrent Expenditure                                                     156.00       21.88            2.60
     1. O&M for wastewater network and reclaimed water reuse facilities      138.00       19.36            2.30
     2. O&M for river channels                                                18.00        2.52            0.30
B. Capital Expenditure                                                     5,845.43      820.02          97.40
     1. Institutional capacity building                                       99.00       13.89            1.65
     2. Domestic wastewater collection and treatment                       1,092.48      153.26          18.20
     3. Reclaimed water reuse                                                165.70       23.24            2.76
     4. Green buildings                                                      147.96       20.75            2.47
     5. Renewable-energy-powered district heating and cooling                410.00       57.52            6.83
     6. River rehabilitation and flood mitigation works                      884.68      124.11          14.74
     7. Green eco-district development                                     1,800.00      252.51          29.99
     8. Urban green spaces                                                 1,245.61      174.74          20.76
                                    Total                                  6,001.43      841.90         100.00
O&M = operation and maintenance.
Note: The results-based lending program will disburse funds for results achieved from 2024 (prior results) to 2030.
However, the performance baseline includes results achieved by 31 December 2024. The loan account will remain
open up to December 2030 because independent verification and disbursement for the results achieved by
31 December 2029 can only take place after data becomes available the following year.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

25.     Program financing. The government has requested a regular loan of CNY1,425,680,000
from ADB’s ordinary capital resources to help finance the program. The loan will have a 25-year
term, including a grace period of 6 years; an interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s
Flexible Loan Product; a commitment charge of 0.15% per year; and such other terms and
conditions set forth in the draft loan and program agreements. Based on the straight-line method,
the average maturity is 15.75 years, and the maturity premium payable to ADB is 0.30% per year.
Relending to the CMG and onlending to the ACGD and to the program implementation unit,
Chongqing Gaoxin Development and Construction Investment Group Co., Ltd. (CGDG), will be
upon the same terms and conditions applicable to the loan. 34 The final borrower will bear the
foreign exchange and interest rate variation risks on the loan.



33 CNY7.1284 = $1.0000 as of 2 September 2024.
34 CGDG is a state-owned entity.
                                                                                                                    11


26.   The summary program financing plan is in Table 4. Potential parallel cofinancing (not
ADB-administered) from domestic banks (e.g., China Development Bank) was proposed during
program preparation and will be explored and reported on during program implementation.

                                      Table 4: Program Financing Plan
                                                                   Amount                          Share of Total
Source                                                     (CNY million)  ($ million)                   (%)
Government                                                   4,575.75       641.90                      76.24
Asian Development Bank
    Ordinary capital resources (regular loan)                 1,425.68           200.00                 23.76
                        Total                                 6,001.43           841.90                100.00
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

27.     Total climate finance for the program is $124.00 million, with an estimated $72.75 million
in mitigation costs and $51.25 million in adaptation costs. The loan will finance 100% of the
mitigation costs and 100% of the adaptation costs. Climate adaptation interventions include, the
application of the sponge city measures and green eco-district development in the urban areas.
The program’s contribution to climate mitigation finance stems from the improvements in
centralized wastewater collection and treatment. 35

F.       Capacity Development and Program Action Plan

28.      Actions included in the PAP will ensure the achievement of the intended outcome by
addressing key capacity issues that may impede the achievement of the outcome. These actions
derive from the detailed systems, sector, poverty, social, and gender analyses conducted as part
of the program due diligence. The implementation of the PAP will help close the capacity gaps
and strengthen program systems, including M&E, fiduciary, safeguards, and gender and social
inclusion. The DLIs also emphasize capacity development and innovative approaches. The PAP
will be reviewed and updated as needed during implementation.

G.       Implementation Arrangements

29.      The CMG will be the executing agency and provide overall policy guidance and
supervision. Its Chongqing Foreign Loan Project Management Office, which oversees
Chongqing’s internationally financed loan projects and programs, will provide overall municipal-
level coordination, guidance, and oversight of the RBL program. The ACGD is the implementing
agency and has a dedicated ACGD Program Management Office (APMO), which was set up in
February 2024 for the implementation of the RBL program. The APMO is responsible for day-to-
day supervision, coordination, and guidance on program preparation and implementation. CGDG
is the program implementation unit responsible for procurement, contract and construction
management, and operation and maintenance of the program-supported infrastructure and
facilities. Other entities—e.g., the ACGD’s Construction Bureau, Urban Development Affairs
Center, Ecology and Environment Bureau, and Government Affairs Service Center—will be
involved in certain program and sector development activities, such as capacity building and
institutional strengthening.



35 In terms of climate adaptation, the program is classified as a type 2A project, which aims to achieve both adaptation

  and development goals. The program goes beyond climate-proofing measures by enhancing the district’s overall
  climate resilience through a combination of physical and nonphysical measures that address climate risks such as
  floods, heavy rainfall, droughts, and heatwaves.
12


30.     Disbursement arrangements. Disbursement of the ADB loan proceeds will follow ADB’s
Loan Disbursement Handbook (2022, as amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements
agreed between the government and ADB. 36 The loan proceeds will be disbursed to a dedicated
account to be opened by the Chongqing Finance Bureau, based on the verified achievement of
DLIs for which disbursement is requested. The currency of the account will be Chinese yuan. The
ACGD requested advance financing totaling CNY356.420 million (25% of the ADB loan amount)
following loan effectiveness. The provision of advance financing will facilitate a smooth and timely
implementation of the program by helping meet the ACGD’s cash flow needs. Advance financing
allows the necessary innovations and capacity building to be introduced at the start of the
program, thus maximizing the beneficial impacts on program implementation. The proposed
advance financing will be allowed on the understanding that the government will refund any
outstanding advance amount if DLIs are not achieved. When the CMG submits a withdrawal
application for the achieved DLIs, any outstanding advances must be liquidated before any
disbursements are made. In addition, CNY71.284 million (5% of the ADB loan amount) will be
provided under DLI 3 as financing for prior results achieved in 2024, with the condition that such
financing will be limited to results achieved within a period of 12 months before the signing of the
loan agreement. Establishment of a steering committee at the start of the RBL program
implementation is crucial to laying the institutional foundation, ensuring coordinated efforts and
strategic alignment, and achieving the overall program objective for green and low-carbon urban
development in CGD. Partial disbursement on a pro rata basis will be permitted for DLIs 1, 5, and
7, provided at least 50% of the targeted performance improvement is achieved. Disbursements
are allowed for early or late achievement of DLIs. This means that, regardless of the DLI target
years, disbursement can be made only when the set targets are met on or before the RBL
program’s completion date. The APMO will prepare and submit to ADB, through the Chongqing
Finance Bureau, a withdrawal application along with evidence verifying the achievement of the
DLIs in accordance with the verification protocols.

                                          III.     DUE DILIGENCE

A.      Program Technical Assessments

31.    Following the Joint Multilateral Development Banks Methodological Principles for
Assessment of Paris Agreement Alignment, the program has been assessed as aligned with the
goals of the Paris Agreement. 37

32.      Program soundness and results assessment. The RBL program will respond to key
development needs and demonstrate green, low-carbon, climate-resilient, and nature-based
urban development in CGD. Program technical assessments conclude that the ACGD needs to
initiate actions and reforms to (i) strengthen the cross-bureau steering committee to stimulate the
implementation of green and low-carbon initiatives; (ii) promote new technologies and approaches
such as a green eco-district; and (iii) enhance human resource development in green and low-
carbon development areas. The PRF, DLIs, and PAP reflect these findings. Due diligence based
on historical and predicted revenues, budgets, and expenditures confirms that the program
expenditure framework and financing plan are robust. The program soundness assessment
justifies the rationale for public provision and financing, and concludes that (i) the RBL program
design and implementation arrangements are sound, (ii) the PRF is well designed, (iii) the DLIs
are a selection of critical indicators for achieving overall RBL program results, and (iv) the M&E
system is fit for purpose.

36 ADB. 2022. Loan Disbursement Handbook 2022.
37 ADB. 2023. MDBs Agree Principles for Aligning Financial Flows with Paris Agreement Goals. News release. 20 June.
                                                                                                                    13


33.     Economic analysis. The economic rationale of the RBL program revolves around the
reduction of carbon emissions, mainly through improved energy efficiency of buildings, and
environmental and health benefits from better river water quality, wastewater management, and
flood mitigation. An estimated annual reduction in greenhouse gas emissions of 206,538 tons of
CO2 equivalent will be achieved compared with the without-program scenario. 38 Buildings and the
construction industry are generally the leading producers of carbon emissions, while WWTPs are
heavy users of electricity. In addition, (i) improved reclaimed water facilities will alleviate local
water shortages; (ii) green buildings and district heating and cooling will contribute to carbon
emission reduction and climate mitigation; and (iii) the green eco-district developed as part of the
program in accordance with the latest standards will provide a model for such developments in
the future. Moreover, with the creation of sponge city facilities and urban green spaces, the
program will also contribute to stronger climate change adaptation capacity in CGD. This
approach will help manage stormwater, reduce urban heat islands, and enhance the resilience of
urban areas to climate impacts.

B.       Gender Equality

34.      The program promotes gender equality by building the capacity of women residents and
female public employees for dealing with key environmental issues, participating in decision-
making, and increasing resilience to natural hazards and climate change. The program is
categorized effective gender mainstreaming. Based on the gender assessment, specific and
monitorable gender actions are incorporated into the DLIs and verification protocols, PRF, PAP,
and design and monitoring framework. Key gender issues are (i) gender disparities in
employment, largely influenced by gender norms and time constraints faced by women;
(ii) women’s persistent underrepresentation in leadership and technical positions, with fewer than
one-third occupying such roles; (iii) women’s limited knowledge, skills, access to resources, and
participation in awareness-raising activities regarding green and low-carbon development; and
(iv) women’s increasing exposure to environmental and health risks because of heightened
pollution and safety concerns arising from inadequate infrastructure. To tackle these issues, the
program incorporates five gender-specific performance indicators, such as gender-inclusive
consultation and training programs; gender-responsive outreach strategies; facilitated
certifications for female and male students in green, low-carbon, and climate-resilient practices;
and job opportunities for women during construction and operations of program activities.

C.       Poverty and Social Dimensions

35.     The program is classified general intervention for poverty reduction. A poverty and social
analysis was undertaken based on extensive stakeholder consultations and socioeconomic
surveys. The program will directly benefit 837,712 residents of CGD (as of 2023), an area facing
water scarcity and climate-related challenges like floods and droughts, which threaten livelihoods
and the region’s environmental health. Among these beneficiaries are 416,568 women (49.73%);
34,912 ethnic minorities (4.17%); 1,619 low-income individuals (0.19%), including 1,565 people
receiving a minimum living subsidy and 54 people from subsistence marginal families;
5,203 persons with disabilities (0.62%); 57,200 persons older than 60 years (6.83%); and about
70,000 migrant workers per year. 39 The program will directly contribute to improving wastewater
collection and management; mitigating flood risks with nature-based solutions; increasing green
spaces for residents; promoting public engagement in skills training, decision-making processes,

38 A detailed estimation of the reductions in greenhouse gas emissions is in Climate Change Assessment (Annex 5).
39 Ethnic minorities live interspersed with the Han majority with minimal to no differences in culture and socioeconomic

  status. No concentrated settlements of ethnic minorities exist in the program areas.
14


and awareness programs; and generating income through employment opportunities provided to
local residents, including youth, migrants, and low-income individuals. The program will
significantly improve the quality of environmental and living conditions for local residents, giving
priority to the well-being of women, children, older people, people with disabilities, and low-income
individuals. The program will have an indirect impact on public health and safety, and social
inclusiveness within CGD. Based on the findings of the household survey and focus group
discussions, the program will directly address the identified issues by incorporating key actions
outlined in the PAP to maximize benefits, particularly for vulnerable groups, while also mitigating
any risks and negative impacts that may arise from the program.

D.       Program Systems Assessments

36.     M&E system. The program M&E system assessment confirms that M&E arrangements
are generally robust since much of the data is already collected and reported to higher levels of
government as part of the arrangements for annual monitoring of the achievement of the national
and provincial sector plans. Most data are thus subject to supervisory checks. However, some
bespoke monitoring arrangements are required for certain capacity-building activities. Potential
weaknesses are that (i) the APMO is newly established and has no experience in managing and
implementing an RBL program, especially in preparing the supporting documentation for DLI
verification; and (ii) some data associated with the PRF indicators will be collected and reported
by departments within the ACGD itself, which may impact the quality and accuracy of data.
Mitigating measures include strengthening the APMO capacity through training and consulting
support and engagement of a credible IVA.

37.     Fiduciary systems. The program will use the PRC’s fiduciary systems for financial
management, procurement, and anticorruption measures, which are highly standardized across
the whole government system. The program fiduciary systems assessment confirms the overall
adequacy of the financial management system in the local governments and CGDG involved in
the program, as well as the soundness of budgeting, payment, and information systems, and of
accounting and auditing procedures and practices. The financial management risk assessment
rates the risk level moderate before mitigation, and low with mitigation measures. The mitigation
measures are summarized in the PID.

38.      The PRC’s public procurement system has evolved since the early 1990s, and the laws
and regulations governing public procurement have been instituted reflecting the fundamental
transition from a state-controlled to a market-based economy. The Tendering and Bidding Law
and the Government Procurement Law are the primary procurement laws governing the public
procurement of goods, works, and services in the PRC. The country procurement systems—
public procurement laws and corresponding implementation regulations adopted by the central
government and the CMG, as well as procurement procedures and processes in CGD—will be
used to procure goods, works, and consulting and non-consulting services under the program.
The PRC procurement laws are based on international best practices and principles, contain
articles dealing with corrupt practices, require the use of open tendering (for values above
threshold) as the main procurement method, and define the conditions for use of other
procurement methods. There is no fundamental conflict between the PRC’s procurement laws
and the principles of economy, efficiency, fairness, transparency, quality, and value for money
stated in the ADB Procurement Policy (2017, as amended from time to time) except for a few
differences. 40 The program will not finance the procurement of high-value contracts for goods,

40 Notwithstanding these differences, their potential impact on procurement activities under the program is considered

  minimal, particularly on those linked to DLIs.
                                                                                                                  15


works, and consulting and non-consulting services. 41 The CMG has an advanced e-procurement
system—Chongqing Public Resources Trading Center—to procure goods, works, and consulting
services; and CGDG will use this system as well as its physical premises for program procurement
by posting procurement plans, advertisements, bidding documents, clarifications, awarding of
contracts, and associated information upon contract signing. Bid submission, bid opening, and
bid evaluation will also be conducted through this system. CGDG staff involved in procurement
and contract management are knowledgeable and experienced in the government procurement
procedures that will be used for program procurement. Nevertheless, they often lack regular
professional procurement training and experience in implementing sustainable procurement
practices and contract management, and have limited awareness of ADB’s anticorruption and
integrity requirements. Overall, the program’s procurement risk is rated moderate before
mitigation and low with the mitigation measures defined in the PID.

39.    The Guidelines to Prevent or Mitigate Fraud, Corruption, and Other Prohibited Activities
in Results-Based Lending for Programs were explained to and discussed with the CMG, the
ACGD, CGDG, and other program stakeholders. 42

40.     Safeguard systems. The potential activities to be financed under the program are
categorized B for environment and involuntary resettlement, and C for Indigenous Peoples when
ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009) categorization guidance is applied. Outputs 2 and 3
will involve civil works on state-owned or collective lands or within existing premises that may
have temporary and site-specific environmental impacts, and limited involuntary resettlement
impacts. Output 1 will not trigger environmental or involuntary resettlement impacts. Considering
the nature and size of civil works, the environmental and social impacts are deemed not
significant. Any activities that will be categorized A for any of the three safeguard areas are
excluded from the program. Resettlement due diligence will also cover past land acquisition and
resettlement, and corresponding due diligence reports will be prepared and will include any
corrective actions required. The ethnic minority population within the program area accounts for
4.2% of the total population in CGD; they are primarily the Tujia and Miao, which represent 50.3%
and 21.6% of the total ethnic minority population. The scattered ethnic minority residents are living
together with Han people, and there is no ethnic minority concentrated community. Due diligence
shows that ethnic minorities in the program area have minimal to no differences with Han social,
economic, cultural, and political systems. None of the activities under the program will directly
target specific ethnic groups, and no differential impacts are expected on ethnic minorities, who
are expected to benefit equally with other residents in the program area.

41.    The program safeguard systems assessment (PSSA) confirms that the program is likely
to pose only low to moderate environmental and social risks, while significant social benefits will
accrue from a low-carbon, climate-resilient, and nature-based urban environment in CGD. The
assessment determined that the existing regulatory framework, technical capacity, and
implementation practices of the program safeguards system in Chongqing and CGD are adequate
for managing any programmatic, institutional, and contextual risks. The PSSA identified minor
gaps related to the management and coordination of program safeguard systems, monitoring and
data, and the public engagement process. Actions to remedy these gaps are detailed in the PID.
The PSSA and the detailed environmental and involuntary resettlement safeguard systems

41 The definition of high-value contracts may be amended from time to time. Currently, the amounts are $50 million for

   works, turnkey, and supply and installation contracts; $30 million for goods; $20 million for information and
   technology systems and non-consulting services; and $15 million for consulting services.
42 ADB. 2023. Guidelines to Prevent or Mitigate Fraud, Corruption, and Other Prohibited Activities in Results-Based

   Lending for Programs. Attachment in ADB. 2024. Staff Instruction on Business Processes for Results-Based Lending
   for Programs.
16


assessments were endorsed and disclosed on the ADB website in May 2024.

E.      Sustainability

42.      For the program results to be sustainable beyond program completion, the ACGD will
need to allocate adequate financial and human resources to enable (i) operation and maintenance
of program facilities (new and existing), (ii) service continuity and accessibility, (iii) institutional
strengthening and capacity building, (iv) community engagement and public awareness, and
(v) policy development and regulatory support. Resources will only be made available if there is
a continued government commitment to achieving and sustaining the program goals. There is
strong assurance that this continued commitment will be forthcoming since the RBL program is
part of medium- to long-term municipal and national initiatives for carbon peaking before 2030
and emission neutrality before 2060. Current plans define performance targets for 2030, and a
standardized set of institutional responsibilities, indicator definitions, and monitoring
arrangements were established and cascaded to subnational levels.

F.      Summary of Risk Assessment

43.   The overall RBL program risk is rated moderate. Major risk and mitigating measure is
summarized in Table 5 and described in detail in the integrated risks assessment and mitigating
measures section of the PID.

                                  Table 5: Risk and Mitigating Measure
Risk                                                                 Mitigating Measure
Lack of incentives for the ACGD to promote The ACGD will (i) closely communicate with CMG to ensure
the green eco-district and construct high  continuous policy support, and (ii) develop and promote policy and
star-rated green buildings may delay or    financial incentives to support green projects. It will also engage with
adversely impact the implementation of the the private sector and carry out educational campaigns to enhance
program.                                   awareness of and participation in green building practices.
ACGD = Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin District, CMG = Chongqing Municipal Government.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                             IV.     ASSURANCES

44.     The government, the CMG, and the ACGD have agreed with ADB on certain covenants
for the RBL program, which are set forth in the draft loan and program agreements.

                                        V.         RECOMMENDATION

45.     I am satisfied that the proposed results-based loan would comply with the Articles of
Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve the
loan of CNY1,425,680,000 to the People’s Republic of China for the Chongqing Gaoxin District
Green and Low-Carbon Urban Development Program, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in
regular terms, with interest to be determined in accordance with ADB’s Flexible Loan Product; for
a term of 25 years, including a grace period of 6 years; and such other terms and conditions as
are substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft loan and program agreements
presented to the Board.

                                                                       Masatsugu Asakawa
                                                                       President
23 September 2024
                                                                                            Appendix         17


                   DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK FOR THE PROGRAM

Impacts the Program is Aligned with
(i) Green, low-carbon, and nature-based city established; and (ii) CGD’s contribution to carbon dioxide
peaking and carbon neutrality targets supported (PRC’s 14th Five-Year Plan and Chongqing Gaoxin
District Green Low-Carbon and High-Quality Development Program)a
                                                                                                 Risks and
Results                                                             Data Sources and              Critical
Chain                         Performance Indicators              Reporting Mechanisms          Assumptions
Outcome             By 2030:
Green and           a. At least 206,538 tons of carbon dioxide    a. Semiannual program         A: National
low-carbon          equivalent emissions avoided annually         progress reports and          government
urban               (2023 baseline: 0) (OP3.1)                    program completion            remains
development                                                       report                        committed to
in CGD              b. Ratio of CGD residents expressing          b. Social surveys and         attaining
improved            satisfaction with their improved living       survey reports with           carbon
                    environment has risen to at least 85%,        gender analysis               peaking and
                    including 85% for womenb (2024 baseline:                                    neutrality
                    69%, 69% for women) (OP2.3)                                                 targets and to
                                                                                                the direction
                    c. 72% of the urban areas in CGD comply       c. Statistical yearbooks of   toward a
                    with the sponge city standards                Chongqing Municipality        green and
                    (2023 baseline: 51.32%) (DLI 1) (OP3.2.1,     and/or CGD; official          low-carbon
                    OP3.2.5, OP3.3.1)                             information from              livable city
                                                                  Chongqing Housing and
                                                                  Urban–Rural
                                                                  Development
                                                                  Commission and ACGD
                                                                  Construction Bureau
                    d. Water quality of the Liangtan River, the   d. Statistical yearbooks of
                    Lianhuatan River, and the Huxi River          Chongqing Municipality;
                    improved (2023 baseline: Liangtan River:      Chongqing Municipal
                    annual average meets class IV;                Water Resource
                    Lianhuatan River: annual average meets        database; regular
                    class V; Huxi River: class V+) (DLI 2)        monitoring results
                    (OP3.3.1, OP4.3.1)                            provided by Chongqing
                                                                  Ecology and Environment
                                                                  Bureau and ACGD
                                                                  Ecology and Environment
                                                                  Bureau; and semiannual
                                                                  program progress reports
Outputs             By 2029:
1. Institutional    1a. A cross-bureau steering committee         1a. The ACGD’s official       R: Staff
capacity and        established and operational in the ACGD       documents and                 turnover
human capital       for multidisciplinary green and low-carbon    semiannual program            hinders
for green and       initiatives (2023 baseline: No cross-bureau   progress reports              continuity of
low-carbon          steering committee) (DLI 3) (OP4.2.1,                                       the activities.
urban               OP6.2.2)
development         1b. At least eight partnership agreements     1b. Partnership
enhanced            between the ACGD, academic institutions,      agreements, certificates,
                    and enterprises established and resulting     and ACGD working
                    in at least 2,500 students (40% of them       reports
                    female) obtaining certifications in green,
18        Appendix



                                                                                               Risks and
Results                                                              Data Sources and           Critical
Chain                         Performance Indicators               Reporting Mechanisms       Assumptions
                     low-carbon, and climate-resilient practices
                     (2023 baseline: 0) (DLI 4) (OP1.1.1,
                     OP2.1.1)
                     1c. At least 300,000 CGD residents,           1c.–1e. The ACGD’s
                     including at least 50% women, engaged in      official documents and
                     awareness activities to enhance               semiannual program
                     knowledge and understanding of key            progress reports
                     environmental topics (2023 baseline: 0)
                     (OP2.5, OP3.1.2, OP6.2.4)
                     1d. At least 5,000 public employees,
                     including at least 50% women, have
                     participated in activities designed to
                     enhance skills relating to key
                     environmental topics (2023 baseline: 0)
                     (OP3.1.2, OP3.2, OP4.3.2, OP6.1.1)
                     1e. Policy studies relating to climate
                     change adaptation and mitigation, green
                     finance, and private sector participation
                     conducted and reports acknowledged by
                     the ACGD (2023 baseline: 0) (OP4.2.1)
                     1f. At least three knowledge products on      1f. Website of ADB-PRC
                     best practices from the program, including    Regional Knowledge
                     one focused on gender aspects, published      Sharing Initiative
                     (2023 baseline: 0)
2. Green and         2a. Annual centralized domestic               2a.–2e. Statistical        R: Extreme
low-carbon           wastewater collection rate in the urban       yearbooks of Chongqing     weather
urban                areas of CGD increased to at least 75%        Municipality and/or CGD;   events
infrastructure       (2023 baseline: 61%) (DLI 5) (OP3.3.1,        ACGD Construction          beyond
and services         OP3.3.2, OP4.1.2, OP4.3.1, OP5.1.1)           Bureau and wastewater      forecast
in CGD                                                             treatment plants’          hinders the
                     2b. At least 30% of the reclaimed water in
established                                                        database; and              infrastructure
                     wastewater treatment plants in CGD
                                                                   semiannual program         delivery.
                     reused (2023 baseline: 0) (OP3.3.2,
                                                                   progress reports
                     OP4.1.2)
                     2c. At least two three-star green buildings
                     and/or ultra-low-energy buildings
                     demonstrated in CGD (2023 baseline: 0)
                     (OP3.1.3, OP3.1.5)
                     2d. At least 30% of all new buildings in
                     CGD achieved a one-star or higher green
                     building rating (2023 baseline: 12%)
                     (OP3.1.3, OP3.1.5)
                     2e. Renewable-energy-powered district
                     heating and cooling supply serviced area
                     in CGD reached 1.06 million square
                     meters (2023 baseline: 0 square meters)
                     (OP3.1.3, OP 3.1.4, OP3.1.5)
                                                                                        Appendix       19


                                                                                              Risks and
Results                                                             Data Sources and           Critical
Chain                    Performance Indicators                  Reporting Mechanisms        Assumptions
3. Nature-       3a. Green eco-district developed in CGD        3a. The APMO’s reports;
based            (2023 baseline: 0) (DLI 6) (OP3.1.3,           conceptual and detailed
solutions for    OP3.1.5, OP3.2.5)                              design approvals issued
urban ecology                                                   by the authorized
and climate                                                     government agencies;
resilience                                                      construction completion
implemented                                                     acceptance and approval
                                                                certificates issued by the
                                                                authorized government
                                                                agencies; and
                                                                commissioning/operation
                                                                certificates confirming
                                                                adherence to the green
                                                                eco-district standards;
                                                                and semiannual program
                                                                progress reports
                 3b. Key river sections in the urban areas of   3b. Semiannual program
                 CGD secured flood mitigation capacity for      progress reports
                 a 100-year return period flood, with nature-
                 based solutions incorporatedc
                 (2023 baseline: 5-year–20-year recurrence
                 interval) (OP3.2.1, OP3.2.5, OP4.1.2)
                 3c. Green spaces, including parks,             3c. Statistical yearbooks
                 gardens, walkways, and grasslands in the       of Chongqing Municipality
                 urban areas in CGD increased to at least       and/or the ACGD; remote
                 40% (2023 baseline: 34.89% green spaces        sensing data from the
                 in CGD urban areas) (DLI 7) (OP4.1.2,          ACGD; and semiannual
                 OP4.3.1)                                       program progress reports
                 3d. At least 3,000 job opportunities           3d. Semiannual program
                 generated under the program, of which at       progress reports
                 least 20% are for women during
                 construction and at least 30% are for
                 women during operationd
                 (2023 baseline: 0) (OP1.2)
Key Program Actions
1. Technical and climate change actions
1.1 Prepare a detailed plan for the implementation and demonstration of a green eco-district and three-
    star green buildings and/or ultra-low-energy buildings (Q2 2025–Q4 2025).
1.2 Ensure that all program facilities are designed with low-carbon and inclusive features, in compliance
    with national design codes, and incorporate nature-based solutions and sponge city principles
    (Q2 2025–Q4 2028).
1.3 Install water quality and flow monitoring devices on the wastewater pipelines exiting the CGD to
    accurately track effluent volumes and ensure their operational functionality (Q4 2025–Q4 2029).
1.4 Validate the operation and maintenance of one-star or higher rated green buildings annually
    (Q4 2025–Q4 2030).
1.5 Strengthen institutional capacity building (Q4 2024–Q4 2030).
1.6 Implement the program knowledge management action plan and jointly review progress (Q1 2025–
    Q4 2030).
1.7 Ensure that all the facilities under the program are operated and maintained properly (Q1 2025–
    Q4 2030).
20      Appendix



Key Program Actions
2. Social and gender actions
2.1 Engage an APMO social and gender specialist to monitor and report on social and gender actions,
     indicators, and targets in the program results framework and program action plan (Q1 2025).
2.2 Engage Women’s Federation in the implementation of gender actions (Q1 2025–Q4 2029).
2.3 Ensure vulnerable groups’ participation—including at least 50% women, older people, people with
     disabilities, and low-income individuals—in (i) training programs and awareness-raising activities,
     (ii) surveys with gender analysis of residents’ satisfaction with the improved living environment in
     CGD, and (iii) public consultation and decision-making during the design and implementation of the
     program activities to address their priorities and needs (Q1 2025–Q4 2029).
2.4 Adopt a socially inclusive and gender-responsive approach when developing the outreach program
     for training on low-carbon development and climate resilience, ensuring that at least 30% of trainees
     are female; and a strategy to remove barriers for vulnerable groups in accessing public infrastructure
     and services (Q1 2025–Q4 2029).
2.5 Develop an inclusive recruitment plan that promotes social equality and ensures equal opportunities
     for all residents, including vulnerable groups, in terms of recruitment information dissemination and
     the recruitment process; and provide at least 20% of job opportunities generated through the
     program to women during construction and 30% to women during operation (Q1 2025–Q4 2029).
2.6 Systematically collect program data disaggregated by sex, age, ethnicity, and income, and include in
     progress monitoring reports (Q1 2025–Q4 2030).
3. Environmental and social safeguard actions
3.1 Assign safeguard focal staff: (i) one for the APMO to coordinate all environmental safeguards and at
     least one for the APMO to coordinate all social safeguard implementation activities and reporting for
     the program; (ii) one environment officer for CGDG; and (iii) one resettlement officer for CGDG to
     (a) carry out screening, impact assessment, preparation of resettlement plans and/or due diligence
     reports, and social compliance audits as necessary; and (b) guide implementation (Q1 2025–
     Q4 2030).
3.2 Recruit program implementation consultants and develop capacity for environmental and social
     safeguards through regular training for the APMO, CGDG, contractors, and construction supervision
     companies (Q4 2024–Q4 2030).
3.3 Implement and monitor the detailed program safeguard actions in the program implementation
     document (Q1 2025–Q4 2030).
3.4 Prepare and submit semiannual environmental and social monitoring reports (Q3 2025–Q4 2030).
3.5 ADB to mobilize a staff consultant to carry out third-party verification of resettlement performance
     semiannually for 1.5 years during program implementation, commencing after submission of the
     APMO’s first semiannual environmental and social monitoring report (Q3 2025–Q1 2027).
4. Fiduciary actions
4.1 Recruit program implementation consultants to provide guidance on program implementation and an
    independent verification agency to carry out DLI verification (Q4 2024–Q1 2025).
4.2 Prepare and issue comprehensive program implementation guidelines for financial management,
    procurement, and progress reporting for the APMO, CGDG, and related agencies (Q1 2025–Q2
    2025).
4.3 Deliver adequate training on technical, procedural, regulatory, and integrity topics to all staff involved
    in procurement and financial management (Q1 2025–Q4 2030).
4.4 Ensure that sustainable procurement practices are incorporated in bidding documents, wherever
    applicable (Q1 2025–Q4 2030).
4.5 Disseminate the principles of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended from time to time) by
    posting them on the ACGD website with clear guidance on how to lodge any complaints (Q1 2025–
    Q2 2025).
Financing Plan
Total program financing (2024–2030): CNY6,001,432,300
Government: CNY4,575,752,300
ADB: CNY1,425,680,000 (loan)
A = assumption; ACGD = Administration of Chongqing Gaoxin District; ADB = Asian Development Bank; APMO =
ACGD Program Management Office; CGD = Chongqing Gaoxin District; CGDG = Chongqing Gaoxin Development and
                                                                                                       Appendix           21


Construction Investment Group Co., Ltd.; DLI = disbursement-linked indicator; OP = operational priority; PRC =
People's Republic of China; Q = quarter; R = risk.
Note: Refer to Disbursement-Linked Indicators, Verification Protocols, and Disbursement Schedule (Annex 1, Table 2)
for definition and description of achievements.
a Government of the PRC. 2021. The Outline of the 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social

   Development of the People’s Republic of China and the Long-Range Objectives through the Year 2035 (in Chinese);
   and ACGD. 2024. Chongqing Gaoxin District Green Low-Carbon and High-Quality Development Program, 2023–
   2035 (in Chinese).
b Refer to Program Implementation Document (Annex 4, Table 2) for definition and description of methodologies.

   “Improved living environment” in this context refers to enhancements in several key areas that are linked to the
   program and contribute to the overall quality of life for residents in CGD, covering (i) wastewater and rainwater
   discharge, collection, and treatment system; (ii) domestic waste disposal and recycling facilities; (iii) river and wetland
   management system; (iv) park and public spaces; and (v) building energy efficiency, use of renewable energy,
   sponge city aspects.
c Nature-based solutions involve the use of natural processes and ecosystems to address environmental challenges

   and enhance resilience and sustainability. Examples include rewetting, floodplain reconnection, reforestation to store
   carbon, natural water retention measures, riparian restoration, and reopening of old canals or rivers to increase
   resilience to heatwaves.
d Women represent 14% of all construction industry workers. While the data may undercount actual numbers of female

   workers (as many are hired through temporary agencies and not counted as formal employees), the targets are set
   to help overcome low participation of women in the construction industry.
Source: ADB.
