Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




INTERNAL


Project Number: 58122-001
September 2025




Proposed Results-Based Loan and Administration of
Grant
Armenia: Transformative Housing Reforms for
Improved Vitality and Empowerment Program




Distribution of this document is limited until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, this document will be reclassified as public and disclosed in accordance
with ADB's Access to Information Policy.
                  CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                    (as of 8 August 2025)

           Currency unit        –       dram (AMD)
              AMD1.00           =       $0.00260
                  $1.00         =       AMD384.04




                        ABBREVIATIONS

ADB          –      Asian Development Bank
CBA          –      Central Bank of Armenia
DLI          –      disbursement-linked indicator
DMF          –      design and monitoring framework
GCFF         –      Global Concessional Financing Facility
GDP          –      gross domestic product
IFI          –      international financial institution
IVA          –      independent verification agency
M&E          –      monitoring and evaluation
MLSA         –      Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
MOF          –      Ministry of Finance
NMC          –      National Mortgage Company
OP           –      operational priority
RBL          –      results-based lending
TA           –      technical assistance
THRIVE       –      Transformative Housing Reforms for Improved Vitality and
                    Empowerment
UDC          –      Urban Development Committee




                               NOTE

         In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars.
Vice-President         Yingming Yang, Office of the Vice-President (South, Central
                          and West Asia)
Director General       Leah Gutierrez, Central and West Asia Department (CWRD)
Directors              Mohd Sani Mohd Ismail, Director, Finance Sector Office,
                          Sectors Department 3 (SD3-FIN)
                       Donald Lambert, Country Director, Armenia Resident Mission
                          (ARRM), CWRD
Project team leaders   Benita Ainabe, Principal Financial Sector Specialist, SD3-FINa
                       Luke Crosby Fochtman, Country Operations Head, ARRM,
                             CWRD
Project team members   Ashima Bali; Financial Management Specialist; Financial
                             Management Division; Procurement, Portfolio, and
                             Financial Management Department
                       Tamar Bortsvadze, Gender Officer, Gender Equality Division,
                             Climate Change and Sustainable Development Department
                             (CCSD)
                       Shiela dela Torre; Partnerships Officer; Strategic Partnerships
                             Division; Strategy, Policy, and Partnerships Department
                             (SPD)
                       Lilit Dilanyan, Safeguards Officer (Social), Office of Safeguards
                             (OSFG)
                       Oliver Domagas, Principal Financial Control Specialist, Loan
                             and Grant Disbursement Section, Controller’s Department
                       Grigor Gyurjyan, Senior Economics Officer, ARRM, CWRD
                       Jairus Carmela Josol; Climate Change Officer; Climate
                             Change, Resilience, and Environment Cluster; CCSD
                       Ivy R. Laurente, Senior Operations Assistant, SD3-FIN
                       Henry Ma, Senior Economist, Macroeconomics Research
                             Division, Economic Research and Development Impact
                             Department
                       Rosalind Mckenzie, Principal Operations Coordination
                             Specialist (Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations),
                             Fragility and Engagement Division, CCSD
                       Marie Jessamine Mitra, Associate Project Officer, SD3-FIN
                       Marie Christine Montoya; Senior Strategy and Policy Officer;
                             Strategy, Policy, and Business Process Division; SPD
                       Marine Nikoghosyan, Senior Project Officer (Financial Sector),
                             SD3-FIN
                       Irina Novikova, Principal Safeguards Specialist (Social), OSFG
                       Genevieve O’Farrell, Senior Safeguards Specialist,
                             (Environment), OSFG
                       Sona Poghosyan, Senior Safeguards Specialist (Social), OSFG
                       Gohar Tadevosyan, Senior Social Development Specialist,
                             Human and Social Development Sector Office, Sectors
                             Department 3
                       Monica Young, Financial Sector Specialist, SD3-FIN
                       Adeliya Zhunussova, Senior Counsel, Office of the General
                             Counsel
     Peer reviewers              Pamela Bracey, Principal Finance Specialist, SD3-FIN
                                 Kiyoshi Nakamitsu, Principal Urban Development Specialist,
                                    Water and Urban Development Sector Office, Sectors
                                    Department 2
 a   Outposted to Georgia Resident Mission, CWRD.




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                       CONTENTS

                                                                                     Page
PROGRAM AT A GLANCE
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                                      1
II.    THE PROGRAM                                                                        1
       A.   Rationale                                                                     1
       B.   Program Scope                                                                 6
       C.   Program Results                                                               7
       D.   ADB Value Addition                                                           11
       E.   Expenditure Framework and Financing Plan                                     12
       F.   Capacity Development and Program Action Plan                                 13
       G.   Implementation Arrangements                                                  13
III.   DUE DILIGENCE                                                                     14
       A.    Program Technical Assessments                                               14
       B.    Gender Equality                                                             14
       C.    Poverty and Social Dimensions                                               15
       D.    Program Systems Assessments                                                 15
       E.    Sustainability                                                              17
       F.    Summary of Risk Assessment                                                  17
IV.    ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS                                                         18
V.     RECOMMENDATION                                                                    18

APPENDIX
Design and Monitoring Framework for the Program                                          19

ANNEXES
1.   Disbursement-Linked Indicators, Verification Protocols, and Disbursement Schedule
2.   Legal Agreements
3.   Program Technical and Systems Assessments
4.   Program Implementation Document
5.   Climate Change Assessment
                                          PROGRAM AT A GLANCE


1. Project Data
   Project        58122-001                                     Project name                Transformative Housing
   number                                                                                   Reforms for Improved
                                                                                            Vitality and Empowerment
                                                                                            Program
   Country        Armenia                                       Executing or                Ministry of Finance
   Borrower       Armenia                                       implementing agency

   Sector         Finance Sector Office                         Geographical location       Country
   office
   Sector         Finance                                       Subsector                   Housing Finance
   Country        http://www.adb.org/Documents/LinkedDocs/?id   Portfolio at a glance       http://www.adb.org/Documents
   economic       =58122-001-CEI                                                            /LinkedDocs/?id=58122-001-
   indicators                                                                               PortAtaGlance

   Strategic      Private sector development, Climate           Sustainable Development SDGs 1, 5, 8, 9, 11, 13 and
   Focus Area     action, Resilience and empowerment            Goals                   16
   Lending        Results-Based Lending (RBL)
   modality
2. Financing
   ADB Financing                                                                 Amount ($ million)
   Regular ordinary capital resources loan                                           250.00
   Concessional ordinary capital resources loan                                       0.00
   Special Funds resources (ADF grant)                                                0.00
   Cofinancing                                                                   Amount ($ million)
   Global Concessional Financing Facility (ADB-                                      16.45
   administered)
   Non-ADB administered                                                               0.00
   Counterpart                                                                   Amount ($ million)
   Government                                                                        613.55
           Total                                                                     880.00
   ADB Climate Financing
   ADB
      Adaptation                                                                        6.50
      Mitigation                                                                        31.50
   Cofinancing (ADB-administered)
      Adaptation                                                                        0.00
      Mitigation                                                                        0.00
           Total                                                                        38.00
3. Climate Action
   Absolute GHG emissions (tCO2e per year)                                                  0
   Relative GHG emissions (tCO2e per year)                                                  619 tCO2e/year
   Climate change risk on the project without adaptation measures                           Low
    Disaster Risk Reduction,         Environmental Finance/Governance, Disaster Risk Reduction
    Environment and Nature
4.Private Sector Development
 Private capital mobilized ($)
 PSD classification                                   Medium-PSD
5.Safeguards
    Category        Environment:                               A         B        C      FI
                    Involuntary resettlement:                  A         B        C      FI
                    Indigenous Peoples:                        A         B        C      FI
6.Gender Equality
    Category            Gender equality objective (GEN)                      Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
                        Some gender elements (SGE)                           Indirect gender benefits (IGB)
7.Regional Cooperation and Public Goods
    Category            Pillar 1    Pillar 2    Pillar 3      Not applicable
8.Digital Transformation
    Category            Level 1      Level 2        Level 3    Level 4        Not applicable


6




    Source: Asian Development Bank
    This document must only be generated in eOps.                                     Generated Date: 02-Sep-2025 11:01:06 PM
                                         I.      THE PROPOSAL

1.     I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed results-
based loan to Armenia for the Transformative Housing Reforms for Improved Vitality and
Empowerment (THRIVE) Program. The report also describes the proposed administration of a
grant to be provided by the Global Concessional Financing Facility (GCFF) for the THRIVE
Program, and if the Board approves the proposed loan, I, acting under the authority delegated to
me by the Board, approve the administration of the grant.

2.      THRIVE is a results-based lending (RBL) program that will be implemented over 5 years
to contribute toward financing and addressing the long-term, sustainable housing needs of
approximately 109,000 refugees who fled to Armenia around September 2023. In support of the
government’s housing program articulated in the Prime Minister’s Decree “N 710-L”, the program
will enhance opportunities for the refugees to receive long-term housing and improve social and
economic conditions in Armenia, contributing to the broader social housing policy objectives of
the government. 1 It focuses on (i) developing an improved social housing governance policy
framework, (ii) establishing resilient and inclusive housing finance systems, (iii) improving market
regulations and financing mechanisms, and (iv) strengthening institutions and enhancing the
knowledge of beneficiaries.

                                         II.      THE PROGRAM

A.      Rationale

3.       Strategic context. THRIVE is the first housing finance program of the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) in Armenia. In the absence of a dedicated agency responsible for providing low-
income housing, ADB will support the government in financing and implementing a strategic,
relevant, and measurable approach to social housing. The program is aligned with the extended
ADB country partnership strategy for Armenia, 2019–2023 and the forthcoming country
partnership strategy, 2026–2030, as it will encourage rural development through a housing
assistance program that incentivizes recipients to move outside of Yerevan, enhances climate
and disaster resilience, and promotes gender equality.2 It is included in the 2025–2027 lending
pipeline for Armenia. Aligned with three of the five strategic focus areas of ADB’s Strategy 2030
midterm review—private sector development, climate action, and resilience and empowerment—
the program will enable ADB to tackle new challenges and deliver on its development vision for
the region up to 2030 and beyond.3 It is also aligned with four of the seven operational priorities
(OPs) of ADB’s Strategy 2030: (i) addressing remaining poverty and reducing inequities (OP1);
(ii) accelerating progress in gender equality (OP2); (iii) tackling climate change, building climate
and disaster resilience, and enhancing environmental sustainability (OP3); and (iv) strengthening
governance and institutional capacity (OP6). 4 It aims to achieve ADB’s development result
indicators, delivering benefits for the well-being of people, the health of the planet, and the
prosperity of economies, which in turn drive progress toward United Nations Sustainable



1 The RBL will support the Government of Armenia’s State Assistance Program for Housing for Displaced Families
  (Decree N 710-L, published on 16 May 2024 and its subsequent amendments) and its subsequent regulation (Decree
  N 898-L, published 14 June 2024).
2 ADB. 2019. Country Partnership Strategy: Armenia, 2019–2023—Fostering Inclusive, Diversified, and

  Transformative Growth. Extended to 2025
3 ADB. 2024. Strategy 2030 Midterm Review: An Evolution Approach for the Asian Development Bank.
4 ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific.
2


Development Goals.5 Although the government program supported by THRIVE will be anchored
on Decree N 710-L, its results will also contribute to broader policy objectives of the government
under the Programme of the Government of Armenia (2021–2026), to develop a social housing
solution, including the need for a unified policy.6

4.       Macroeconomic context. The development of Armenia's housing sector is essential for
the country’s economic growth, poverty reduction, and inclusiveness goals. Improvements in
housing drive economic activity through increased construction, job creation, and heightened
demand for related goods and services. Access to affordable, quality housing enhances living
conditions for the low-income segment of the population, directly contributing to poverty
alleviation. Addressing the housing needs of vulnerable groups also promotes inclusiveness and
social stability. Furthermore, a well-functioning housing market eases labor mobility constraints,
stimulates infrastructure investment, and improves access to essential services such as health
care and education. Armenia graduated to upper middle-income country status in 2018.
Supported by large inflows of Russian migrants, tourists, and capital, economic growth
accelerated to 12.6% in 2022. It moderated to 8.3% in 2023 and 5.9% in 2024 as foreign exchange
and migrant inflows petered out, along with a gradual weakening of external demand. Growth is
expected to decelerate gradually to more sustainable levels of about 5.0% in 2025 and 2026.

5.      Gross domestic product (GDP) per capita increased from $4,685 in 2021 to $8,500 in
2024. Moreover, the poverty rate declined from 27.5% in 2020 to 23.7% in 2023. As the
government embarked on an expansionary fiscal policy, the fiscal deficit increased from 2.0% of
GDP in 2023 to 3.7% in 2024 and is projected to increase to 5.5% in 2025 before decreasing to
4.5% in 2026. The rising fiscal deficits observed during 2022–2024 are in part due to rising
expenditures, driven by increased social spending and public investment, which included support
for ethnic Armenian refugees that will also be supported by the THRIVE program (para. 2).
The 2025 budget projects a deficit of 5.5% of GDP, with overall revenue forecast at 26.0% of
GDP. Armenia’s debt levels remain sustainable; the current outlook calls for continued prudence
in fiscal management—striking a balance between staying on the fiscal consolidation path or
accommodating rising spending pressure. 7 The government program funded by THRIVE
demonstrates efficient use of public funds by aligning expenditures with clearly defined outputs
and outcomes.

6.       Background. Approximately 115,000 ethnic Armenian refugees (approximately 109,000
who arrived in Armenia around September 2023 and 6,000 from September 2020 to November
2020, accounting for approximately 30,000 households) require long-term housing in Armenia.8
Women and girls make up 52% of this population, with children accounting for 26% and individuals
over the age of 65 making up 13%. Among the adults, 61% are of working age. A portion of this
population has already benefited from a previous social housing program (under Decree N 169-
L); however, there remains a significant population (13,000 to 15,000 households) with housing
needs.9 Additionally, the government has an ongoing cash assistance program for the refugees
that is expected to run until the end of 2025 at the earliest, and will be replaced by rental programs
targeting more vulnerable segments of the refugee population.

5 ADB’s development result indicators 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, and 12, driving progress toward United Nations
  Sustainable Development Goals 1, 5, 8, 9, 11, 13, and 16. ADB. 2024. Steering ADB’s Corporate Strategy to
  Success: Corporate Results Framework, 2025–2030.
6 Government of Armenia. 2021. Programme of the Government of the Republic of Armenia (2021–2026).
7 ADB. 2025. Asian Development Outlook (ADO) April 2025; ADB. 2025. Asian Development Outlook (ADO) July 2025
8 Government estimates.
9 Based on data from the International Organization for Migration, the United Nations, and the Ministry of Labor and

  Social Affairs.
                                                                                                                    3


7.      The government housing program. Recognizing the need for long-term housing, the
government adopted and issued Decree N 710-L to address the social housing needs of ethnic
Armenian refugees (footnote 1). The program has the following general parameters for eligibility:
the beneficiary (i) does not own real estate in Armenia, (ii) did not benefit from a previous housing
program (N 169-L) from 2020, (iii) does not have two or more working-age family members
abroad, and (iv) is an Armenian citizen. The government program’s implementing agency, the
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MLSA), will provide financial assistance to beneficiaries under
the housing program in the form of vouchers or certificates, which may be presented to
participating commercial banks to obtain 10-year mortgages for properties at locations of their
choice. These mortgages will be fully repaid by the government.10 The government will use this
program in part to encourage development in less-populated parts of the country, and thus will
offer a variable amount per family member based on location. The amount of financial support
ranges from AMD2 million to AMD5 million (approximately $5,200 to $13,000) per family member,
which may be used to purchase existing stock or new-build houses or apartments (using
mortgages), repay an existing mortgage, refurbish existing sock, or purchase furniture.
The application period for the government’s program is 2024–2029. However, with a 10-year
minimum mortgage term, actual program implementation is expected to be 14 years. 11
An analysis of the refugee population’s current geographical settlement indicates that most of the
population is in regions where the government will be providing AMD4 million (approximately
$10,300) per family member.12 The 2020 social housing program administered by the National
Mortgage Company (NMC) indicates that the average price of housing purchased by the refugee
population was approximately AMD12.5 million ($32,600).13 The government aims to increase the
number of participating financial institutions (banks and credit organizations) to ensure sufficient
capacity to review and process mortgage applications. As of July 2025, there were 5 under N
710-L and 11 under the previous N 169-L program.

         1.       Sector Issues and Opportunities

8.       Insufficient budget, financing, and liquidity. The N 710-L program is estimated to cost
$880 million. $500 million lending from international financial institutions (IFIs) will contribute to
the cost of the program.The government will finance the balance from its own resources (Tables
1 and 4). The government has allocated AMD15 billion (approximately $37.5 million) in the 2025
budget to finance N 710-L. Taking into account the estimated real estate values and the number
of eligible households, the IFI lending will cover a minimum of 10% of the value of the real estate
as downpayments; mortgage interest repayments; and cash assistance programs comprising the
current rental subsidy scheme and subsequent schemes targeting vulnerable groups. These will
be financed in equal parts by ADB under THRIVE, and the World Bank using its investment project
financing instrument with performance-based conditions. The government program’s overall
financing gap is estimated at approximately $880 million, based on a nominal real estate cost of
$536 million,14 and includes mortgage interest payment costs estimated at 14% charged by local
financial institutions, including commercial banks, selected by the government to participate in the

10 The minimum mortgage term is 10 years. If the value of real estate is above the level of financial support offered

  through N-710 L, the beneficiary will be responsible for paying the excess amount.
11 14 years is the maximum period of the government program, assuming beneficiaries apply for 10-year mortgages

  during the final months of the initial 5-year implementation period.
12 To ensure that the government’s N 710-L housing program achieves its purpose and targets the refugee population

  in need of financial support, the maximum value of eligible real estate is approximately $164,800 (equivalent).
13 As of March 2025, the average house price per square meter in Yerevan was AMD457,458. The average house

   price per square meter in the country excluding Yerevan was AMD166,431, and including Yerevan was AMD227,700.
   House price averages are officially reported per region and not as an overall weighted or simple average:
   cadastre.am/storage/files/032025.pdf.
14 Calculated as 13,000 eligible households x $41,200 average home value = $536 million.
4


program. Local financial institutions are expected to face liquidity constraints while taking part in
the program as it is separate from their core commercial lending operations. To ensure the
sustainability of the housing program, the government must ensure that NMC, which is wholly
owned by the Central Bank of Armenia (CBA), is sufficiently funded so that it can provide liquidity
to the commercial banks to originate the mortgages, supplementing their own resources.
Additionally, NMC could raise market-based funding by issuing bonds that could attract
institutional investors such as pension funds. However, the size of NMC’s balance sheet is
insufficient to finance the mortgages of 13,000 households envisaged under the housing program,
the cost of which accounts for five times NMC’s capital and two times its total assets.

9.      Absence of a national housing agency and strategy. Armenia does not have a
dedicated agency responsible for preparing and implementing a national housing plan to address
housing needs such as the provision of low-income housing. This program will be the first of its
size and magnitude to be implemented by MLSA. The agency lacks the technical expertise,
capacity, and resources to appraise housing finance proposals, collaborate with commercial
banks, engage with capital market institutional investors seeking long-term investments, and
increase public awareness of the N 710-L program. There is limited awareness of international
good practices in social housing programs and policy design, and there are general program
implementation capacity constraints in Armenia. A strategic, fit-for-purpose, and scalable
approach to social housing, drawing on international experience, is necessary. Interministerial
coordination on a comprehensive national housing policy—incorporating climate and disaster
resilience, gender mainstreaming, inclusion, and governance—does not exist.

10.      Lack of interest and low participation of local financial institutions in low-income
housing finance. Local financial institutions favor commercial lending operations, which are more
profitable, over mortgages. This, combined with insufficient liquidity (para. 8), constrains housing
finance in Armenia. In the initial phase of the earlier government program, uptake by local financial
institutions was slow, indicating reluctance to participate. This could undermine the success of
program implementation.

11.      Impact of limited employment opportunities on housing affordability. Sustainable
livelihoods of beneficiaries are essential to the success of social housing programs.
The government program encourages settlement in more remote parts of the country, often with
lower economic development opportunities. This may affect the ability of refugees—especially
those lacking skills—to successfully integrate and secure employment. Furthermore, beneficiaries
must be financially equipped to afford their homes beyond the period of the government’s support.
This is particularly challenging for women in Armenia, who earn 36% less than men, are more
likely to engage in informal work, and have lower labor force participation.15 Although often skilled,
refugee women are underemployed or confined to low-paid, informal work that does not offer
financial stability. 16 Single mothers and elderly women face the highest levels of housing
insecurity because of limited income and inadequate social protection. These barriers limit their
financial independence and access to mortgages, making it difficult for them to afford and
maintain adequate housing beyond government support.

12.      Low public awareness. Increasing public awareness of the N 710-L program is crucial
to its successful implementation. Prospective beneficiaries among the refugee population are not
fully aware of its features, scope, and eligibility requirements, may have limited mortgage-related
financial literacy, and could be apprehensive about their ability to access financing.

15 World Bank. 2024. Armenia: Country Gender Assessment.
16 UN Women and CARE Caucasus. 2024. Armenia Refugee Crisis: Gender Analysis.
                                                                                                              5


13.     Underdeveloped capital markets. Although Armenia has a legal and regulatory
framework for securitization and has successfully issued asset-backed securities (e.g.,
microfinance loan securitization), its fledgling securitization and capital markets can be developed
further through mortgage-backed securitization (including covered bonds) and corporate bond
issuance. This provides an opportunity for the private sector to play a meaningful role in providing
capital to NMC and local financial institutions through capital markets. Armenia’s market
capitalization accounted for only 4% of GDP in 2024, below that of its regional peers (e.g., Georgia
at 8% and Uzbekistan at 16%), with 34 issuers and 206 securities listed and admitted to trade.
However, the ratio of bond market value to GDP was 32% in 2024, compared with Georgia at
13% and Uzbekistan at 8%.

14.     Use of RBL. Strong government ownership of the program, institutional development
potential, harmonization with other development partners, and a focus on sustainable,
measurable outcomes reinforce RBL as the best suited modality to finance the program. The RBL
modality creates incentives for delivering and sustaining results because ADB disbursements are
based on achievement of the program’s results, as measured by disbursement-linked indicators
(DLIs) agreed with the government. This strengthens the program’s accountability and instills a
high degree of government ownership and alignment on results. The RBL program will enhance
development effectiveness, improve the performance of Armenia’s housing programs, and
promote institutional coordination. It also fosters alignment and coordination with the World Bank
around the same government-owned housing program (including alignment of some ADB DLIs
with the World Bank project’s performance-based conditions).

15.       ADB’s experience and lessons. The program incorporates lessons from the
Independent Evaluation Department’s review of ADB’s country partnership strategy for Armenia,
2019–2023, which recommended: (i) adding new areas of support; (ii) continued flexibility and
responsiveness to the country’s emerging needs and priorities, given its limited fiscal space;
(iii) further development of gender mainstreaming capacities at national and local levels; and
(iv) coordinating with other development partners on advancing the government reform agenda,
supporting public and private sector development and operations, and mitigating climate risks.17
The program also draws on ADB’s lessons from previous ADB RBL programs supporting housing
finance in Uzbekistan.18 One lesson is that ADB’s participation in country-led programs through
financing, knowledge-sharing, and technical assistance (TA) can catalyze the involvement of
other development partners and the private sector. Another lesson is that promoting social equity
and gender equality is instrumental in the economic empowerment of vulnerable groups and
women. Another lesson is that the inclusion of climate mitigation measures should be a key
consideration in future ADB programs. Finally, drawing from its experience in supporting housing
finance in other developing member countries, ADB has ensured government ownership of the
reforms through comprehensive consultations involving extensive joint and combined policy
dialogue with the program executing and implementing agencies to diagnose and address issues
in program design. To achieve impactful, cohesive outcomes, integrated mortgage and wider
finance sector development must include policy measures to support the supply and demand side
of the market, and market access.

16.    Private sector participation. Local financial institutions will play a significant role in
THRIVE, given their role in the mortgage application, screening, approval, and financing
processes. The program will create opportunities to expand supply and demand in the local capital

17 Independent Evaluation Department. 2023. Armenia Validation of the Country Partnership Strategy Final Review,

  2019–2023. ADB.
18 ADB. 2024. Uzbekistan: Affordable Rural Housing Program
6


market by mobilizing private capital (from institutional investors such as pension funds) through
regular bond issuance or securitization (including covered bonds). Private sector developers will
play a key role in responding to beneficiaries’ housing supply needs by constructing buildings that
adopt climate-resilient construction methods and designs. In addition, a central aspect of the
government program is encouraging ethnic Armenian refugees to settle in rural or less-developed
areas of the country, creating potential opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises to
establish and expand their businesses in these regions. These enterprises may require support
as they expand to more remote areas.

17.      Climate change. Armenia’s housing sector is exposed to the following hazards, with
intensity and likelihood of occurrence varying across provinces: floods, droughts, water scarcity,
heatwaves, wildfires, and landslides. As a seismically active region, earthquakes are also a
pervasive hazard throughout the country. In the absence of risk mitigation measures, these
hazards can indirectly impact the program by damaging housing infrastructure, compromising the
health and safety of beneficiaries, impeding the delivery of critical services, interrupting the supply
of labor and materials, and increasing construction and operating costs—including energy
consumption and risk premiums. To reduce these risks, site and technical screening of buildings
will be conducted for existing housing units, while for new ones a preapproval process of housing
design will be implemented, where feasible. This process will integrate a suite of adaptation and
mitigation measures, from site selection, resilient design, and minimum energy efficiency
measures for shell, core, and furnishings. Armenia’s building standards and long-term social
housing strategy will also be reviewed to mainstream climate change considerations.
The program is aligned with and contributes to Armenia’s Nationally Determined Contribution for
2021–2023, Long-Term Low-Emissions Development Strategy for 2050, National Adaptation Plan
2021–2025, and the National Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Program 2021–2030.19

18.     Technical assistance. TA totaling $500,000 from ADB’s Technical Assistance Special
Fund (TASF-other sources), approved at the concept stage, has supported program preparation
and due diligence in relation to climate, private sector development, gender, safeguards, financial
management, design of DLIs, integrity risk, and other areas.20 A portion of the TA will also support
implementation of the program through social housing policy reforms that improve market
regulations and mechanisms for housing finance. It will also support project monitoring and
implementation oversight. Additional TA funds may be mobilized during program implementation.

B.        Program Scope

19.    The scope of the broader government program and the RBL program is summarized in
Table 1.
                                 Table 1: Program Scope

     Item                   Broader Government Program                      Results-Based Lending Program
 Outcome            Social and economic inclusion of ethnic Armenian   Enhanced opportunities for ethnic Armenian
                    refugees, by enabling home ownership and long-     refugees to receive long-term housing and
                    term residence in Armenia while promoting          improved social and economic conditions
                    country-wide development




19 Climate Change Assessment (Annex 5).
20 ADB. 2024. Technical Assistance to Armenia for Preparing and Implementing the Transformative Housing Reforms

    for Improved Vitality and Empowerment Program.
                                                                                                                          7


      Item                     Broader Government Program                       Results-Based Lending Program
 Key outputs        (i)   Ethnic Armenian refugees provided with cash      Output 1: Improved social housing
                          assistance for rent and long-term housing        governance policy framework developed
                    (ii) Awareness-raising campaign                        Output 2: Resilient and inclusive housing
                    (iii) Mortgage applications processed and              finance systems established
                          approved                                         Output 3: Market regulations and financing
                    (iv) New development opportunities available to        mechanisms improved
                          the construction market                          Output 4: Institutions strengthened, and
                    (v) Refugee population’s adoption of citizenship       beneficiary knowledge enhanced
                          in Armenia
 Activities         (i) Promote housing construction in and                (i)   Develop a long-term housing strategy to
                          relocation to underdeveloped areas of                  address ongoing and emerging housing
                          Armenia.                                               needs.
                    (ii) Social inclusion of refugees.                     (ii) Establish      and     operationalize     a
                    (iii) Establish     and    implement     beneficiary         comprehensive beneficiary database.
                          database.                                        (iii) Improve institutional structure through a
                    (iv) Appoint licensed construction companies to              dedicated entity responsible for the
                          offer home design options to suit various              housing strategy.
                          family sizes, financial capacities, locations,   (iv) Strengthen institutions to promote good
                          livelihoods, and preferences of the refugees;          social housing policies and practices.
                          and plans that ensure quality control, green     (v) Assess and support government urban
                          building standards, and seismic resilience.            planning that incorporates livelihood and
                    (v) Add financial institutions to the program to             location preferences of refugees; and
                          process mortgages.                                     ensure that new housing units have
                    (vi) Review Armenian citizenship applications                quality control, energy-efficient building
                          and update population registry.                        standards, and resilience to seismic and
                                                                                 other natural hazards.
                                                                           (vi) Closely engage with Ministry of Labor
                                                                                 and Social Affairs, Urban Development
                                                                                 Committee,        National       Mortgage
                                                                                 Company, and Central Bank of Armenia
                                                                                 on achievement of disbursement-linked
                                                                                 indicators.
 Expenditure        $880 million                                           $250.00 million
 size
 Main financiers (i) Government: $364 million                          Global Concessional Financing Facility:
 and        their(ii) ADB: $250 million                                $16.45 million grant
 respective total(iii) World Bank: $250 milliona
 amounts         (iv) Global Concessional Financing Facility: $16
                       million
                 (Primarily for mortgages and cash assistance)
 Geographic      Nationwide (with development encouraged in Nationwide (with development encouraged in
 coverage        smaller cities and rural areas)                       smaller cities and rural areas)
 Implementation (i) 2024–2029 (application period)                     2026–2030
 period          (ii) 2024–2038       (full  period,    considering
                       10-year mortgages)
a Under a proposed project using investment project financing with performance-based conditions.

Sources: Government of Armenia and Asian Development Bank.

C.       Program Results

20.     The RBL program’s impact will be long-term, sustainable, and affordable home ownership
provided for ethnic Armenian refugees with improved conditions for social and economic
integration, aligned with the Programme of the Government of Armenia (2021–2026) (footnote 6).
The outcome will be enhanced opportunities for ethnic Armenian refugees to receive long-term
housing and improved social and economic conditions.21 The program will achieve its outcome
by strengthening the capacity of government agencies and local financial institutions to implement

21 The design and monitoring framework for the program is in the Appendix.
8


an effective and inclusive housing program. It will provide direct and targeted solutions through:
(i) budget and liquidity support to finance between 10% and 30% of the real estate value as
mortgage downpayments and mortgage repayment installments for at least 5 years; and
(ii) development of a long-term housing strategy to address ongoing and emerging housing needs,
activities that enhance environmental sustainability and resilience to geophysical and climate
hazards, and harmonization of other support programs for refugees. The program will also
incentivize Armenian commercial banks to participate in an economically important government-
supported scheme while maintaining sufficient liquidity, capital, and profitability; and support
livelihoods and provision of economic opportunities to the refugees while also promoting private
sector participation. Public awareness campaigns will enhance program uptake. Finally, the
program will contribute to the development of Armenia’s capital markets by strengthening NMC’s
governance and regulatory framework and supporting the planned medium- to long-term
restructuring of NMC. This will attract institutional investors (e.g., pension funds, asset
management companies, and local financial institutions) to invest in corporate bond,
securitization, or covered bond issuances, and ensure market readiness for NMC’s possible
privatization in the future.22

21.      Achieving the aforementioned solutions are contingent on four critical factors:
(i) affordability, or sufficiency of the monetary value of the government mortgage subsidies in
relation to real property prices across the country, including in areas that provide ample
employment and business opportunities; (ii) attractiveness of the eligibility criteria of the housing
program (Decree N 710-L); (iii) appetite of financial institutions and beneficiaries to participate in
the program; and (iv) overall financial sustainability of the program, considering the government’s
budget and expenditure framework and the liquidity of state-owned NMC and the commercial
institutions.

22.     The outcome of the program will be achieved by December 2031 through the following
performance indicators in the design and monitoring framework (DMF): 7,000 mortgages will be
originated under the program, from none in 2024; support programs for refugees will be
harmonized by developing and implementing (pilot) rental programs from not being harmonized
in 2024; and 7,000 households from the refugee population will own homes provided under the N
710-L program and 10% will have stable sources of income from none in 2024. There are four
outputs in this program as explained below.

23.    Output 1: Improved social housing governance policy framework developed.
The program will establish an interministerial committee comprising key government
stakeholders—MLSA, NMC, the Urban Development Committee (UDC), and the Ministry of
Finance (MOF)—with at least 35% female representation. It will also ensure gender-responsive
outreach to eligible refugee households. With significant intragovernment buy-in, key structural
components of the program will be achieved. Under this output, a long-term national housing
strategy to address ongoing and emerging social housing needs, coupled with technical expertise
for improving capacities and policies to help the housing sector evolve in line with international
good practices, are imperative.

24.     Output 2: Resilient and inclusive housing finance systems established. Under this
output, inclusive, environmentally sustainable building standards that promote resilience to
seismic and other natural hazards will be established or enhanced. The program will support the
following activities: sustainable and disaster-resilient actions relevant to the housing sector,
including the incorporation of green building design and construction standards (risk-informed site

22 Program Results Framework Assessment is in Program Technical and Systems Assessments (Annex 3).
                                                                                                     9


and asset selection, sustainable materials, energy efficiency, water efficiency, and greenhouse
gas emission reductions) and seismic or climate resilience; gender mainstreaming to ensure
equal access to the program; and harmonization of other support programs for refugees (including
the potential to expand the program beyond the refugee population to other underserved groups).

25.     Output 3: Market regulations and financing mechanisms improved. To ensure the
financial sustainability of the program—and ultimately ensure the outcome of long-term housing
for ethnic Armenian refugees is achieved—the program will support the following activities under
this output: (i) regulations governing NMC’s leverage ratios will be revised, in particular lifting the
1:1 ratio restriction of outstanding issuance amount to tier 1 capital, allowing NMC to increase its
capacity for bond issuance; (ii) enabling mortgage-backed securitization or covered bond
program(s) through a planned issuance strategy; and (iii) adopting a regulation requiring
developers to meet minimum financial covenants and commitments.

26.     Output 4: Institutions strengthened, and beneficiary knowledge enhanced. Under
this output, the institutional capacity of MLSA, NMC, and other agencies will be strengthened in
housing finance and housing program management, including gender-responsive approaches to
build institutional awareness and capacity of the participating local banks to improve the
inclusivity, accessibility, and responsiveness of financial services for refugee women. Financial
literacy programs will be delivered to beneficiaries of the housing program, ensuring that women
and men are targeted equally through using tailored content and methods. The management
information system for beneficiaries will track recipients and help the analysis of demography,
gender, socioeconomic status, and location; and determine where outreach efforts should
be focused.

27.      DLIs. The program will track progress using 10 DLIs along with eight DMF indicators not
linked to disbursement. Two outcome-level DLIs are anchored in the core objectives of the
program—i.e., to provide housing and empower refugees; these support the program’s outcome
of improving the social and economic status of refugees. Eight output-level DLIs will create an
enabling environment for and contribute to the achievement of the two outcome-level DLIs which
are: the origination of mortgages under N 710-L (DLI 1) and the provision of cash assistance
under the current rental subsidy scheme (DLI 2) (which will be succeeded by future rental
programs targeting more vulnerable segments of the refugee population)—allowing a gradual
transition of beneficiaries to the mortgage scheme. The output DLIs will achieve the following:
(i) build institutional capacity to harmonize all benefits under the responsibility of MLSA; (ii) adopt
a long-term strategy to address housing needs; (iii) ensure climate- or seismic-resilience of the
dwellings of beneficiaries; (iv) support households headed by women; (v) support NMC’s efforts
toward becoming market-oriented and sustainable; (vi) mobilize private capital from institutional
investors; and (vii) assist ethnic Armenian refugees in benefiting from other social protection
programs. The 10 DLIs represent key actions to minimize risk; they are specific, measurable, and
relevant to the country and development context, and can be independently verified. MLSA, NMC,
CBA, and UDC are responsible for achieving the DLIs. The DLIs are weighted based on their
relevance and contribution to the achievement of the program outcome. They are aligned with the
financing needs of the government, and some will be apportioned across the 5-year
implementation period, providing incentives for the implementing agencies to deliver on the
reforms through TA from ADB and the World Bank.23 The DLIs and their disbursement allocations
are summarized in Tables 2a and 2b.



23 Disbursement-Linked Indicators, Verification Protocols, and Disbursement Schedule (Annex 1).
10


                  Table 2a: Disbursement-Linked Indicators (ADB Financing)
Indicator                                                                  Disbursement       Share of Total
                                                                             Allocated            ADB
                                                                             ($ million)      Financing (%)
Outcomes
1. 7,000 mortgages originated under the program, at least 20% of                  60.0               24.0
which are for households headed by women (MLSA)
2. Support programs for ethnic Armenian refugees harmonized by                    75.0               30.0
developing and implementing pilot rental programs (MLSA)
Output 1
3. Comprehensive management information system to harmonize                       25.0               10.0
benefits established and operationalized (MLSA)
4. Long-term housing strategy to address pre-existing and ongoing                  5.0                2.0
housing needs developed and adopted (MLSA)
Output 2
5. 350 households residing in energy-efficient, sustainable, climate-             12.5                5.0
resilient, or seismic-resilient buildings (MLSA and Urban Development
Committee)
6. Household applications processed and approved, and housing                     25.0               10.0
certificates utilized, of which at least 20% comprise single women with
children or households headed by women (MLSA).
Output 3
7. NMC’s restructuring strategy to become market-oriented and                     10.0                4.0
support long-term housing finance (e.g., through divestment from
Central Bank of Armenia) adopted (NMC and Central Bank of Armenia)
8. NMC capitalized (NMC)                                                          10.0                4.0
9. AMD15 billion of NMC bonds issued (NMC)                                        15.0                6.0
Output 4
10. All ethnic Armenian refugees can access existing social protection            12.5                5.0
programs for non-refugees (MLSA)
Total                                                                           250.0              100.0
ADB = Asian Development Bank; MIS = management information system; MLSA = Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs;
NMC = National Mortgage Company.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

                  Table 2b: Disbursement-Linked Indicators (GCFF Financing)
Indicator                                                                  Disbursement       Share of Total
                                                                           Allocated          GCFF
                                                                           ($ million)        Financing (%)
Outcomes
1. 7,000 mortgages originated under the program, at least 20% of                  3.95               24.0
which are for households headed by women (MLSA)
2. Support programs for ethnic Armenian refugees harmonized by                    4.94               30.0
developing and implementing pilot rental programs (MLSA)
Output 1
3. Comprehensive management information system to harmonize                       1.65               10.0
benefits established and operationalized (MLSA)
4. Long-term housing strategy to address pre-existing and ongoing                 0.33                2.0
housing needs developed and adopted (MLSA)
Output 2
                                                                                                                     11


Indicator                                                                       Disbursement        Share of Total
                                                                                Allocated           GCFF
                                                                                ($ million)         Financing (%)
5. 350 households residing in energy-efficient, sustainable, climate-                   0.82                   5.0
resilient, or seismic-resilient buildings (MLSA and Urban Development
Committee)
6. Household applications processed and approved, and housing                           1.65               10.0
certificates utilized, of which at least 20% comprise single women with
children or households headed by women (MLSA).
Output 3
7. NMC’s restructuring strategy to become market-oriented and                           0.66                   4.0
support long-term housing finance (e.g., through divestment from
Central Bank of Armenia) adopted (NMC and Central Bank of Armenia)
8. NMC capitalized (NMC)                                                                0.66                   4.0
9. AMD15 billion NMC bonds issued (NMC)                                                 0.99                   6.0
Output 4
10. All ethnic Armenian refugees can access existing social protection                  0.82                   5.0
programs for non-refugees (MLSA)
Total                                                                                 16.45               100.0
GCFF = Global Concessional Financing Facility; MIS = management information system; MLSA = Ministry of Labor
and Social Affairs; NMC = National Mortgage Company.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

28.     Verification and reporting protocol, and independent verification agent. Verification
protocols include verification by a credible independent verification agency (IVA) that will develop
a clear verification methodology for each DLI to be agreed with ADB. Since no institution was
deemed appropriate to be the verification agent for the DLIs, it was agreed that the government
would recruit a third-party firm after loan effectivenss, using competitive selection. The selection
of the IVA will require ADB’s approval.24 Prior results are within the scope of the RBL program,
and ADB has assessed the systems used to achieve such results.25 Financing for prior results
have been agreed upon during negotiations between ADB and the government and indicated in
the loan agreement. Financing for prior results can be withdrawn upon loan effectiveness.
TA funding may be used for the verification of prior results before the appointment of an IVA.
In addition, ADB will conduct review missions to evaluate program progress, assess the
robustness of the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework, and discuss annual work plans
and budgets.

D.      ADB Value Addition

29.    Given its focus on housing finance, the THRIVE program complements previous and
ongoing efforts of Agence Française de Développement and Germany’s KfW Development Bank,
which focus on improving mortgage affordability for low- to middle-income households; building
the capacity of mortgage lenders by introducing quality standards for lending, enhancing
procedures, and training staff; introducing energy-efficient housing products; and providing green
mortgages to be financed through NMC’s issuance of green bonds. It also complements ADB’s
ongoing policy-based lending program for Armenia, which helps the government strengthen fiscal
management, improve infrastructure, and promote money and capital markets.26 By focusing on

24 Draft terms of reference for the independent verification agent are in Program Implementation Document (Annex 4).
25 Prior results are DLIs achieved before the effectiveness of the loan and grant agreements, but no earlier than 12

  months before the signing of the agreements. TA funding may be used for the verification of prior results.
26 ADB. 2024. Armenia: Fiscal Sustainability and Financial Markets Development Program (Subprogram 2).
12


results, ADB’s program will orient various government, regulator, and private sector stakeholders
and development partners toward a common set of results. The government’s limited experience
in implementing housing support programs will be addressed under the program through capacity
development, institutional strengthening, and implementation support, ensuring the long-term
sustainability of the program. ADB has supported the Government of Armenia in similar aspects
through other RBL programs in the health and urban sectors. In addition, ADB has supported
successful social housing programs in the region—e.g., in Uzbekistan—with upcoming programs
in Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic. ADB missions, program design, initial assessments, and
mobilization of the GCFF grant have been closely coordinated with the World Bank—a parallel
approach preferred by the government as an efficient means to address the country’s housing
financing gap and encourage knowledge sharing.

E.        Expenditure Framework and Financing Plan

30.    Program expenditures. The RBL program expenditures are estimated to be $880 million
from 2026 to 2030 (Table 3).

        Table 3: Summary of Program Expenditure Framework, 2026–2030 (2024 prices)
     Itema                                                          Amount ($ million)       Share of Total (%)
     1. Maximum 30% downpayment and cash assistance                     161.0                        18.3
     for rental subsidy programs
     2. Mortgage interest repayments (installments) and                    343.0                       38.9
     cash assistance for rental subsidy programs
     3. Mortgages originated by local financial institutions               188.0                       21.4
     (own resources)
     4. Mortgages originated by local financial institutions               188.0                       21.4
     (liquidity from the National Mortgage Company)
     Total                                                                 880.0                     100.0
a The program cost is based on the support to a maximum of 13,000 households, using a voucher of AMD4 million per
  family member, and a family or household with a maximum of four members. The local financial institutions will
  originate mortgages under the housing program, with half funded from their own resources and the other half through
  National Mortgage Company (NMC) refinancing liquidity. Issuance of mortgages will be at market rate (14%). NMC
  will increase its issuance in the local bond market to partially cover the required liquidity. At maximum, NMC could
  double its current bond issuance for more than a 5-year period, depending on market conditions, reaching up to
  $100 million for this housing program. The volumes and levels in each category are contingent on uptake of the
  mortgage program by the refugee population.
Sources: Government of Armenia and Asian Development Bank estimates.

31.     Program financing. ADB will provide financing for prior results of up to 20% of the ADB
loan and 20% of the GCFF grant (footnote 25), and advance financing of up to 25% of the ADB
loan and 25% of the GCFF grant for DLIs yet to be achieved to finance activities needed to
achieve the DLIs. The combined outstanding balance of advance financing and financing for prior
results should not exceed 30% of the ADB financing and 30% of the GCFF grant, or their
respective ceilings as described in this paragraph.

32.    The government has requested a regular loan of $250 million from ADB’s ordinary capital
resources to help finance the program. The loan will have a 27-year term, including a grace period
of 10 years; an interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s Flexible Loan Product; a
commitment charge of 0.15% per year; and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft
loan agreement. Based on the straight-line method, the average maturity is 18.75 years, and the
maturity premium payable to ADB is 0.3% per year. The summary program financing plan is in
Table 4. The GCFF will provide grant cofinancing of $16,450,000 to be administered by ADB.
                                                                                                               13



                                    Table 4: Program Financing Plan
                                                                         Amount                Share of Total
Source                                                                  ($ million)                 (%)
Governmenta                                                               613.55                    69.7
   Asian Development Bank
       Ordinary capital resources (regular loan)                          250.00                     28.4
   Global Concessional Financing Facility (grant)                          16.45                      1.9
Total                                                                     880.00                    100.0
a. Includes the government’s own resources and borrowings from other financing sources as stated in Table 1.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

33.     Total climate finance for the program is $38 million, with an estimated $31.5 million in
mitigation costs and $6.5 million in adaptation costs. The ADB loan will finance 100% of the
mitigation and adaptation costs.

F.      Capacity Development and Program Action Plan

34.    During program implementation, the executing and implementing agencies will be
responsible for contracting the IVA, who will conduct activities in an impartial manner and
safeguard measures to prevent conflicts of interest; and they will develop an M&E framework.
ADB will conduct financial management training, THRIVE will be included in the annual audit plan
of MLSA, MLSA will prepare program financial statements in accordance with the International
Public Sector Accounting Standards, and annual program financial statements will be audited by
an independent auditor acceptable to ADB and aligned with the International Standards on
Auditing. Other areas where capacity will be strengthened during program implementation include
program-based budgeting, external audit, anticorruption, environmental and social safeguards,
and gender mainstreaming.

G.      Implementation Arrangements

35.     The executing agency is the MOF, responsible for overall policy, program guidance, and
supervision. The implementing agencies responsible for delivery of the DLIs are MLSA, UDC,
NMC, and CBA. MLSA is the main implementing agency of the THRIVE program as it is
responsible for implementing the related government decree. The government will establish a
policy-level steering committee or working group consisting of ADB, the World Bank, MLSA, MOF,
CBA, UDC, NMC, and other government institutions and organizations. The National Social
Development Association of Armenia and local financial institutions will be consulted in this
process. The objective of the working group will be to support the government in the preparation
and coordination of the programs financed by ADB and the World Bank, and coordinate efforts
among stakeholders. The deputy prime minister has been requested to chair the committee.

36.     Disbursement arrangements. The loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed following
ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2022, as amended from time to time), and based on the
achievement and verification of agreed DLIs. Each DLI amount will be disbursed in proportion to
the total ADB and GCFF financing amounts (pro rata). The MOF will submit a withdrawal
application to ADB, together with the verified program results report. The loan and grant proceeds
will be disbursed to the government’s general account. The government will refund any
unliquidated advance within 2 months of the end of the winding-up period and amounts allocated
for DLIs not achieved by program completion will be canceled.
14


                                         III.    DUE DILIGENCE

A.      Program Technical Assessments

37.       Program soundness and results assessment. The program design and implementation
arrangements are sound, the results framework is well designed, the DLIs are a selection of
critical indicators for achieving overall program results, the M&E system is fit for purpose, and the
expenditure framework and financing plan are robust. Because of structural inefficiencies,
including inadequate institutional capacity, limited private sector participation, and the absence of
a unified housing policy, market forces alone cannot address these challenges, making it unlikely
for many households to meet their housing needs through market-based solutions. Therefore,
public intervention is essential to support ethnic Armenian refugees in obtaining stable and long-
term housing. The program is financially sustainable, and the results assessment demonstrates
a logical, well-structured results chain aligned with the program’s desired outcomes. Capacity-
building activities implemented during the program will enhance its long-term sustainability.27

38.     Economic analysis. THRIVE represents a critical intervention to address housing
challenges for refugees, while strengthening Armenia's housing market and promoting regional
development. The program's economic impact analysis compares three scenarios: (i) no
government program, (ii) the government program without IFI support, and (iii) the government
program with IFI (ADB and World Bank) support. It concludes that the IFI-supported program
delivers better economic, social, and financial outcomes while easing the fiscal burden on the
state budget. Moreover, IFI support includes institutional strengthening, which enhances the
government’s ability to design and implement housing policies effectively.

B.      Gender Equality

39.     The program is categorized effective gender mainstreaming. 28 It adopts a gender-
responsive approach to empowering women and building their resilience by improving access to
affordable and adequate housing for households headed by women, single mothers, the elderly,
and other vulnerable women. Two of the four program outputs include gender performance
indicators in the DMF: (i) output indicator 1b requires 35% female representation in the
interministerial committee on housing policy and planning, guaranteeing that women's voices are
meaningfully included in decision-making; and (ii) output indicator 2c (DLI 6) ensures that at least
20% of the total applications processed, approved, and utilized housing certificates are from
single mothers or households headed by women. The DMF also includes three additional gender-
sensitive performance indicators: (i) outcome indicator a (DLI 1) targeting 20% households
headed by women among the 7,000 mortgages provided; (ii) output indicator 1a focuses on
gender-responsive outreach campaigns to raise awareness and increase uptake of the housing
program among households headed by women and vulnerable women—these efforts could be
complemented by capacity-building initiatives aimed at improving refugee women’s financial
literacy and understanding of property rights; and (iii) output indicator 4b involves at least one
knowledge-sharing session on improving refugee women’s access to mortgages by enhancing
the capacity of customer-facing staff of participating local financial institutions to serve women as
a distinct category of borrowers.29




27 Program Soundness Assessment is in Program Technical and Systems Assessments (Annex 3).
28 ADB. 2025. Guidelines for Gender Mainstreaming Categories of ADB Projects.
29 Gender Assessment is in Program Technical and Systems Assessments (Annex 3).
                                                                                                  15


C.     Poverty and Social Dimensions

40.     The program supports affordable homeownership for ethnic Armenian refugees, aiming to
improve their social and economic integration, aligning with the government strategy (footnote 6).
The program will improve access to housing and promote long-term stability, asset ownership,
and improved living conditions for vulnerable groups. It is expected to generate employment in
construction, with awareness campaigns planned to promote job opportunities among refugees,
host community residents, and other vulnerable groups. However, the program also presents
several potential risks. Some beneficiaries may lose their current employment because of
relocation. To address this, the program should be linked with existing labor market initiatives and
provide employment support in the areas of relocation. Increased demand in rural housing
markets could lead to rising house prices and higher costs for construction materials and services.
Revising the value of housing certificates could mitigate this risk. Moreover, refugees relocating
from urban to rural areas may face a decline in wages; this can be mitigated through additional
support such as flexible financing options, tax incentives, or transitional assistance.

41.     An additional concern is the potential decline in access to essential services like water,
sanitation, and health care in rural areas. This risk can be mitigated by assessing the readiness
and capacity of target areas to accommodate the relocating population and ensuring that services
meet national standards. The loss of social networks and community support structures is another
potential risk. This can be mitigated by encouraging relocation within current communities where
feasible, supporting community-building activities to foster social cohesion, and connecting
beneficiaries with local social assistance services to prevent exclusion. Despite consultations with
civil society and non-government organizations, the target refugee population had limited
involvement in the design of the program. To enhance their voice and participation, it is
recommended that inclusive mechanisms be established during implementation to ensure that
beneficiaries’ needs and perspectives are reflected in decision-making.

42.      DLIs aim to ensure social inclusion, and DMF performance indicators will track progress
on inclusion. DLI 1 ensures the issuance of 7,000 vouchers while DLI 6 ensures that 7,000 refugee
households utilize them. 70% of these households are families that have members with first- or
second-group disabilities, have lost members or breadwinners, have been affected by injury, or
have three or more children. DLI 2 ensures that support programs include persons with disabilities
and families with multiple children. Families with minors should be considered a priority target for
certificate implementation and employment support programs. DLI 3 tracks the harmonization of
benefits, and DLI 10 supports integration of the refugee population into the social protection
system. DMF output indicator 1a tracks gender-responsive outreach, and DMF output indicator
4b supports learning modules on women's inclusion.

D.     Program Systems Assessments

43.      M&E system. The program’s M&E system (anchored in a structured verification
framework, independent validation, and real-time data tools) is well-positioned to support the RBL
approach. It will ensure data integrity, facilitate problem-solving, and promote transparency in
achieving the program’s development objectives. Effective implementation of THRIVE requires
timely identification and mitigation of institutional, operational, and data-related risks. Given the
results-based nature of the program, the government and ADB have adopted a phased capacity
development and risk management approach to support delivery of results and ensure
institutional readiness. One of the main risks is the limited experience of MLSA in managing large-
scale housing finance and results-based programs. Although MLSA has demonstrated strength
in delivering social assistance and digital transformation initiatives, managing a performance-
16


driven program with complex interagency coordination and financial flows requires strengthened
capacity. To mitigate this, a dedicated program implementation unit will be established within
MLSA to oversee day-to-day operations, M&E coordination, and reporting.30

44.     Fiduciary systems. The fiduciary assessment concluded that Armenia’s public financial
management system is sufficiently robust to implement the program. The budget for social
housing is included as part of the social sector budget, which represents the largest item of the
national budget. During 2019–2023, the government allocated 27% to 31% of total budget funds
to programs implemented by MLSA. The RBL program financing plan, as part of the broader
government program financing plan, is included in the approved 2025 state budget and Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework, 2026–2028. MLSA’s budget execution rate (actual versus budget)
has consistently exceeded 100%: 102% in 2019, 111% in 2020, 123% in 2021, 106% in 2022,
and 105% in 2023. The principal reason for a consistent budget execution rate above 100% has
been the growing importance of and need for expenditure on social programs, resulting in within-
year changes in financing priorities within the government (para. 5). However, given that certain
RBL program expenditure items are new, the budget execution rates cannot be directly attributed
to the program and activity levels under the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. This poses a
risk that these RBL program expenditure items may not receive adequate budget allocation in the
next financing plan, potentially hindering the achievement of the overall RBL program's intended
results within the planned budget. The fiduciary systems assessment concluded that the overall
pre-mitigation financial management risk is substantial because of (i) uncertainty in budget
allocation, (ii) the use of single budget codes for cash transfers and mortgage payments, and
(iii) MLSA’s limited experience with ADB projects and the RBL modality. To mitigate these, ADB
will support implementation of program-based budgeting and provide hands-on technical support
to MLSA and the Unified Social Service to develop robust processes and procedures, dedicated
budget codes, and an efficient reporting and monitoring system for the program.31

45.     As the program expenditure framework comprises mortgages originated through
commercial banks and cash assistance for rental programs, substantive procurement is not
expected under the program. However, if procurement beyond selection of consultants is required
during program implementation, it will fully comply with ADB’s guidelines, including provisions to
exclude debarred or suspended entities and other actions outlined in the program implementation
document. These actions will be continuously monitored and updated as needed in the progress
reports (footnotes 30 and 31). Since ADB will administer cofinancing resources from GCFF for
this program, universal procurement will be applicable.32

46.     Safeguard systems. The program is classified category C for environment, involuntary
resettlement, and Indigenous Peoples in accordance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement
(2009) and Operations Manual requirements, as program activities concern social housing
governance, housing financing mechanisms, and institutional strengthening.33 Program activities
are not anticipated to have any adverse impacts or to trigger ADB safeguard policy principles,
and a program safeguards systems assessment is not required. The program will support 7,000
mortgages for eligible households for the purchase, construction, or renovation of residential
property. The mortgages will be provided by participating local financial institutions.
The participating institutions have established environmental and social management systems

30 Program Monitoring and Evaluation System Assessment is in Program Technical and Systems Assessments (Annex

  3).
31 Program Fiduciary Systems Assessment. and Program Expenditure and Financing Assessment are in Program

  Technical and Systems Assessments (Annex 3).
32 ADB. 2015. Enhancing Operational Efficiency of the Asian Development Bank.
33 ADB. 2013. Safeguard Policy Statement. Operations Manual. OM F1.
                                                                                                               17


and mortgage application processes, which include requirements to check that local-level
approvals and permits are obtained and include prohibited investment activities lists consistent
with those of ADB. MLSA’s management information system (DLI 3) will integrate data on
mortgage application records to enable verification of eligibility for ADB financing, and there will
be a requirement to exclude activities that would be classified category A or category B for
environment or involuntary resettlement, and activities listed in the Safeguard Policy Statement’s
prohibited investment activities list.

47.     ADB does not classify Armenia as a fragile and conflict-affected situation, but it monitors
regional and domestic developments. In response to events in September 2023, ADB conducted
a contextual portfolio review (November 2023–January 2024) that noted the specific context of
regional political and societal tensions, the influx of ethnic Armenian refugees, and ongoing
challenges of access to and availability of housing for both refugee and established resident
populations. The review emphasized the need to consider how to balance access to housing
between the refugee and local resident populations, and how to create solutions that benefit
society as a whole to maintain and foster social cohesion.

48.      ADB conducted integrity due diligence on NMC, its board of directors, and senior
management. This integrity due diligence did not identify significant or potentially significant
integrity risks related to the project. ADB’s Guidelines to Prevent or Mitigate Fraud, Corruption,
and Other Prohibited Activities in Results-Based Lending for Programs were explained to and
discussed with the government, MOF, MLSA, UDC, NMC, and CBA.34

E.      Sustainability

49.     The government's commitment to the N 710-L program reflects its long-standing historical
responsibility and cultural commitment toward ethnic Armenian refugees. Key reforms, including
the development of a social housing policy and alignment of NMC with market standards, will
ensure long-term, sustainable housing solutions in Armenia. Leveraging ADB’s expertise in
seismic resilience and energy-efficient building standards will promote long-term environmental
sustainability for any newly constructed homes. Equal access for men and women underpins the
program's inclusive approach, while capacity building for ministries and financial literacy training
for refugees will help strengthen institutions and beneficiary knowledge of social housing and
housing finance.

F.      Summary of Risk Assessment

50.     Major risks and mitigating measures are summarized in Table 5 and described in detail in
the integrated risks assessment and mitigating measures section of the program implementation
document (footnote 24). Although the majority of risks identified are classified as substantial, the
mitigating measures are sufficient enough to address them, and the overall program benefits and
impacts are expected to outweigh the costs.

                        Table 5: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
 Risks                                                                  Mitigating Measures
 Results. Slow uptake of the government’s housing         Strong awareness-raising campaigns and ongoing
 program because of low beneficiary awareness,            monitoring of implementation to identify issues
 complex eligibility criteria, limited affordability,     early and take corrective actions as needed

34 ADB. 2023. Guidelines to Prevent or Mitigate Fraud, Corruption, and Other Prohibited Activities in Results-Based

  Lending for Programs. Attachment in ADB. 2025. Staff Instruction on Business Processes for Results-Based Lending
  for Programs.
18


 Risks                                                                  Mitigating Measures
 administrative delays, and lack of trust in
 government initiatives
 Fiduciary (financial management)
   1. Planning and budgeting. The allocated              1. A separate subbudget code—independent of
       budget     code    in    the    Medium-Term          the cash assistance subbudget code—will be
       Expenditure Framework combines mortgage              established for mortgage support.
       expenditure and cash assistance, thereby
       reducing transparency.
   2. Staffing capacity. The positions of chief          2. MLSA and USS will develop a recruitment plan
       accountant at MLSA and USS have been                 to fill the vacancies and, in the interim, ensure
       vacant for more than 3 years, potentially            that the quality of accounting meets the
       compromising the quality of accounting               required standards.
       processes and outcomes.
   3. Experience with ADB. Accounting and                3. ADB will provide training on its financial
       finance staff at MLSA and USS are not                management and disbursement requirements,
       familiar with ADB’s financial management             including ADB's eLearning courses on financial
       and disbursement requirements.                       management.
   4. Internal control and internal audit.
       Potential exclusion of the program in MLSA’s      4. The program will be included in the annual
       annual internal audit plan because of the            audit plan of MLSA and USS.
       decentralization of internal audit activities.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, MLSA = Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, USS = Unified Social Service.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                              IV.      ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS

51.      The government has agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the RBL program, which
are set forth in the draft loan and grant agreements. The establishment of separate budget codes
to differentiate expenses for mortgage repayments, interest repayments, and cash assistance will
be an additional condition to the effectiveness of the draft loan and grant agreements.

                                       V.      RECOMMENDATION

52.     I am satisfied that the proposed results-based loan would comply with the Articles of
Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve the
loan of $250,000,000 to Armenia for the Transformative Housing Reforms for Improved Vitality
and Empowerment Program, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, in regular terms, with interest
to be determined in accordance with ADB’s Flexible Loan Product; for a term of 27 years, including
a grace period of 10 years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in accordance
with those set forth in the draft loan agreement presented to the Board.


                                                                     Masato Kanda
                                                                     President

2 September 2025
                                                                                   Appendix            19


              DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK FOR THE PROGRAM

Impact the Program is Aligned with

Long-term, sustainable, and affordable home ownership provided for ethnic Armenian refugees with
improved conditions for social and economic integration (Programme of the Government of Armenia
[2021–2026])a
                                                         Data Sources and         Risks and Critical
Results Chain            Performance Indicators        Reporting Mechanisms         Assumptions
Outcome               By December 2031:
Enhanced              a. 7,000 mortgages originated    a.–c. MLSA audited        R: Insufficient
opportunities for     under the program, at least      financial statements,     monetary value of
ethnic Armenian       20% of which are for             semiannual reports, and   government
refugees to receive   households headed by             independent monitoring    mortgage subsidies
long-term housing     womenb,c (2024 baseline: 0)      reports; program          in relation to real
and improved social   (DLI1) [DR1, DR2, DR3]           monitoring reports and    property prices
and economic                                           completion report
conditions.           b. Support programs for                                    R: Lack of appetite
                      ethnic Armenian refugees                                   and interest of the
                      harmonized by developing                                   financial institutions
                      and implementing pilot rental                              and beneficiaries to
                      programs (2024 baseline: 0)                                participate in the
                      (DLI2) [DR1, DR2, DR3,                                     program
                      DR11]
                                                                                 R: Financial
                      c. 10% of households from                                  sustainability of the
                      refugee population with                                    program
                      homes provided under the N
                      710-L program have stable                                  A: Attractiveness of
                      sources of income (2024                                    the eligibility criteria
                      baseline: 0) [DR1, DR2, DR3,                               of the housing
                      DR10]                                                      program (Decree N
                                                                                 710-L)

                                                                                 A: World Bank
                                                                                 parallel loan under
                                                                                 its investment project
                                                                                 financing instrument
Outputs               By December 2030:
1. Improved social    1a. At least 1 successful        1a.–1c. MLSA-audited      R: Limited capacity
housing governance    gender-responsive outreach       financial statements,     of ministries and
policy framework      campaign to eligible refugee     semiannual reports, and   institutions
developed             households completedd (2024      independent monitoring
                      baseline: 0) [DR4, DR11]         reports

                      1b. Interministerial committee
                      established with at least 35%
                      female representation (2024
                      baseline: N/A) [DR4, DR11]

                      1c. Comprehensive
                      management information
                      system to harmonize
                      benefits established and
                      operationalized by MLSA
20      Appendix



                                                            Data Sources and           Risks and Critical
Results Chain             Performance Indicators          Reporting Mechanisms           Assumptions
                        (2024 baseline: N/A) (DLI3)
                        [DR2, DR11]

                        1d. Long-term housing
                        strategy to address pre-          1d. MLSA
                        existing and ongoing housing
                        needs developed and
                        adopted (2024 baseline: N/A)
                        (DLI4) [DR1, DR2, DR3,
                        DR11]

2. Resilient and        2a. Inclusive climate-resilient   2a. MLSA and Urban          R: Limited capacity
inclusive housing       or seismic-resilient building     Development Committee       of ministries and
finance systems         standards established and         semiannual reports, and     institutions
established             enhanced (2024 baseline:          independent monitoring
                        N/A) [DR1, DR3, DR4, DR5,         reports
                        DR7]

                        2b. 350 households residing       2b.–2c. MLSA
                        in energy-efficient,              semiannual reports, and
                        sustainable, climate-resilient,   independent monitoring
                        or seismic-resilient buildings    reports
                        (2024 baseline: 0) (DLI5)
                        [DR1, DR2, DR3, DR5, DR7]

                        2c. Household applications
                        processed and approved, and
                        housing certificates utilized,
                        of which at least 20%
                        comprise single women with
                        children or households
                        headed by women (2024
                        baseline: 0%) (DLI6) [DR1,
                        DR2, DR3, DR4]

3. Market regulations   3a. Regulations governing         3a. CBA regulations and     R: Limited capacity
and financing           NMC’s leverage ratios             strategic documents         of ministries and
mechanisms              revised (2024 baseline: N/A)                                  institutions
improved                [DR11, DR12]
                                                                                      R: Limited investor
                        3b. Mortgage-backed               3b.–3c. CBA and NMC         appetite
                        securitization or covered         regulations and strategic
                        bond program(s) enabled           documents
                        (2024 baseline: N/A) [DR11,
                        DR12]

                        3c. Regulation requiring
                        developers to meet minimum
                        financial covenants and
                        commitments adopted (2024
                        baseline: N/A) [DR11, DR12]

                        3d. NMC’s restructuring           3d.–3f. CBA and NMC
                        strategy to become market         regulations and strategic
                                                                                Appendix        21


                                                        Data Sources and       Risks and Critical
Results Chain          Performance Indicators        Reporting Mechanisms        Assumptions
                    oriented and support long-       documents; bond
                    term housing finance (e.g.,      prospectuses
                    through divestment from
                    CBA) adopted (2024
                    baseline: N/A) (DLI7) [DR11,
                    DR12]

                    3e. NMC capitalized (2024
                    baseline: AMD55.45 billion
                    capital) (DLI8) [DR11, DR12]

                    3f. AMD15 billion of NMC
                    bonds issued (2024 baseline:
                    AMD7 billion) (DLI9) [DR11,
                    DR12]

4. Institutions     4a. All ethnic Armenian          4a.–4b. MLSA             R: Limited capacity
strengthened, and   refugees can access existing     semiannual reports and   of ministries and
beneficiary         social protection programs for   independent monitoring   institutions
knowledge           non-refugees (2024 baseline:     reports
enhanced            N/A) (DLI10) [DR1, DR2,
                    DR3, DR11]

                    4b. At least 1 knowledge-
                    sharing session on improving
                    women’s access to finance
                    provided by NMC or MLSA to
                    participating banks under the
                    programe (2024 baseline:
                    N/A) [DR1, DR2, DR3, DR11]
22     Appendix


Key Program Actions


1. Independent verification agency
1.1 Contract the independent verification agency. The contractual agreement with the independent
    verification agency shall include a mandate for impartiality and safeguard measures to prevent
    conflicts of interest (2025).

2. Monitoring and evaluation
2.1 Develop the monitoring and evaluation framework: Define key objectives, indicators, and data
    collection methodologies, align the framework with DLIs, ADB requirements, and program goals
    (2025).
2.2 Conduct a baseline assessment to establish reference points for tracking progress (2025).
2.3 Establish standardized templates for semiannual stakeholder reports. Assign monitoring and
    evaluation focal points within each institution to ensure smooth implementation (2025).
2.4 Conduct capacity-building workshops on data collection and validation (for stakeholders), and
    results-based monitoring and reporting for (program implementation unit staff) (2025).
2.5 Establish stakeholder feedback mechanisms: Develop structured survey tools, focus group
    discussion guides, and interview protocols for engaging beneficiaries and financial institutions
    (2025).
2.6 Conduct surveys, group discussions, and interviews among beneficiaries and financial institutions
    (2026–2030).

3. Financial management
3.1 Provide training on ADB's financial management requirements, including the use of ADB's
    eLearning courses on financial management (within 2 months of loan effectiveness).
3.2 Include the RBL program in the annual internal audit plan (annually during program
    implementation).
3.3 Annual program financial statements to be audited by an independent auditor acceptable to ADB
    in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and submitted to ADB (annually within 6
    months of fiscal year-end).
3.4 Prepare program financial statements in accordance with International Public Sector Accounting
    Standards cash basis (annually during program implementation).
3.5 Ensure that the annual budget is aligned with the expenditure framework in decree N 710-L in
    terms of prioritization (2026–2030).
3.6 build capacity to undertake program-based budgeting with consistent application of budget code
    (2026–2030).
3.7 Reduce recurring external audit observations and resolve material audit observations in a timely
    manner (2026–2030).

4. Anticorruption system
4.1 Conduct targeted training for staff of MLSA, NMC, Urban Development Committee, CBA, and other
    relevant entities on ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended from time to time), RBL
    integrity guidelines, and integrity reporting obligations (2025).
4.2 Develop comprehensive guidelines, outlining key legal frameworks, institutional responsibilities,
    and reporting procedures (2025).
4.3 Establish and operationalize a dedicated program-level integrity reporting mechanism (email
    address and/or phone line), disclose it through the program management information system and
    beneficiary communications, and integrate it with the program’s grievance redress system and
    reporting flow to ADB (2025).

5.    Environmental and social safeguards
5.1   Exclude activities that may result in significant adverse impacts (classified category A or category
      B for environment or involuntary resettlement) and activities listed on ADB’s Safeguard Policy
      Statement (2009) prohibited investment activities list (2025–2030).
                                                                                              Appendix         23


 5.2   Organize regular workshops, focus groups, and feedback sessions with refugee populations and
       vulnerable households, ensuring inclusive and gender-responsive approaches (2026–2030).

 Key Program Actions

 5.3   Organize informational sessions in local communities, focusing on educating beneficiaries about
       their rights and available financial assistance options (2026–2030).
 5.4   Establish clear guidelines detailing the process for receiving, acknowledging, assessing, and
       resolving grievances (2025).
 5.5   Set up and publicize accessible grievance submission channels, including a dedicated hotline,
       email, online portal, and in-person complaint desks (2025).
 5.6   Develop a grievance database to systematically track complaints, resolutions, and trends (2025).
 5.7   Social services staff training: Retrain social service workers and social workers to support people
       individually using trauma-informed methods, enabling them to make informed decisions about the
       program (2026–2030).
 5.8   Nongovernment sector engagement: Explore opportunities to involve nongovernment social
       service workers through delegation or other mechanisms, considering the insufficient workforce in
       state social services (2026–2030).
 5.9   Banking sector capacity building: Organize capacity development training for bank loan consultants
       and/or engage competent social workers to provide counseling for trauma-affected individuals so
       that they can effectively interact with banks (2026–2030).

 6.   Gender mainstreaming
 6.1  Organize gender equality training for interministerial committee members to enhance their
      understanding of gender-responsive housing policies and practices (2026–2030).
 6.2 Organize trainings/workshops for architects and construction companies focusing on universal
      design and housing solutions (such as lighting, secure public spaces, and childcare-friendly
      environments) (2026–2030).
 6.3 Develop targeted training programs forparticipating banks focused on gender mainstreaming in
      housing finance (2026–2030).
      Examples of training that could be relevant for originating the portion of household mortgages
      above the valuation threshold of the program and, therefore, not covered by the government may
      include (i) building the capacity of financial institutions in alternative credit assessment models that
      recognize informal income and self-employment—common among women; and (ii) introducing
      flexible repayment plans or adaptable installment schedules to better serve creditworthy
      households headed by women with irregular incomes).
 6.4 Appoint a dedicated gender focal person at MLSA to offer tailored, gender-sensitive guidance on
      housing finance, ensuring inclusive access for all women, especially single mothers, women with
      disabilities, and other vulnerable groups (2026).
 6.5 Conduct targeted, gender-responsive outreach campaigns to raise awareness about the program,
      highlighting opportunities for single mothers and households headed by women to apply for support
      (2026–2030).
 6.6 Deliver targeted capacity building to female refugees and households headed by women in
      financial literacy and property rights and ownership (2026–2030).
 Financing Plan

 Total program financing (2026–2030): $880,000,000
 Government of Armenia: $613,550,000
 Asian Development Bank: $250,000,000 (loan)
 Global Concessional Financing Facility: $16,450,000 (grant) full administration
A = assumption, ADB = Asian Development Bank, CBA = Central Bank of Armenia, DLI = disbursement-linked indicator,
DR = development result, MLSA = Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, N/A = not applicable, NMC = National Mortgage
Company, R = risk, RBL = results-based lending.
a Government of Armenia. 2021. Programme of the Government of the Republic of Armenia (2021–2026).
24      Appendix


b Mortgage origination is the formal approval of a mortgage for subsequent disbursement to the borrower to finance
  the purchase of a property. Under the program, the mortgage is considered originated when it has been approved
  by MLSA and the participating bank.
c Households headed by women are households where either no adult men are present (because of divorce,

  separation, migration, nonmarriage, or widowhood) or where the men, although present, do not contribute to the
  household income because of illness or disability, old age or other incapacity (but not because of unemployment).
  The head is the primary decision-maker responsible for the household’s financial support and overall livelihood.
d Successful gender-responsive outreach comprises effectively reaching at least 90% of the refugee population and

  supporting both women and men by addressing their specific needs and access barriers. It actively promotes gender
  equality in housing through inclusive communication, gender-sensitive targeting, legal support, and application
  processes for women with care and mobility constraints. It should also aim to enhance women’s awareness of
  financial literacy and strengthen their understanding of property rights.
e Knowledge-sharing session may include women’s inclusion in learning modules, which could cover key topics such

  as gender equality or equity principles, serving refugee women as a distinct category of borrowers, or gender-
  responsive communication strategies for customer-facing staff. The modules aim to build institutional awareness and
  capacity to improve the inclusivity, accessibility, and responsiveness of financial services for refugee women,
  particularly those from vulnerable groups.
Contributions to ADB’s Development Results and Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals
A summary of the RBL program contributions to ADB's development results and alignment with Sustainable
Development Goals are presented in the Contributions to Development Results page in eOperations. This information
may be requested from the program team.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
