Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




PUBLIC

Project Number: 58135-001
March 2026




Proposed Financial Intermediary Loan and
Technical Assistance Grant
Otbasy Bank Joint-Stock Company (JSC)
Promoting Inclusive and Green Housing Finance
Project
(Guaranteed by the Republic of Kazakhstan)




This is a redacted version of the document approved by ADB's Board of Directors. The document
excludes information that is subject to exceptions to disclosure set forth in ADB's Access to
Information Policy.
                    CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                     (as of 11 December 2025)

                  Currency unit      –     tenge (T)
                         T1.00       =     $0.0019
                         $1.00       =     T518.47




                          ABBREVIATIONS

ADB    –     Asian Development Bank
ESG    –     environmental, social, and governance
ESMS   –     environmental and social management system
GDP    –     gross domestic product
JSC    –     joint-stock company
m2     –     square meter
NPL    –     nonperforming loan
SDG    –     Sustainable Development Goal
TA     –     technical assistance




                                  NOTE

           In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars.
Vice-President         Yingming Yang, Office of the Vice-President (South, Central and
                          West Asia)
Director General       Leah Gutierrez, Central West Regional Department (CWRD)
Directors              Mohd Sani Mohd Ismail, Director, Finance Sector Office, Sectors
                          Department 3 (SD3-FIN)
                       Utsav Kumar, Country Director, Kazakhstan Resident Mission
                          (KARM), CWRD

Project team leaders   Giacomo Giannetto, Principal Financial Sector Specialist, SD3-FIN
                       Arystan Galiyev, Senior Project Officer (Natural Resources and
                            Agriculture), KARM, CWRD
Project team members   Altynai Abdyldaeva, Gender Officer (Gender and Development),
                            Gender Equality Division, Climate Change and Sustainable
                            Development Department (CCSD)
                       Lilia Aleksanyan, Senior Country Economist, Office of the Director
                            General, CWRD
                       Mel Altoveros; Procurement Specialist; Procurement Division (PFP);
                            Procurement, Portfolio, and Financial Management Department
                            (PPFD)
                       Keecia Bianca Binaohan, Senior Project Assistant, SD3-FIN
                       Gaukhar Biyekenova, Senior Treasury Specialist, Client Solutions
                            Division, Treasury Department
                       Andrew Calixto, Integrity Officer, Prevention and Compliance
                            Division (AIPD), Office of Anticorruption and Integrity (OAI)
                       Maria Cynthia Castillejos, Principal Financial Sector Officer, SD3-
                            FIN
                       Maria Lorena C. Cleto, Senior Safeguards Specialist (Social), Office
                            of Safeguards (OSFG)
                       Nicole Andrea Cuento, Project Assistant, SD3-FIN
                       Julian Alexander Doczi, Senior Procurement Specialist, PFP, PPFD
                       Oliver Domagas, Principal Financial Control Specialist, Loan and
                            Grant Disbursement Section, Controller’s Department
                       Abhishek Hegde, Private Sector Development Specialist, Private
                            Sector Development Unit, CWRD
                       Feruza Insavalieva, Senior Safeguards Officer, OSFG
                       Samir Ismayilov, Financial Sector Specialist, SD3-FIN
                       Elmira Izmaganova, Project Officer (Financial Sector), KARM,
                            CWRD
                       Okju Jeong; Climate Change Specialist; Climate Change,
                            Resilience, and Environment Cluster; CCSD
                       Ruslan Kurmanbekov, Senior Investment Specialist, Private Sector
                            Financial Institutions Division, Private Sector Operations
                            Department
                       Oksana Nazmieva, Principal Financial Management Specialist,
                            Financial Management Division, PPFD
                       Ma. Roserillan S. Robidillo, Safeguards Specialist, OSFG
                       Elsa Ronterre, Integrity Specialist, AIPD, OAI
                       Aida Satylganova, Senior Safeguards (Social), OSFG
                       Collette You-Jung Shin, Senior Counsel, Office of the General
                            Counsel
                           Helen Steward, Principal Markets Development Advisory Specialist,
                              Special Initiatives and Funds, Office of Markets Development
                              and Public–Private Partnership
                           Gohar Tadevosyan, Senior Social Development Specialist, Human
                              and Social Development Sector Office, SD3
                           Armine Yedigaryan, Safeguards Specialist (Environment), OSFG
Peer reviewer              Shigehiro Shinozaki, Senior Economist, Regional Cooperation and
                              Integration Division, Economic Research and Development
                              Impact Department




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                       CONTENTS

                                                                Page
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                1
II.    THE PROJECT                                                 1
       A.   Rationale                                              1
       B.   Project Description                                    4
       C.   ADB Value Addition                                     7
       D.   Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan              7
       E.   Implementation Arrangements                            9
III.   TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE                                        9
IV.    DUE DILIGENCE                                              10
       A.    Safeguards                                           10
       B.    Economic and Financial Viability                     10
       C.    Gender Equality                                      11
       D.    Poverty and Social Dimensions                        12
       E.    Procurement, Financial Management, and Integrity     12
       F.    Sustainability                                       13
       G.    Summary of Risk Assessment                           13
V.     ASSURANCES                                                 13
VI.    RECOMMENDATION                                             14

APPENDIX
Design and Monitoring Framework                                   15

ANNEXES
1.   Legal Agreements
2.   Safeguard Documents and Plans
3.   Economic and Financial Analysis
4.   Technical Assistance Report
5.   Climate Change Assessment
6.   Gender Assessment and Action Plan
                                                                                        Project Classification Information Status: Complete




                                                  PROJECT AT A GLANCE

1. Project Data
   Project number 58135-001                                        Project name                   Promoting Inclusive and Green
                                                                                                  Housing Finance Project
   Country             Kazakhstan                                  Executing or                   Otbasy Bank JSC
   Borrower            Republic of Kazakhstan                      implementing agency
   Sector office       Finance Sector Office                       Geographical location Country
   Sector(s)           ü Finance                                   Subsector(s)          Housing finance
   Country             https://www.adb.org/Documents/Linke Portfolio at a Glance                  https://www.adb.org/Documents/Linke
   economic            dDocs/?id=58135-001-CEI                                                    dDocs/?id=58135-001-PortAtaGlance
   indicators
   Strategic Focus ü Resilience and empowerment                    Sustainable                    SDG 1.4
   Area            Climate action                                  Development Goals              SDG 5.a
                                                                                                  SDG 13.2, 13.3, 13.a

   Lending             Development financing institution (DFI)
   modality
2. Financing
    ADB Financing                                                                             Amount ($ million)
    Regular ordinary capital resources loan                                                       173.59
    Cofinancing                                                                               Amount ($ million)
    None                                                                                            0.00
    Counterpart                                                                               Amount ($ million)
    Government                                                                                     96.00
    Others                                                                                         50.00
             Total                                                                                319.59
    ADB Climate Financing
    ADB
       Adaptation                                                                                      2.46
       Mitigation                                                                                     26.12
    Cofinancing (ADB-administered)
       Adaptation                                                                                      0.00
       Mitigation                                                                                      0.00
                Total                                                                                 28.58
   Note: An attached technical assistance will be financed on a grant basis by the Technical Assistance Special Fund in the amount
   of $500,000.
   Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar
3. Climate Action
   Absolute GHG emissions (tCO2e per year)                                                    0
   Relative GHG emissions (tCO2e per year)                                                    -9303
   Climate change risk on the project without adaptation measures                             Medium
   Disaster Risk Management,          Not Applicable
   Environment and Nature
4. Private Sector Development
   Private capital mobilized ($):
   PSD classification:                       Basic-PSD
5. Safeguards
   Category            Environment:                             ¨ A ¨ B ¨ C þ FI
                       Involuntary resettlement:                ¨ A ¨ B ¨ C þ FI
                       Indigenous peoples:                      ¨ A ¨ B ¨ C þ FI
6. Gender Equality
     Category           þ Gender equality objective (GEN)     ¨ Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
                        ¨ Some gender elements (SGE)          ¨ Indirect gender benefits (IGB)
 7. Poverty Reduction and Inclusion
    Category        ¨ Poverty reduction and inclusion focus (PIF)
                    ¨ Poverty reduction and inclusion elements (PIE)
                    þ Indirect poverty reduction and inclusion (IPI)
 8. Regional Cooperation and Public Goods
    Category       ¨ Pillar 1 ¨ Pillar 2 ¨ Pillar 3 þ Not applicable
 9. Digital Transformation
    Category         ¨ Level 1 ¨ Level 2 þ Level 3 ¨ Level 4 ¨ Not applicable
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.                                    Generated Date: 22-Jan-2026 15:13:37 PM
                                           I.       THE PROPOSAL

1.     I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan to
Otbasy Bank Joint-Stock Company (JSC), to be guaranteed by the Republic of Kazakhstan, for
the Promoting Inclusive and Green Housing Finance Project. The report also describes proposed
technical assistance (TA) for Support to Promoting Inclusive and Green Housing Finance, and if
the Board approves the proposed loan, I, acting under the authority delegated to me by the Board,
approve the TA.

2.      The proposed financial intermediation loan will promote affordable residential mortgage
loans to women and the development and funding of benchmark green mortgage products for the
low- to moderate-income population in Kazakhstan.1 It addresses a gap in long-term mortgage
financing—in particular, the absence of green mortgage programs—that the private sector is
unable to meet.

                                            II.      THE PROJECT

A.       Rationale

3.       Access to finance to develop sustainable, green, and affordable housing is lacking in
Kazakhstan. The country’s housing problems are compounded by rising housing prices,
insufficient support for financing energy efficiency and modernization of old housing stock, and a
lack of financing for green, energy-efficient housing.

4.      Inadequate housing stock development. A priority of Kazakhstan’s strategic national
development plan is to ensure the provision of quality, sustainable, green, and affordable
housing.2 Based on the country’s housing policy, while Kazakhstan aims to construct 111 million
square meters (m2) of housing by 2030 at a rate of 18.5 million m2 per year, only 15.5 million m2
was delivered annually from 2018 to 2023 (footnote 2). The delivery of finance for housing creation
and ownership is inefficient and costly, in part because of an underdeveloped domestic long-term
debt market that limits the availability of funds to match the tenor needed to support banks’
affordable mortgage funding. Although government bonds may have maturities up to 10-year
range, corporate bond tenors typically span no more than 3 years, indicating a gap in the tenor of
financing needed for mortgages out to 15 to 20 years (at a minimum). Although construction has
increased in recent years (except for a slight decline in 2022), population growth and aging
housing stock have contributed to a significant housing shortage. According to the Ministry of
Industry and Construction, more than 651,960 citizens of Kazakhstan are on the waiting list for
housing as of April 2024 under state programs. This number increases by about 10% every year.

5.      Low supply of affordable housing. Housing prices have increased substantially since
2008, not only due to strong increases in demand from rising income and population, but also
because various government programs that offered subsidized interest rates on mortgages and
the ability of individuals to use excess pension fund savings for housing acquisition since 2021
have further stimulated housing demand and prices. These factors have contributed to a
construction boom in the higher-priced housing segment and further contributed to speculative
price increases. The year-on-year increase in housing prices reached a record high of 75% in

1
  The proposed loan is aligned with (i) the priorities of ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive,
  Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific, and the Sustainable Development Goals, specifically in addressing
  climate change; (ii) ADB. 2023. Country Partnership Strategy: Kazakhstan, 2023–2027—Accelerating Resilient and
  Sustainable Growth for All; and (iii) ADB. 2024. Strategy 2030 Midterm Review.
2 Government of Kazakhstan. 2024. National Development Plan until 2029.
2


May 2022.3 Mortgage payments as a percentage of income in Kazakhstan are higher than in most
European countries and Central Asian upper-middle-income countries (e.g., Azerbaijan,
Georgia).4 Housing prices continue to rise, reducing affordability, particularly for women, low- to
moderate-income groups, and the rural population.

6.       Lack of green housing financing options. More than 80% of the housing stock was built
during the Soviet era. This stock suffers from high energy consumption, poor thermal insulation,
a lack of metering, the absence of thermostatic valves and consumption regulation, and
insufficient management of heating units. The average energy consumed for heating in buildings
is about 250–300 kilowatt-hours (kWh)/m2, which is considerably higher than the global average
of 50 kWh/m2. About 34% of total energy demand is taken up by residential buildings. Thus, there
is a need for energy-efficient green housing in Kazakhstan. However, the lack of availability of
green mortgage financing and validated green technology options for housing projects inhibit
developers’ ability to reduce greenhouse gas emissions at a reasonable cost.

7.       Nascent green bond market. The country's green bond market is in its infancy. The Asian
Development Bank (ADB) issued the first green bonds on the Kazakhstan Stock Exchange in
2020. 5 A few issuances by other entities have been distributed on the Astana International
Exchange. As of November 2023, a total of T112.9 billion (about $250 million) in green bonds
have been issued in Kazakhstan, with ADB being the largest issuer. This compares with about
$27 billion outstanding bond issuances in the corporate market alone, while no sovereign green
bonds have been issued. Elements that inhibit the development of the green bond market include
the underdevelopment of the domestic long-term bond market, the relatively high costs of
obtaining green certifications and opinions of projects and assets, limited bankable green projects
to be financed, and insufficient awareness and clarity of the essentials of green financial products.
This further limits the availability of green finance for affordable green housing.

8.      Inadequate supply of mortgage financing. The mortgage finance sector in Kazakhstan
is underdeveloped, with mortgage loans equaling only about 5% of gross domestic product (GDP)
as of the end of 2023, compared with about 7% in Uzbekistan and about 17% in
Georgia. 6 Historically, nonperforming loans (NPLs) experienced by commercial banks during
financial crises in Kazakhstan in 2008, 2015, and 2020 led banks to limit mortgage financing
mainly to wealthier clients, leaving out lower-income segments. Therefore, deficiencies in the
quality and availability of housing stock are felt disproportionately by the poor.

9.      Inadequate access to suitable and affordable finance by women. Access to mortgage
finance is even more limited for women borrowers, who face higher requirements (on average)
for obtaining mortgage loans because of a significant gender pay gap (women earn 25.2% less
than men on average) and their higher reliance on self-employment (particularly in rural areas).
Additional factors affecting women’s access to mortgage financing include limited credit histories
and cultural norms. The result is that women comprised only 31% of homeowners in the country
in 2023, while accounting for 51% of the population.

10.    Thus, the binding constraints can be summarized as (i) inadequate access to long-term,
affordable mortgage finance for women and low-to moderate-income households; (ii) insufficient

3 CEIC Data. Kazakhstan House Prices Growth (accessed 9 May 2024).
4
  Numbeo. Mortgage as a Percentage of Income by Country 2024 (accessed 9 May 2024). Mortgage payments as a
  percentage of income in the country are 29th highest out of 104 economies surveyed.
5 ADB. 2020. ADB Issues Green Bonds in Kazakhstan Tenge. News release. 17 November.
6 Mortgage Refinancing Company of Uzbekistan and National Bank of Georgia; Helgi Library. Mortgage Loans (As %

  of GDP) in Kazakhstan (accessed 9 May 2024).
                                                                                                                          3


mortgage products that are tailored to women’s income profiles and housing needs; and (iii)
underdeveloped green mortgage products and market. These constraints correspond with the
design and outputs of the project (paras. 18–20).

11.      Justification for financial intermediation loan modality. A sovereign financial
intermediation loan will allow underserved target groups to access affordable housing finance,
immediately improve their economic well-being, and raise awareness and understanding of green
housing standards and green mortgage lending. The project will develop lending through a
framework for green mortgages that can be adapted across the finance sector. A sovereign
financial intermediation loan is appropriate given clear market failures in Kazakhstan’s housing
finance sector, where private sector financing on a commercial basis is insufficient to meet the
long-term, affordable, and green housing needs of low- to moderate-income households. The
modality will enhance the financial system's outreach, efficiency, and stability and support
sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction driven by the private sector. Structural
constraints with limited availability of long-tenor local currency funding, nascent green mortgage
and bond markets, and high perceived risks of low- to moderate-income households have resulted
in a suboptimal supply of private mortgage finance, particularly for green housing. The modality
enables targeted public sector intervention to address these gaps by channeling market-based
resources through a sound, financial intermediary, while complementing and not crowding out
private sector financing. The modality will support the development of a green mortgage bond
market that can attract longer-term, lower-cost funding for banks in that it will enable the private
finance segment to offer the first green mortgages in the country, while also incentivizing
developers to build and provide green housing. Otbasy Bank JSC’s offering of green mortgages
will also expand its product line into a new and viable area that not only helps service a broader
range of clients, but also diversifies its asset base, thereby reducing risk.

12.     Housing is a priority in Kazakhstan’s development strategy until 2030 to expand housing
access.7 Several government housing initiatives aim to create conditions to expand housing and
access to affordable finance. 8 Programs include rental schemes, construction savings plans,
mortgage interest rate subsidies, and support to private sector developers to stimulate
construction. The programs target vulnerable groups with limitations on maximum loan amount,
income, and property ownership. The Kazakhstan Housing Company (KHC), fully owned by
National Management Holding Baiterek JSC, is a key entity backing the government’s goals in
affordable housing. KHC backs private sector developers working with local municipalities to build
affordable public housing through the purchase of bonds issued by municipalities funding housing
development and by providing developers with credit guarantees, for a fee, enabling them to
obtain construction finance. KHC also operates a social rental program through housing they own.

13.   Otbasy Bank JSC was established in accordance with the Law on Housing Construction
Savings of 2013 and is under supervision by the Agency for Regulation and Development of the

7   Government of Kazakhstan. 1997. Strategy of Kazakhstan’s Development until 2030.
8   There are three major state mortgage financing programs: (i) the 7–20–25 housing program (7% interest rate, 20%
    down payment, up to 25-year term) is currently phasing out with only T100 billion annual budget from 2023 (down
    from T1 trillion in previous years, or more than 70% of the current mortgage portfolio of the banking sector), with
    funding provided from the state budget through commercial banks; (ii) the OTAU program (formerly 9–20–25 program),
    operated by the Otbasy Bank, funds mortgages primarily for young families with a minimum savings of T1 million in
    Otbasy Bank, with terms that are more market oriented than those of 7–20–25 in terms of minimum interest rate and
    maturity (a minimum 9% interest rate and maturity up to 19 years); total funding allocated for the program is T150
    billion; and (iii) the NAURYZ program, launched in May 2024, which is the largest program, with T1.7 trillion in funding
    subsidized by the state budget, with lending terms close to those of the market (7% interest rate for vulnerable groups
    and 9% for all other groups).
4


Financial Market of Kazakhstan. Since May 2013, Otbasy Bank JSC has been fully government-
owned through Baiterek. Its mandate is to provide the population with equal access to the housing
savings system, enabling every family to own a home. It is one of the main operators of the state
housing programs and thus has continuous government support. It has a mandate to provide
mortgages for affordable housing to the low- to moderate-income and vulnerable population
segments, including women. The project is aligned with the government’s strategy to prioritize
housing finance and sustainable, green, and affordable housing development through various
strategic plans and three major state mortgage financing programs (footnote 8).

14.    The project builds on the closed Promoting Gender Equality in Housing Finance Project,
which focused on providing women with affordable housing finance to acquire and/or renovate
housing.9 It expands upon the previous objective by ensuring that housing acquired by women
and target groups meets certain green and energy-efficiency standards, thereby contributing to
more sustainable housing. The project performance has been successful, while the demand
remains high.

15.     Key lessons from related projects. Key lessons from the closed Promoting Gender
Equality in Housing Finance Project were that it imposed low target income levels on
subborrowers and tightly restricted the regional locations of the homes acquired under subloans,
making it difficult to find qualified subborrowers. The current loan sets household income at levels
where a sufficient number of target clients in the low- to moderate-income groups are available.
The current loan also does not restrict the location where women may acquire housing. In this
way, it supports their access to broader economic opportunities. The successful Uzbekistan
Affordable Rural Housing Program, affirmed that having a gender focus and social equity criteria
were instrumental in empowering groups that helped enhance credibility and reduced risks.10 The
Kyrgyz Republic Enhancing Housing Finance for Affordable and Energy-Efficient Housing Project
not only identified the need to provide mortgage finance to women but raised the importance of
backing the development of a green mortgage market for low- to-moderate income households
that will further incentivize the construction of energy efficiency housing in the country.11 All the
projects reflect that future housing finance projects should integrate climate resilience, financial
literacy, and private sector participation for sustainability.

B.         Project Description

16.      The project is aligned with the following impact: gender equity promoted, and sustainable
economic growth and green development supported (footnotes 2 and 7).12 The project will have
the following outcome: acquisition of energy-efficient, sustainable, green, and affordable housing
units by women and low- to moderate-income groups increased, and the development of a green
mortgage market supported.13 The outputs are (i) access to housing finance by women and low-
to moderate-income groups of the population expanded, (ii) residential mortgage loan product
targeting women borrowers designed, and (iii) development of green mortgage products for
housing acquisition and renovation incentivized.


9 Independent Evaluation Department. 2025. Validation Report: Promoting Gender Equality in Housing Finance Project

     in Kazakhstan. ADB; It was closed in December 2023 and rated successful.
10 ADB. Uzbekistan: Affordable Rural Housing Program was closed in June 2024 and rated successful.
11
   ADB. Kyrgyz Republic: Enhancing Housing Finance for Affordable and Energy-Efficient Housing Project was
   approved in September 2025.
12 Government of Kazakhstan. 2013. Concept for Transition of the Republic of Kazakhstan to Green Economy; and

   Otbasy Bank. 2024. Development Strategy of Otbasy Bank JSC for 2024–2033.
13 The design and monitoring framework is in the Appendix.
                                                                                                  5


17.     A key focus for developing the private sector market is that the project creates a green
mortgage finance framework to serve as a benchmark for the banking sector, generating
standardized and sustainable green mortgage products for low- to moderate-income households.
Otbasy Bank JSC’s green mortgage products will serve as a demonstration and encourage the
development of similar products by private commercial banks. At the same time, they will help
position Otbasy Bank JSC as a strong leader in backing green mortgages and green housing,
leading practical efforts supporting the country’s climate goals. The offering of green mortgage
finance will also incentivize private sector developers to prioritize building new housing that is
affordable and has lower carbon emissions and energy use, while also helping address the lack
of sustainable and reasonably priced housing in the country.

18.      Output 1: Access to housing finance by women and low- to moderate-income group
of the population expanded. The output will (i) address the gap in long-term funding available
in the local capital market for Otbasy Bank JSC by releasing the proceeds of local currency gender
bond issuances by ADB for subloans to qualified women and low- to moderate-income group
subborrowers for the purpose of providing long-term, fixed-rate mortgages in local currency to
acquire or renovate housing; (ii) underwrite mortgages for at least 2,000 women and/or people in
low- to moderate-income group; and (iii) conduct outreach to housing developers and
stakeholders to apprise them of the availability of mortgage funding targeting women. The
expansion of mortgage finance for women and low- to moderate-income groups will enable these
individuals to improve their economic security and well-being by helping these target groups
secure suitable and more sustainable housing across the country, wherever they deem to have
the best economic, social, health, and educational prospects.

19.     Output 2: Residential mortgage loan product targeting women borrowers designed.
The output will (i) assess the specific needs of women in low- to moderate-income group for
housing finance in both rural and urban areas; (ii) create a mortgage structure with defined
underwriting criteria to be applied for subloan issuance; and (iii) identify energy efficiency and
green housing criteria that can be included in the underwriting criteria, ensuring that women
acquire more climate-sustainable housing. The design of a new mortgage product targeted to
low- to moderate-income women will be refined to better support the specific needs of women
across the country. Not only will this enable a broader client base, but it will also improve the
capacity of women and households led by women to acquire mortgages. The design also backs
Otbasy Bank JSC’s initial efforts to incorporate energy efficiency and quality considerations into
housing acquired through its mortgage offerings.

20.     Output 3: Development of green mortgage products for housing acquisition and
renovation incentivized. The output will (i) assess impediments to the availability of green
mortgage finance in Kazakhstan; (ii) introduce a comprehensive program for Otbasy Bank JSC,
enabling the expansion of green finance products covering the processes and criteria required for
a sustainable green mortgage lending program and the expansion of green mortgage product
offerings for housing purchases and renovation; (iii) prepare a framework that incorporates criteria
to expand the provision, standardization, and availability of green mortgage finance to incentivize
adoption across the finance sector, and perform outreach to banking, private, and public sector
stakeholders to advise them on implementation; and (iv) devise a mechanism for the introduction
of climate-sensitive mortgage products for women. The development of green mortgage and
renovation products and the associated market aligns with the sustainability goals of the country
and will spur investment in climate-resilient housing. It also supports private sector development
by raising the private sector’s understanding of green housing standards and green mortgages,
incentivizing developers to construct green housing, and incentivizing banks to offer
green mortgages.
6



21.     The maximum tenor for mortgages will be 19 years for the purchase of residential property
and 10 years for renovation. The maximum mortgage loan will be T50.0 million, and the maximum
renovation loan will be T15.0 million. Subloan interest rates may be set up to 400 basis points
above the interest rate of ADB’s loan rate. The maximum net monthly household income of
subborrowers is T1.250 million during the first year of the project, starting from the date of loan
effectiveness, increasing to T1.500 million from the start of the second year. The debt-to-income
ratio required will be according to the policy of Otbasy Bank JSC. It is estimated that funds may
be recycled up to two times during the life of the ADB loan.

22.    For women’s mortgages, eligible subborrowers must be women of full legal age, and the
property shall be occupied by and registered in the name of the female owner or in the names of
both owners if one is a woman. The minimum down payment required will be 20% in Astana and
Almaty and 15% in all other regions based on the respective purchase prices. The residential
property to be purchased must have been built no earlier than 2016 or under construction.
Property for renovation may have been built at any time, and loans will have a maximum loan-to-
value of 60%.

23.      Specifically for the green mortgage program, the residential property is to be occupied by
the owner. The minimum down payment required will be 20% of the purchase price. The property
to be purchased must meet the “green standard” of construction as certified by OMIR (a minimum
of a silver level) or other comparable green standard levels as per the Kazakhstan National Green
taxonomy.14

24.      This green residential property can be an existing property, new, or under construction.
Property to be renovated must be occupied by the owner. Women’s mortgages designed under
the project will expand upon Otbasy Bank JSC’s existing mortgage offers for women by including
minimum energy-efficiency class standards and a maximum age limit for the housing acquired to
ensure that the most current building standards are utilized. The small green mortgage product,
offered previously by Otbasy Bank JSC, did not conform properly with international standards for
climate finance and the national green taxonomy; this project addresses that gap. Consistent with
the approach taken by Otbasy Bank JSC in the closed Promoting Gender Equality in Housing
Finance Project (footnote 9), the bank may contribute a portion of its internal funding to create a
blended cost of funds to back the project. Funds will come from retained earnings and available
liquidity on a case-by-case basis at the time of each bond issuance and drawdown. The intention
is to enable a more sustainable blended cost of funds that considers market conditions and the
strategic objectives, performance, and liquidity conditions of Otbasy Bank JSC.

25.    The project is aligned with ADB’s strategic focus areas of (i) climate action (climate
adaptation and mitigation); and (ii) resilience and empowerment (poverty reduction and inclusion,
and gender equality). It supports the following Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (i) SDG
1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere (1.4); (ii) SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower
all women and girls (5.a); and (iii) SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its
impacts (13.2, 13.3, 13.a). The project is aligned with the following pillars of ADB’s country
partnership strategy for Kazakhstan, 2023–2027: Pillar 1—Address climate change impacts and
support decarbonization; and Pillar 2—Promote inclusive economic growth.

14 OMIR (meaning “life” in Kazak) green building standards created by the Kazakhstan Green Building Council, adapted

    from the World Green Building Council and consistent with the national green taxonomy. Decree of the Government
    of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 996 on Taxonomy of Green Projects to be Financed through Green Bonds and
    Green Loans, adopted on 31 December 2021.
                                                                                                                 7



C.        ADB Value Addition

26.      The project complements government housing initiatives to expand access to affordable
housing finance for vulnerable groups and ADB’s broader engagement in Kazakhstan’s finance
sector, including the proposed Fiscal Governance and Financial Sector Reforms Program
(subprogram 2). Together, these initiatives help mitigate financing gaps and structural constraints
related to banking sector resilience, governance, and capital market development that have
limited long-term mortgage and green bond financing. ADB is the only external funding source for
Otbasy Bank JSC’s green mortgage lending and affordable housing finance aimed at women or
low- to moderate-income groups. Other development partners have provided only nominal
advisory services that have not resulted in ensuing loan projects. ADB’s loan provides liquidity
and expertise to expand lending to women, enabling increased economic opportunities as well as
incentivizing and leading the development of green mortgage finance in the country. ADB will
issue local currency green and gender bonds that will demonstrate viable funding mechanisms
for inclusive and green housing finance, support development of the domestic bond market, and
enable Otbasy Bank JSC to access such funding independently over time.15 The attached TA will
build the capacity of Otbasy Bank JSC to effectively assess and mitigate climate risk and integrate
comprehensive environmental, social, and governance (ESG) risk management practices.

D.        Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan

27.       The project is estimated to cost $319.6 million (Table 1).

28.    The ADB loan will finance expenditures related to the qualified mortgage subloans to be
issued by Otbasy Bank JSC to qualified subborrowers. No works, equipment, or consulting
services are supported.
                             Table 1: Summary Cost Estimates
                                         ($ million)
Item                                                                                                  Amounta
A. Base Cost
    1. Output 1: Access to housing finance by women and low- to moderate-income
       group of the population expanded                                                                  115.9
    2. Output 2: Residential mortgage loan product targeting women borrowers
       designed                                                                                            0.0
    3. Output 3: Development of green mortgage products for housing acquisition and
       renovation incentivized                                                                           115.9
               Subtotal (A)b                                                                             231.7
B. Contingenciesc                                                                                          0.0
C. Financial Charges During Implementationd                                                               87.9
                                    Total (A+B+C)                                                        319.6
a Local taxes will be borne by the subborrowers.
b Figures reflect rounding
c Physical and price contingencies and a provision for exchange rate fluctuation are not relevant for the financial
  intermediation loan.
d Includes interest, commitment, and other charges on all financing sources.

Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.




15 ADB issued four Tenge bonds, three in the domestic market that were the first gender bonds were listed on the

    Kazakhstan Stock Exchange. The bonds had maturities that matched the bullet repayments of the ADB loan and
    were raised at rates less than those of equivalent government bonds, the savings of which were passed onto the
    subborrowers.
8


29.     Otbasy Bank JSC has requested a regular loan of T90 billion from ADB’s ordinary capital
resources to help finance the project.16 The loan, to be guaranteed by the Republic of Kazakhstan,
will have a term of up to 19 years; an interest rate determined in accordance with ADB’s local
currency loan product; a commitment charge of 0.15% per year; and such other terms and
conditions set forth in the draft loan and guarantee agreements. The average maturity is 19 years,
and the maturity premium payable to ADB is 0.50% per year. The loan is expected to be disbursed
in tranches with a bullet repayment structure, but in not more than three disbursements per year,
and with no less than 90 days interval between disbursements. Each disbursement shall be for
amounts of not less than T9 billion and not more than T20 billion, in multiples of T1,000, and
subject to ADB’s ability to execute the required funding arrangement. Disbursements above
T20 billion or in intervals of less than 90 days or exceeding 3 per year will be at ADB’s sole
discretion. Disbursement requests linked to either green or women’s mortgages must be
segregated. The loan will be repaid in full at or before the final maturity of 19 years following the
date of loan approval.

30.     The summary financing plan is in Table 2. ADB will finance the expenditures related to
Otbasy Bank JSC’s underwriting of mortgages for women and for low- to moderate-income groups
of the population.

                                    Table 2: Summary Financing Plan
                                                ($ million)
                                                                     Amount                Share of Total
Source                                                              ($ million)                 (%)
Asian Development Bank
    Ordinary Capital Resources (regular loan)a                        173.59                    54.30
Subborrowersb                                                          50.00                    15.60
Government of Kazakhstanc                                              96.00                    30.00
                            Total                                     319.59                    100.0
a The amount of $173.59 million is equivalent to T90 billion (as of 11 December 2025).
b The amount comprises the downpayments of mortgagors estimated at 20% of the total housing acquisition cost and

  the interest margin charges of subborrowers on their subloans during loan implementation.
c Includes interest, commitment, and other financial charges during loan implementation and regulatory capital

  required to cover subloan risk assets.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

31.     Total climate finance for the project amounts to T14.733 billion, comprising an estimated
T13.500 billion in mitigation costs and T1.238 billion million in adaptation costs financed from the
ADB loan. Mitigation costs are associated with the adoption of the OMIR green building standards
or other standards consistent with the national green taxonomy, in the provision of green
mortgages, resulting in at least a 30.0% reduction in heating- and ventilation-related energy
consumption. These standards apply to the housing held as collateral for subloan mortgages and
will incentivize the use and application of green housing standards across the housing sector
throughout the country. Adaptation costs result from placing water-saving installations in the
housing acquired with subloans. 17 The attached TA accounts for an additional $82,953 in
mitigation costs and $72,970 in adaptation costs.




16 Equivalent to $173.59 million as of 11 December 2025.
17 Climate Change Assessment (Annex 5).
                                                                                                              9


E.      Implementation Arrangements

32.     Implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 3.

                                Table 3: Implementation Arrangements
 Aspects                                                       Arrangements
 Implementation perioda         March 2026–March 2030
 Estimated completion date      31 March 2030
 Estimated loan closing dateb   30 September 2030
 Management
   (i) Oversight body            Ibragimova Lyazzat Yerkenovna (chair)
       (board of directors)      Khamitov Ersain Yerbulatovich (member)
                                 Yermekova Elmira Muslimovna (member)
                                 Zhamalov Sanzhar Yerkebayevich (member)
                                 Tokobaev Nurlan Tursunbekovich (member)
                                 Shaikhy Zhandos Alkenovich (member)
   (ii) Steering agency          The Government of Kazakhstan, acting through the Ministry of National Economy
   (iii) Executing agency        Otbasy Bank Joint-Stock Company
   (iv) Implementation unit      Otbasy Bank Join-Stock Company
 Disbursementc                   Disbursement of the loan proceeds will follow ADB's Loan Disbursement Handbook
                                 (2022, as amended from time to time) and detailed arrangements agreed between
                                 the government and ADB.
a The implementation period starts from the expected month of commitment or signing.
b Estimated closing date of the last loan or grant.
c For guidance, refer to the ADB Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                    III.    TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

33.     The attached TA for Support to Promoting Inclusive and Green Housing Finance will
support project implementation and empower Otbasy Bank JSC to develop and implement a
robust green mortgage framework, integrate comprehensive ESG risk management practices,
establish an environmental and social management system (ESMS), enhance its sustainable
finance capabilities, and augment its underwriting and credit risk management systems
supporting the project’s implementation. The proposed activities and deliverables will ensure that
Otbasy Bank JSC can leverage ADB’s support effectively, contributing to the broader goal of
sustainable development in Kazakhstan’s housing finance and growing green mortgage finance
segments.18

34.    The TA financing amount is $500,000, of which (i) $250,000 will be financed on a grant
basis by ADB’s Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF-other sources); and (ii) $250,000 will
be financed by Otbasy Bank JSC on behalf of the government on a partial cost recovery basis.
The partial cost-recovery payment method will be through an upfront payment of the required
amount. The government’s share of the TA will be provided to ADB’s TASF and will be
administered by ADB. The government, through Otbasy Bank JSC, will provide counterpart
support in the form of counterpart staff, access to needed data, office space for meetings and
consultations, assistance in arranging key meetings and events, and other in-kind contributions.




18 Technical Assistance Report (Annex 4).
10


                                      IV.     DUE DILIGENCE

A.        Safeguards

35.    In compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the project’s safeguard
categories are as follows.

36.      Environment (category FI-C). Project activities will be limited to providing mortgages to
eligible subborrowers and will have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. Otbasy Bank
JSC is developing an ESMS arrangement to guide the management and screening of all
subprojects, ensuring category C for all safeguards. The ESMS was approved by Otbasy Bank
JSC on 18 December 2024 and has been disclosed by ADB on 30 January 2025.19 The ESMS
implementation status will be reported annually in stand-alone ESMS monitoring reports. These
reports will be disclosed on the ADB and Otbasy Bank JSC websites.

37.     Involuntary resettlement (category FI-C). The involuntary resettlement safeguard
category is FI, treated as C. Project activities will be limited to providing mortgages to eligible
subborrowers, which will not generate any involuntary resettlement impacts. As good practice,
Otbasy Bank JSC, which has prior experience as a financial intermediary for ADB-supported
projects, is developing an ESMS arrangement to strengthen capacity and guide screening of all
subloans (mortgages), ensuring category C for all safeguards.

38.    Indigenous Peoples (category FI-C). The Indigenous Peoples safeguard category is FI,
treated as C. Project activities will be limited to providing mortgages to eligible subborrowers,
which will not generate impacts on Indigenous Peoples as defined by ADB’s Safeguard Policy
Statement.

B.        Economic and Financial Viability

39.     The proposed project of facilitating housing finance and green mortgage market
development is viable and expected to provide economic benefits to the four main project
stakeholders: women; low- to moderate-income groups; the construction industry, including the
private sector; and the government. The economic and financial viability of the project depends
mainly on the solvency of the implementing entity. Otbasy Bank JSC is the main implementer of
government programs for housing finance in Kazakhstan and is the only bank following the
German system of contractual savings for housing (the Bauspar model), wherein a housing loan
is linked to a savings deposit. Savings are supported by a yearly government premium. A main
source of Otbasy Bank JSC’s finance is through program loans provided directly by the
government and regional bodies for specific target groups and eligibility criteria. Otbasy Bank JSC
targets the low- to moderate-income borrower segment and has a loan portfolio of T3.8 trillion as
of November 2025, making it the market leader in mortgage finance. The ADB loan comprises
less than 2.5% of Otbasy Bank JSC’s loan portfolio. It has 17 regional branches, 2 city branches,
18 service centers, and 3 service points across the country.20 Otbasy Bank JSC’s housing savings
model is viable, as it effectively serves higher-risk market segments, while maintaining a low level
of NPLs for more than 90 days—just 0.19%, compared with 3.2% for the banking sector overall.
Otbasy Bank JSC's main product, the preliminary housing loan, is well suited to serve low- to
moderate-income groups but requires adaptation to expand into green finance.

19 ADB. 2024. Promoting Inclusive and Green Housing Finance Project: Environmental and Social Management
   System Arrangement.
20 Economic Analysis (Annex 3[i]) and Financial Analysis (Annex 3[ii]).
                                                                                                               11



40.     Otbasy Bank JSC’s financial viability stems from its strong financial performance and
robust profitability. From 2019 to 2023, Otbasy Bank JSC’s organic loan portfolio performed well,
registering a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 33.6%. However, its deposit portfolio
lagged, with a CAGR of 15.5% during this period. The discrepancy between savings and loans
must be filled by government funding and other external sources, such as ADB. One of the three
strategic goals of Otbasy Bank JSC is to achieve a return on assets of 2.7%, which was reached
in 5 years out of the 6 years from 2018 to 2023. Over that period, return on equity ranged from
12.1% (2020) to 27.9% (2023). Otbasy Bank JSC follows strict lending and collateral practices as
evidenced by its robust asset quality—its NPL ratio was less than 1.0% over the 5 years ending
in 2023, with high portfolio granularity and the maximum loan-to-value ratio not exceeding 75.0%
for 92.8% of its loan portfolio. Otbasy Bank JSC’s parent company, Baiterek, holds positions in
eight development entities and has an external rating of Baa2 by Moody’s with a positive outlook.
Otbasy Bank JSC was assigned a BBB (long-term local/outlook stable) by Fitch in July 2025 and
a Baa2 rating by Moody’s in November 2025. The ratings assume a very high likelihood that
Otbasy Bank JSC will receive support from the government, if necessary (resulting in an uplift of
Moody’s Baseline Credit Assessment from Ba2 to the long-term deposit rating of Baa2). Otbasy
Bank's capital has been supported by gains on the initial recognition of Baiterek loans at below-
market rates, which have boosted Otbasy Bank JSC's additional paid-in capital. The financial due
diligence conducted indicated that Otbasy Bank JSC is in sound financial condition, that its risk
management processes are adequate, it complies with prudential norms, and its corporate
governance is acceptable.

C.      Gender Equality

41.     The project is classified as gender equality objective The gender pay gap remains
significant in Kazakhstan, which poses a major challenge for women in accessing housing finance.
Women face barriers to home ownership, as evidenced by the fact that women are less likely to
own assets or be landowners.21 Financial institutions in Kazakhstan typically apply uniform terms
and conditions to all customers, without considering female borrowers as a target customer
segment. Improved access to safe housing will reduce women’s vulnerability and enhance their
control over economic resources by increasing their economic opportunities. The project builds
on ADB’s completed Promoting Gender Equality in Housing Finance Project, which has provided
women with affordable finance to acquire and/or renovate housing. The current project will
specifically promote affordable housing finance for women in low- to moderate-income segments
of the population by ensuring that housing acquired by women meets green and energy-efficiency
standards, thereby demonstrating improved safety and sustainability. The key gender actions
include (i) increasing women’s access to appropriate and affordable housing finance; (ii) making
green lending products available to women to ensure safer housing conditions; (iii) increasing
women’s financial literacy, thereby improving their capacity to partake in housing finance; (iv)
conducting a climate impact assessment involving women to identify potential solutions to
structuring green mortgage products that are tailored to the climate impact considerations of
women; and (v) improving the leadership skills of female staff to stimulate their
career development.




21 Agency for Strategic Planning and Reforms of the Republic of Kazakhstan and Bureau of National Statistics. 2023.

  Women and Men in Kazakhstan: 2018–2022.
12


D.      Poverty and Social Dimensions

42.      The population of Kazakhstan faces socioeconomic challenges despite its economic
growth. The poverty rate stands at 5.1%, meaning the share of the population with income below
the subsistence level, with women experiencing higher levels of poverty. 22 Rural areas are
particularly disadvantaged because of limited access to housing finance and affordability. The
housing finance system is characterized by low mortgage penetration. Inadequate infrastructure
and high housing costs hinder poverty reduction efforts. The housing finance segment is
constrained and thereby offers limited access to affordable mortgage options to the population,
especially for low- to moderate-income groups, including women. Furthermore, the growing
housing deficit and high urbanization rates have contributed to rising costs in major cities. To
address these issues, the project will promote affordable residential mortgage loans to an
underserved population, with a primary focus on women, and will also develop and fund
benchmark green mortgage products. The population of Kazakhstan will benefit from safe housing
that meets seismic, building, and green standards; and improved energy efficiency, which will
reduce the risk of energy interruptions and enhance sustainability. The project will support low-
and moderate-income households, thereby strengthening household security and financial
stability.

E.      Procurement, Financial Management, and Integrity

43.     No procurement of goods or work will be undertaken. No consulting services will be utilized.

44.      The assessed pre-mitigation financial management risk is low mainly because of ongoing
government support for Otbasy Bank JSC and its mandate to back access to housing and Otbasy
Bank JSC’s (i) strong customer franchise, (ii) stable revenues, (iii) good asset quality, (iv) good
loss-absorption capacity, and (v) sufficient liquidity. Key risks identified included the need for
external audit firm rotation, inconsistency with some risk management approaches across
different departments, and an absence of an independent external assessment of systems,
procedures, and reporting mechanisms for anti-money laundering/combating the financing of
terrorism and countering proliferation financing (AML/CFT/CPF). The main actions to mitigate the
identified risks include incorporating suitable financial covenants into the ADB loan agreement
and establishing regular reporting requirements to provide ADB advance warning of
unsustainable lending. Furthermore, Otbasy Bank JSC has strong and experienced management
and directors who have committed to ensuring a rotation of external auditors to enhance the
conformity of internal risk management across departments. Although AML/CFT/CPF processes
were identified as sound, Otbasy Bank JSC will engage an external review of these functions.
The attached TA will improve staff capacity in sustainable finance and a green mortgage
framework and support effective monitoring of the steps to be implemented to mitigate risks.

45.    Having successfully implemented the Promoting Gender Equality in Housing Finance
Project that closed in 2023, Otbasy Bank JSC’s financial management capacity is sufficient to
ensure effective and efficient project implementation. Otbasy Bank JSC has an effective
independent credit decision-making process, adequate policies, and full autonomy for making
lending decisions and setting loan pricing. The staff of Otbasy Bank JSC are well trained and
experienced in administering financial management arrangements, monitoring, and reporting; and
management quality is assessed as good. There is a need to strengthen capacity in certain areas,
and the attached TA will support the integration of comprehensive ESG risk management

22 Agency for Strategic Planning and Reforms of the Republic of Kazakhstan and Bureau of National Statistics. 2023.

  Main Indicators of Income Differentiation of the Population.
                                                                                                  13


practices, the implementation of an ESMS, the enhancement of the bank’s sustainable finance
capabilities, and the augmentation of its underwriting and credit risk management systems.
Otbasy Bank JSC has a well-developed, reasonable growth-oriented strategy that reflects
management’s strategic focus. Management of the bank is embedded in an adequate corporate
governance structure, and its transparency is in line with international standards.

46.     Integrity due diligence was conducted on Otbasy Bank JSC, its board of directors, and key
management members. The results of the due diligence indicate that these do not appear to
constitute a significant or potentially significant integrity risk to the project. Otbasy Bank’s
compliance unit and overall guidelines ensure the integrity of its corporate and financial
governance appropriately. The assessed procurement risk is low, reflecting that no procurement
will occur. ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended from time to time) and relevant
guidelines and procedures were explained to and discussed with the government and
Otbasy Bank.

F.     Sustainability

47.     The project will expand the number of women and people in low- to moderate-income
groups who are acquiring residential properties because of improved access to mortgage finance.
Improved housing conditions for women and people in low- to moderate-income groups will
enhance their personal economic well-being, supporting Otbasy Bank JSC’s ongoing mandate.
Mortgage products developed under the project will remain part of Otbasy Bank JSC’s offering.
The green mortgage framework prepared under the project will serve as a basis for the bank’s
green mortgage product and back the expansion of green mortgage finance throughout the
banking sector on a commercial basis. As part of the Promoting Gender Equality in Housing
Finance Project, ADB issued gender bonds in tenge to fund the loan. The current project aims to
continue the issuance of gender bonds and expand into issuing green bonds in tenge, which will
support the overall development of the green bond market. By building the capacity of Otbasy
Bank JSC in green finance, green housing, and green mortgage creation and issuance, the
project supports the bank in seeking potential alternative sources of finance, including green
bonds on a commercial basis. The integration of a comprehensive ESG risk management process
in Otbasy Bank JSC will enhance its sustainable finance capabilities.

G.     Summary of Risk Assessment

48.     The assessed pre-mitigation risk is low. No substantial risks are identified. ADB's position
is safeguarded by the strong credit rating of the sovereign guarantor of the loan. The project is
classified as low risk because (i) Otbasy Bank JSC is financially sound as evidenced by its
adequate capital, high-quality assets, sufficient liquidity, and profitability; (ii) ADB has relevant
experience in the banking sector in Kazakhstan, specifically in support of housing finance; (iii)
Otbasy Bank JSC has adequate mechanisms to administer and monitor the disbursement of
mortgage subloans; (iv) Otbasy Bank JSC has extensive experience in housing finance in
Kazakhstan; and (v) Otbasy Bank JSC has experience in implementing a similar project with ADB.

                                      V.      ASSURANCES

49.      The government has assured ADB that the implementation of the project shall conform to
all applicable ADB requirements, including those concerning anticorruption measures, safeguards,
gender equality, procurement, consulting services, financial management, and disbursement, as
further mentioned in the loan documents.
14


50.     No loan disbursements will be made until the ESMS and a grievance redress mechanism
satisfactory to ADB have been established by Otbasy Bank JSC.

                                 VI.     RECOMMENDATION

51.    I am satisfied that the proposed loan would comply with the Articles of Agreement of the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve the loan of
T90,000,000,000 to Otbasy Bank JSC, to be guaranteed by the Republic of Kazakhstan, for the
Promoting Inclusive and Green Housing Finance Project, from ADB’s ordinary capital resources,
in regular terms, with interest to be determined in accordance with ADB’s local currency loan
product; for a term of up to 19 years; and such other terms and conditions as are substantially in
accordance with those set forth in the draft loan and guarantee agreements presented to the
Board.


                                                            Masato Kanda
                                                            President

10 March 2026
                                                                                      Appendix         15

                            DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK

Impact the Project is Aligned with
Gender equity promoted, and sustainable economic growth and green development supporteda
                                                          Data Sources and          Risks and Critical
Results Chain             Performance Indicators
                                                        Reporting Mechanisms          Assumptions
Outcome                   By 2030:
Acquisition of energy-    a. Volume of subloans         a. Otbasy Bank JSC        R: Weak economic
efficient, sustainable,   issued to women and low-      quarterly loan progress   conditions cause a
green, and affordable     to moderate-income group      reports                   disruption in the supply
housing units by          increased by $173.6                                     of housing offered to
women and low- to         millionb (2023 baseline:                                the target groups.
moderate-income           $3.76 billion) (DRs 3 and
groups increased, and     7)c
the development of a
green mortgage
market supported

Outputs                   By 2030:
1. Access to housing      1. Number of loans to         1. Otbasy Bank JSC        A: Government backing
finance by women and      women and low- to             quarterly loan progress   access to affordable
low- to moderate-         moderate-income group         reports                   mortgages is sustained.
income groups of the      funded by ADB subloans
population expanded       increased by at least 2,000
                          (2023 baseline: 174,032)

2. Residential            2. At least one new           2. Otbasy Bank JSC
mortgage loan product     mortgage loan product         quarterly loan progress
targeting women           targeting women created.d     reports
borrowers designed        (2023 baseline: One
                          product)

3. Development of         3a. At least one new green    3a.–3b. Otbasy Bank
green mortgage            mortgage product              JSC quarterly loan
products for housing      created.d (2023 baseline:     progress reports
acquisition and           One product)
renovation
incentivized
                          3b. A green mortgage
                          finance framework
                          prepared to guide
                          development of the
                          product that will also
                          incorporate methods to
                          adapt mortgage products
                          to the unique climate
                          challenges faced by
                          women. (2023 baseline:
                          No framework)
16       Appendix


Key Activities with Milestones
1. Access to housing finance by women and the low-to-moderate income group of the population
    expanded.
1.1 Otbasy Bank JSC adopted ESMS satisfactory to ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009) by Q1 2025.
1.2 Consultants for the project implementation unit contracted and mobilized by Q3 2026.
1.3 Initial public outreach event held to promote the availability of mortgages to women by Q2 2027.
2. Residential mortgage loan product targeting women borrowers designed.
2.1 Underwriting criteria for one new women’s mortgage adopted by Otbasy Bank JSC by Q2 2026.
2.2 New mortgage loan product offered throughout the Otbasy Bank JSC network by Q2 2026.
2.3 Procedure established to identify and confirm housing held as collateral with green criteria and
    construction age restrictions by Q4 2026
3. Development of green mortgage products for housing acquisition and renovation incentivized.
3.1 Underwriting criteria for new green mortgage products adopted by Q2 2026.
3.2 Consultants for the project implementation unit contracted and mobilized by Q3 2026
3.3 New green mortgage product promoted and offered throughout Otbasy Bank JSC’s network by Q4
    2026.
3.4 Development of green mortgage finance framework initiated by Q1 2027.
3.5 Survey on the impact of climate change on women’s access to mortgage finance initiated by Q2 2027.
3.6 Initial public outreach event held regarding green mortgage finance framework by Q3 2027.
Inputs
ADB: $173.59 million loan and $250,000 Technical Assistance Special Fund (TASF-other sources) grant.
Government of Kazakhstan: $96.00 million and $50.00 million subborrower downpayments.
Government of Kazakhstan: $250,000 technical assistance financing (subject to partial cost recovery)
A = assumption, ADB = Asian Development Bank, DR = development result, ESMS = environmental and social
management system, Q = quarter, R = risk.
a Government of Kazakhstan. 2024. National Development Plan until 2029; Government of Kazakhstan. 1997.

  Strategy of Kazakhstan’s Development until 2030; Government of Kazakhstan. 2013. Concept for Transition of the
  Republic of Kazakhstan to Green Economy; and Otbasy Bank. 2024. Development Strategy of Otbasy Bank JSC for
  2024–2033.
b Exchange rate of T518.47 = $1.00 (as of 11 December 2025) applied to ordinary capital resources loan of T90 billion.
c $173.59 million of loan funds will result in the issuance of 2,000 subloans to individuals, of which 1,000 would be to

  individuals acquiring green and sustainable housing.
d New loan products refers to their new availability to clients of Otbasy Bank JSC.

Source: ADB.
