Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors




INTERNAL


Project Number: 58345-001
September 2025



Proposed Loan and Grant
Kyrgyz Republic: Enhancing Housing Finance for
Affordable and Energy-Efficient Housing Project




Distribution of this document is limited until it has been approved by the Board of Directors.
Following such approval, this document will be reclassified as public and disclosed in accordance
with ADB’s Access to Information Policy.
                          CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                            (as of 18 August 2025)

                        Currency Unit     –   som (Som)
                            Som1.00       =   $0.01147
                               $1.00      =   Som87.15



                                ABBREVIATIONS
               ADB         –     Asian Development Bank
               CO2         –     carbon dioxide
               ESMS        –     environmental and social management system
               FY          –     fiscal year
               GDP         –     gross domestic product
               GHG         –     greenhouse gas
               GMP         –     Green Mortgage Program
               MOF         –     Ministry of Finance
               NDC         –     nationally determined contribution
               PEP         –     politically exposed person
               PFI         –     participating financial institution
               SDG         –     Sustainable Development Goal
               SMC         –     State Mortgage Company
               TA          –     technical assistance
               WMP         –     Women’s Mortgage Program


                                     NOTE(S)

(i)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic and its agencies
       ends on 31 December. “FY” before a calendar year denotes the year in which the
       fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2023 ends on 31 December 2023.

(ii)   In this report, “$” refers to United States dollars unless otherwise stated.
Vice-President           Yingming Yang, Office of the Vice-President (South, Central and
                            West Asia)
Director General         Leah Gutierrez, Central and West Regional Department (CWRD)
Directors                Mohd Sani Mohd Ismail, Finance Sector Office, Sectors
                            Department 3 (SD3-FIN)
                         Zheng Wu, Country Director, Kyrgyz Republic Resident Mission
                            (KYRM), CWRD
Project team leader      Giacomo Giannetto, Principal Financial Sector Specialist, SD3-
                            FIN
Project team member(s)   Altynai Abdyldaeva, Gender Equality Division, Climate Change
                             and Sustainable Development Department (CCSD)
                         Mel Altoveros, Procurement Specialist, Procurement Division 1,
                              Procurement, Portfolio, and Financial Management
                              Department (PPFD)
                         Ainura Bekbolotova, Project Analyst, KYRM, CWRD
                         Keecia Bianca Binaohan, Operations Analyst, Human and Social
                             Development Sector Office, Sectors Department 3 (SD3-HSD)
                         Karan Chouksey, Climate Change Specialist; Climate Change,
                             Resilience, and Environment Cluster; CCSD
                         Oliver Domagas, Principal Financial Control Specialist, Loan and
                             Grant Disbursement Section, Controller’s Department
                         Abhishek Hegde, Private Sector Development Specialist, Private
                             Sector Development Unit, CWRD
                         Jules Hugot, Economist, Macroeconomics Research Division,
                             Economic Research and Development Impact Department
                             (ERDI)
                         Gulnur Kerimkulova, Principal Economics Officer, KYRM, CWRD
                         Sung Su Kim, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, SD3-FIN
                         Adhamjon Kuchkarov, Principal Private Sector Development
                              Officer, Private Sector Development Unit, CWRD
                         Nargiza Kudaiberdieva, Safeguards Officer (Social), Office of
                             Safeguards (OSFG)
                         David Lee, Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
                         Maria Carmela Rosario Maniego, Senior Project Assistant, SD3-
                             FIN
                         Marie Jessamine Mitra, Associate Project Officer, SD3-FIN
                         Sophio Omanadze, Safeguards Specialist (Social), OSFG
                         Ozden Onturk, Financial Sector Specialist, SD3-FIN
                         Ninette Pajarillaga, Principal Safeguards Specialist (Environment),
                              OSFG
                         Gohar Tadevosyan, Senior Social Development Specialist,
                             Human and Social Development Sector Office, SD3-HSD
                         Elbek Yusupov, Financial Management Specialist, Public
                              Financial Management Division, PPFD
Peer reviewer            Shigehiro Shinozaki, Senior Economist, Regional Cooperation and
                              Integration Division, ERDI
In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any designation
of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian
Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any
territory or area.
                                      CONTENTS
                                                                Page
PROJECT AT A GLANCE
I.     THE PROPOSAL                                                1
II.    THE PROJECT                                                 1
       A.   Rationale                                              1
       B.   Project Description                                    6
       C.   ADB Value Addition                                    11
       D.   Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan             11
       E.   Implementation Arrangements                           12
III.   TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE                                       12
IV.    DUE DILIGENCE                                              12
       A.    Safeguards                                           12
       B.    Economic and Financial Viability                     13
       C.    Gender Equality                                      14
       D.    Poverty and Social Dimensions                        14
       E.    Procurement, Financial Management, and Integrity     15
       F.    Sustainability                                       16
       G.    Summary of Risk Assessment                           16
V.     ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS                                  17
VI.    RECOMMENDATION                                             17

APPENDIX
Design and Monitoring Framework                                   18

ANNEXES
1.   Legal Agreements
2.   Safeguard Documents and Plans
3.   Economic and Financial Analysis
4.   Climate Change Assessment
5.   Gender Assessment and Action Plan
                                                                              Project Classification Information Status: Complete




                                             PROJECT AT A GLANCE

1. Project Data
   Project number 58345-001                                    Project name    Enhancing Housing Finance for
                                                                               Affordable and Energy-Efficient
                                                                               Housing Project
   Country           Kyrgyz Republic                     Executing or          Ministry of Construction, Architecture,
   Borrower          Kyrgyz Republic                     implementing agency Housing & Communal Services / State
                                                                               Mortgage Company
   Sector office     Finance Sector Office               Geographical location Country
   Sector(s)         ü Finance                           Subsector(s)          Finance sector development
                                                                               Housing finance
   Country           https://www.adb.org/Documents/Linke Portfolio at a Glance https://www.adb.org/Documents/Linke
   economic          dDocs/?id=58345-001-CEI                                   dDocs/?id=58345-001-PortAtaGlance
   indicators
   Strategic Focus ü Climate action                            Sustainable            SDG 1.4
   Area            Resilience and empowerment                  Development Goals      SDG 5.a
                                                                                      SDG 11.1

   Lending           Development financing institution (DFI)
   modality
2. Financing
    ADB Financing                                                                   Amount ($ million)
    Asian Development Fund grant                                                        20.00
    Concessional ordinary capital resources loan                                        45.00
    Cofinancing                                                                     Amount ($ million)
    None                                                                                 0.00
    Counterpart                                                                     Amount ($ million)
    Beneficiaries                                                                       36.60
    Government                                                                           3.20
             Total                                                                      104.80
    ADB Climate Financing
    ADB
      Adaptation                                                                            0.00
      Mitigation                                                                           26.00
    Cofinancing (ADB-administered)
      Adaptation                                                                            0.00
      Mitigation                                                                            0.00
                Total                                                                      26.00
   Currency of ADB Financing: US Dollar
3. Climate Action
   Absolute GHG emissions (tCO2e per year)
   Relative GHG emissions (tCO2e per year)
   Climate change risk on the project without adaptation measures                  Medium
   Disaster Risk Management,          Not Applicable
   Environment and Nature
4. Private Sector Development
   Private capital mobilized ($):
   PSD classification:                    No-PSD
5. Safeguards
   Category          Environment:                        ¨ A ¨ B ¨ C þ FI
                     Involuntary resettlement:           ¨ A ¨ B ¨ C ¨ FI
                     Indigenous peoples:                 ¨ A ¨ B ¨ C ¨ FI
 6. Gender Equality
     Category           þ Gender equality objective (GEN)     ¨ Effective gender mainstreaming (EGM)
                        ¨ Some gender elements (SGE)          ¨ Indirect gender benefits (IGB)
 7. Poverty Reduction and Inclusion
    Category        þ Poverty reduction and inclusion focus (PIF)
                    ¨ Poverty reduction and inclusion elements (PIE)
                    ¨ Indirect poverty reduction and inclusion (IPI)
 8. Regional Cooperation and Public Goods
    Category       ¨ Pillar 1 ¨ Pillar 2 ¨ Pillar 3 þ Not applicable
 9. Digital Transformation
    Category         Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 þ Not applicable
Source: Asian Development Bank
This document must only be generated in eOps.                                   Generated Date: 25-Sep-2025 20:49:40 PM
                                            I.       THE PROPOSAL

1.      I submit for your approval the following report and recommendation on (i) a proposed loan
and (ii) a proposed grant, both to the Kyrgyz Republic for the Enhancing Housing Finance for
Affordable and Energy-Efficient Housing Project.

2.     The project will promote the development and availability of affordable mortgages at fixed
rates with longer tenors in local currency to (i) enable eligible low-to-moderate income households
to purchase housing that meets green standards, and (ii) enable women in the low-to-moderate
income group to purchase housing throughout the country, particularly in the Kyrgyz Republic’s
regions (known as oblasts) supporting a reduction in urban sprawl and helping to back efforts to
reduce the gap between urban and rural economic opportunities.1

                                             II.       THE PROJECT

A.       Rationale

3.      Lack of affordable housing for the low-to-moderate income group. Rising population
and average income levels, increasing internal migration to urban areas, and the return of external
migrants are increasing housing demand. The country’s population has risen by about 60% since
1990, from 4.4 million people to close to 7.0 million in 2023, a steeper rise than found across other
countries in the Caucasus and Central Asia. Concurrently, the population in the large cities, such
as Bishkek and Osh, has risen faster than in the rest of the country, further increasing housing
demand in the urban areas. Furthermore, 76% of the 800,000 Kyrgyz citizens working outside the
country are in Russia. Many Kyrgyz migrants are expected to return in the next few years, further
increasing housing demand, because of better prospects in the Kyrgyz Republic resulting from a
lower base of economic development, demographic growth, and improving connectivity, as well
as sanctions against Russia. The rise in gross domestic product (GDP) per capita since 1995,
with more disposable income, has also increased housing demand. Robust macroeconomic
performance, resulting in sustained GDP growth of 9% annually over 2022-2024 with cumulative
economic expansion of 36.6% since 2021, has contributed to rising household incomes and
strengthening the purchasing power for housing. However, according to Numbeo, the Kyrgyz
Republic ranks 92nd out of 107 economies for housing affordability in 2023.2 The mortgage
market is also underdeveloped, further exacerbating the problem.

4.      Underdeveloped mortgage and green mortgage market. The lack of long-term local
currency financing, an underdeveloped and illiquid government and corporate bond market, and
a fragmented banking sector result in high interest rates and short tenor of funding, impairing the
development of the mortgage subsector. Government bond market maturities may go up to 10
years, with corporate bonds typically lasting 1 year, with no secondary market trading. Banks lack
experience in underwriting long-term loans such as mortgages, and no green mortgage products
are offered. A viable green bond market also does not exist. The absence of green housing
standards and a green mortgage framework impairs the development of a green mortgage bond
market that can attract longer-term, lower-cost funding for banks. Although 72% of the population
held bank accounts in 2024, only 20% saved and 11% borrowed, reflecting the impact of a large
informal sector along with difficulties in deposit mobilization because of socioeconomic barriers,

1
  An oblast is a type of administrative division in the Kyrgyz Republic, which is divided into seven oblasts. The oblasts
   exclude the country’s two principal cities, Bishkek City and Osh City.
2
   The Numbeo index relies on crowd-sourced information and, while it is not rigorous, can offer a rough estimate of
   comparative housing affordability. Numbeo. Property Prices Index by Country 2023 (accessed on 21 October 2024).
2


which is reminiscent of the Soviet past, creating a lack of trust in the banking sector.3 A shallow
capital markets sector further limits the availability of medium- and long-term financing. As a
result, the mortgage market—requiring long-tenor local currency financing—remains
underdeveloped, accounting for only 11.5% of commercial bank outstanding lending and about
2.6% of GDP (compared to 13.5% of bank lending in Uzbekistan and 4.2% of GDP in Kazakhstan)
in 2024.

5.      Because of a lack of long-term funding and high overhead operational costs, private sector
banks are unable to offer mortgage products that target low-to-moderate-income groups.
These mortgages have high downpayments of 20%–50%, tenors up to only 10 years, and interest
rates of 14%–18% and sometimes even higher. Banks may offer occasional special rate programs
as low as 12% and even 6% when combined with incentives provided by specific developers on
a project, but with short tenors and high down payments that effectively target only the high-
income population. Banks charge high margins because of high operational costs and the inability
to secure low-cost, stable, longer-term funding.

6.     Vulnerability to climate change. The Kyrgyz Republic is considered one of Central
Asia’s most vulnerable countries to climate change, and the government has ambitious plans to
reduce carbon emissions and adapt to climate change. The country’s vulnerability is further
compounded by increasing climate variability, rising temperatures, and glacial retreat, which are
expected to reduce water availability and shift heating and cooling demand in residential buildings.
With more than 90% of the land area being mountainous, yet a largely agriculture-dependent
economy, economic growth policies have historically been based on the intensive use of natural
resources. Further, more than 55% of the population lives in rural areas, and 25% is below the
poverty line, exacerbating the impact of climate change on underprivileged populations. Future
climate projections show that heating energy demand could decline by 15%–53%, while summer
cooling needs may rise substantially if passive design measures are not incorporated into new
housing. This underscores the need for climate-resilient building design. The updated 2021
nationally determined contribution (NDC) of the Kyrgyz Republic estimates that the country’s
energy sector generated 66% of national carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, and that implementing
improvements in energy efficiency and adopting green technologies and standards could reduce
the country’s CO2 contribution by 40% by 2030.4

7.      Significant contribution to global carbon emissions by buildings. Greening buildings
is a crucial global measure to address the climate change crisis. Buildings consume about half of
the global final energy consumption and have a significant environmental footprint, generating
about 39% of global carbon emissions (28% from CO2 emissions during operation and 11% from
embodied carbon arising from the energy used to produce materials and during construction).5 In
the country, about 85% of the building stock dates from the Soviet era and lacks energy efficiency
measures making it a leading contributor to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and jeopardizing
the country’s climate agenda.

8.      Lack of green and energy-efficient housing. More than 85% of the housing stock, 77%
of the administrative buildings, and more than 60% of public buildings, such as schools and
hospitals, were built during the Soviet era. They suffer from high energy consumption; low thermal
insulation; lack of metering, thermostatic valves, and consumption regulation; and insufficient
management of heating units; and are subject to high heating losses (70%). The building sector

3
  World Bank. 2025. The Global FINDEX.
4
  Government of Kyrgyz Republic. 2021. Updated Nationally Determined Contributions.
5
  Switch Asia. 2022. Green Building Guidelines Through the Building Lifecycle and Value Chain.
                                                                                                                   3


consumes more than 70% of the country’s total electricity and contributes 35% of the country’s
GHG emissions.6 Energy-efficient green housing in the Kyrgyz Republic needs to be developed
in line with its Green Taxonomy, approved on 30 April 2025.7 Green housing will consider
construction and design that reduces or eliminates negative environmental impacts and can
create positive impacts on the climate and the natural environment. Key elements include energy
efficiency, waste management, resource conservation, resource quality, and health and transport
accessibility.

9.      Lack of green building criteria and updated energy efficiency standards. Locally
derived and applicable green housing criteria do not exist. This impairs the construction and sale
of housing that uses viable green technologies and designs supporting climate mitigation and
adaptation efforts. Although the Kyrgyz Republic has building codes in place, including energy
efficiency and energy savings measures, the standards are not adapted to the country’s climatic
regions, and some elements are outdated, which hinders the energy efficiency of buildings.
The Green Taxonomy identifies several related components linked to housing and energy
efficiency that include (i) green building construction or renovation; (ii) heat insulation material for
walls, roofs, and windows; (iii) electric water heaters and solar water heaters; (iv) lighting
(i.e., LED); (v) household appliances; and (vi) split-system air conditioner units, including
reversible air-to-air heat pumps. However, practical standards at the end-user level have not been
created to support the effective adoption of the Green Taxonomy in the housing sector. Further
development of implementation guidelines and minimum performance thresholds is needed to
operationalize the taxonomy through downstream instruments such as green mortgages.

10.     The State Mortgage Company. The State Mortgage Company (SMC), a state-owned
enterprise established in 2015 (100% of shares are owned by the Department of Presidential
Affairs), provides affordable housing options through mortgage programs targeting the lowest
income groups, government employees, social workers, and migrant workers. SMC aims to
support sustainable development, raise the citizens’ living standards, support the construction
industry and the production and sales of construction materials, and generate employment. As of
the second quarter of 2024, SMC has provided affordable housing to about 11,000 families, using
funds from the state budget, retained capital, and a grant from Germany’s KfW Development
Bank. Funds are generally used to finance the construction of housing, with SMC retaining
ownership and offering units through rent-to-own leasing schemes.

11.     The government’s My House program, 2024–2030 aims to provide housing for at least
40,000 families, using Som80 billion from the state budget and Som20 billion from international
donors and development finance institutions. This increase in targeted families will pose
challenges to SMC and will implicitly impacts fiscal resources that have been used as a key source
of funding support. While SMC has previously offered mortgage products through on-lending via
banks, current programs involve only financing the construction of new housing that is then
retained by SMC and sold under rent-to-own schemes. These schemes either target the most
vulnerable segment of the population (disabled, elderly, and single parent families) at subsidized
rates of 4% or 8%, or segments of the population who are in specific employment segments only,
regardless of income level, such as government or the military, at rates of 8%. The project’s
mortgage lending programs do not overlap SMC’s existing offers. The project enables SMC to
offer their first mortgage product tailored to women without subsidies and without restrictions on
the selection or location of the property purchased. The project also brings in not only the first

6
    World Bank. 2019. Roadmap for the Implementation of Energy Efficiency in Public Buildings of the Kyrgyz Republic.
7
    Government of Kyrgyz Republic. 2025. Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Kyrgyz Republic dated 30.04.25
    No. 246.
4


green mortgage for SMC but also for the country while still targeting the low-to-moderate income
population. The SMC needs to develop programs that expand funding sources by crowding in
private commercial banks, so that limited funding resources are targeted to appropriate low-to-
moderate income groups, and that the development of the mortgage market is supported without
impairing competition and displacing the private sector.

12.     Gender gap in housing finance accessibility. Women face significant barriers to
housing finance, leading to lower homeownership rates and limited financial empowerment
through property ownership. Although no formal legal barriers exist, women’s access to these
properties remains limited—only 29% owned immovable property in 2021—reflecting restricted
access to loans and financial resources. Neither the banking sector nor SMC offers mortgages
tailored to women and SMC does not collect sex-disaggregated data on the end users of its
existing mortgage programs. The lack of such data across state housing loans hinders proper
assessment and, even more, efforts to address it.

13.      Private sector’s role in driving sustainable housing initiatives and green finance
products is limited. The private sector’s role is limited because of the lack of green mortgage
options, insufficient private funding in green finance, a lack of incentives for developers to invest
in sustainable housing, and a lack of standardization in green finance practices and standards.
The lack of viable, commercially-based green mortgage products prevents banks from
participating in green finance activities. It slows innovation in developing green finance products,
reducing consumers’ access to green housing finance and limiting sustainable housing
development. With no incentives, private developers prefer not to invest in sustainable projects,
slowing private sector growth in green construction and missing opportunities to expand eco-
friendly housing, which is essential for long-term market competitiveness. The absence of
standardized green housing and finance criteria aligned with the national Green Taxonomy
creates uncertainty for private banks and developers, discouraging investment and slowing the
adoption of green practices. This limits the private sector’s role in driving sustainable housing
initiatives. The project’s objectives are to indirectly address private sector barriers backing the
understanding of the target population in mortgage finance and to incentivize the housing sector
to deliver green housing. The project works on the demand side of the private sector housing
finance equation. It provides the market with standards for green housing and finance as well as
attracting a large, underserved target population into the mainstream mortgage finance sector.
This enables private banks to increase comfort in making long-term mortgages and understanding
the attractiveness of the underserved target population and incentivize developers to deliver
affordable housing.

14.     Finance sector development. The Kyrgyz banking sector remains sound, and systematic
risks are contained, but supervisory vigilance is warranted, primarily because of risks related to
nonperforming loans and increased foreign currency exposures, with 19.1% of the credit and
37.4% of the deposit portfolios in United States dollars. The sector’s capital adequacy ratio stood
at 22.0% in December 2024, more than the 12.0% regulatory minimum. The share of foreign
participation in the authorized capital of the banking sector comprised 32.5% at the end of March
2025. Despite the strong growth in recent years, financial intermediation is weak, with a ratio of
banking sector assets to GDP of only 53.5% and of loans to GDP of 22.4% at the end of 2024.
The nonbank financial sector is underdeveloped, providing only nominal support in rural regions.
The banking sector suffers from high operational costs and a lack of long-term finance, which
raises margins and end-user interest rates. The capital market sector is in its infancy, further
impairing the availability of alternative sources of longer-term funding.
                                                                                                                5


15.      Mortgage market for finance sector development. A healthy mortgage market is
essential for strengthening the financial sector. It promotes long-term lending, diversifies financial
institutions’ portfolios, and may help attract new sources of domestic and international capital,
fostering financial stability. By providing accessible home financing, it stimulates demand in
construction, real estate, and related industries, creating jobs and boosting private sector activity.
A robust mortgage market also enhances financial inclusion by extending credit access to
underserved populations, empowering broader economic participation. By offering accessible
home financing, the mortgage market helps citizens make better economic decisions and improve
their financial well-being. It encourages innovation in financial products, such as green mortgages,
aligning with sustainability goals, and attracting investment in climate-resilient housing. It also
supports public–private partnerships in affordable housing, leveraging private sector efficiency
and funding to meet societal needs. This dynamic ecosystem drives growth, investment, and
inclusion, reinforcing the link between financial development and private sector expansion.

16.     A financial intermediary loan is the most suitable modality to achieve the objectives
outlined. It aligns well with the need to develop a green mortgage market and promote access to
affordable, sustainable housing. It will allow funds to be mobilized for affordable housing finance
to reach end users, the low-to-moderate income population, including women borrowers, quickly
enabling rapid response to the housing shortage and backing the development of green housing.
The modality also mobilizes and incorporates private sector funding for distribution to the
underserved target groups, impacting the economic well-being of those population segments.
SMC will also benefit from increased practical capacity to manage risks, develop effective
targeted mortgage loan programs, and create mechanisms to expand its funding sources.

17.     Alignment with ADB’s country partnership strategy, 2023–2027 and ADB’s Strategy
2030. The country partnership strategy for the Kyrgyz Republic, 2023–2027 identifies climate
change adaptation and mitigation, governance, and gender equality as central themes.8 ADB will
support the Kyrgyz Republic in exploring innovative modalities for green finance. In line with
ADB’s Strategy 2030, ADB will scale up its support for climate change mitigation by encouraging
developing member countries to shift to a low-GHG emission development path consistent with
each governments’ climate commitments or ambitions.9 ADB will also promote greater financial
inclusion, gender equality, job creation, and access to affordable housing, while providing
integrated solutions to help build livable, green, competitive, resilient, and inclusive cities. The
proposed project aligns with the government’s updated 2021 NDC, National Development
Strategy 2018–2040, National Development Program 2030, and draft green economy
development program, 2025–2029.10 It is also consistent with the government’s My House
program, 2024–2030, approved by presidential decree on 17 July 2024.11 It also supports actions
under the proposed Advancing Green Investment and Resilient Economic Growth in the Kyrgyz
Republic, subprogram 1. The project is categorized as gender equality objective.




8
   ADB. 2023. Country Partnership Strategy: Kyrgyz Republic, 2023–2027—Fostering Inclusive, Resilient, and Private
   Sector–Led Growth.
9
   ADB. 2018. Strategy 2030: Achieving a Prosperous, Inclusive, Resilient, and Sustainable Asia and the Pacific.
10
   Government of Kyrgyz Republic. 2021. Updated Nationally Determined Contributions, Government of Kyrgyz
   Republic. 2018. National Development Strategy 2018–2040, Government of Kyrgyz Republic. 2025. National
   Development Program 2030, and Government of Kyrgyz Republic. 2024. Green Economy Development Program
   2025–2029.
11
   Government of Kyrgyz Republic. 2024. State Housing Program 2024–2030.
6


B.     Project Description

18.     The government has requested (i) a concessional loan of $45 million from ADB’s ordinary
capital resources; and (ii) a grant not exceeding $20 million from ADB’s Special Funds resources
(Asian Development Fund), to help finance the project. The loan will have a 32-year term,
including a grace period of 8 years, an interest rate of 1.0% per year during the grace period and
1.5% per year thereafter, and such other terms and conditions to be outlined in the draft loan and
project agreements.

19.     SMC will use loan and grant funds to promote the availability of affordable mortgages at
fixed rates with longer tenors in local currency to (i) enable eligible low-to-moderate income
households to purchase housing that meets minimum green standards; and (ii) enable women in
the low-to-moderate income group to purchase housing throughout the country. Women’s
acquisition of housing in the oblasts rather than only in the largest urban centers of Bishkek and
Osh will be incentivized, supporting a reduction in urban sprawl and helping to support efforts to
reduce the gap between urban and rural economic opportunities and development in line with the
National Development Strategy 2018–2040.

20.     The project is aligned with the following impact: gender equity promotion, sustainable
economic growth, and green development supported. The project will have the following outcome:
acquisition of energy-efficient, sustainable, green, and affordable housing units by the low-to-
moderate income group supported.

21.       Output 1. Green mortgage product for new housing acquisition by low-to-moderate
income households, including women, developed. The output will (i) provide partial funding
through SMC to participating financial institutions (PFIs) to support the issuance of green
mortgages to the target group to purchase new green housing that meets in advance climate
eligibility criteria aligned with the Kyrgyz Republic’s Green Taxonomy and national energy savings
thresholds (at least 30%) and that will incentivize developers to construct green housing and
banks to offer green mortgages; and (ii) create green housing standards for multifamily housing
units to be used to classify properties according to minimum green criteria for green mortgages.
This will be accomplished through the following:
          (i)      adapting global best practices in green building certification programs and
                   performance-based housing finance mechanisms that can be applied in the Kyrgyz
                   Republic and that conform with the country’s Green Taxonomy;
          (ii)     preparing an independent system for monitoring, reporting, and verification to
                   confirm the application of green housing standards and calculation of the climate
                   impact, including energy savings verification and GHG emission reduction
                   tracking;
          (iii)    supporting revision to building codes and norms to integrate green housing
                   standards and climate-adaptive design features to address both mitigation and
                   resilience co-benefits;
          (iv)     promoting changes to energy efficiency class standards and the related laws and
                   regulations on energy savings and efficiency, including the Law on Conservation
                   of Energy No. 88, of 1998 and the Law on Energy Efficiency of Buildings No. 137,
                   2011 to conform with green housing standards;
          (v)      providing outreach and capacity development to government counterparts,
                   developers, and the banking sector on green housing standards and the
                   underwriting of long-term green mortgages, including use of eligibility screening
                   tools and taxonomy-aligned credit protocols; and
                                                                                                               7


        (vi)     supporting SMC to assess and increase its capacity to sustainably support housing
                 finance by improving its financial funding mix and financial support schemes, to be
                 completed jointly through established working groups that will incorporate the
                 Ministry of Construction, Architecture, Housing and Communal Services; SMC,
                 PFIs, and housing developers.12

22.      These efforts will also define the operational link between performance thresholds,
mortgage eligibility, and climate finance attribution. Efforts under this output will integrate with and
jointly support the preparation of policy actions in the proposed Advancing Green Investment and
Resilient Economic Growth Program for the Kyrgyz Republic.13

23.      Output 2. Access to mortgages by women, including those vulnerable, enhanced.
This output will (i) provide partial funding to support the issuance of mortgages to women with
low-to-moderate household income, enabling them to acquire new or existing housing throughout
the country; (ii) create a differentiated mortgage loan product to provide incentives for women to
purchase housing in the oblasts, outside of Bishkek City and Osh City; (iii) create incentives to
specifically support the acquisition of housing by vulnerable low-to-moderate income women-led
households such as single parent households and those with persons with disabilities; and (iv)
implement a comprehensive gender-sensitive public awareness and information campaign on
women’s housing finance by SMC and PFIs. The mortgage products created targeting women
will be the first such products offered in the country by SMC and the banking sector.

24.     Output 3: Program to incentivize raising energy efficiency or reducing waste and
consumption for women’s housing created. The program will provide financial compensation
to mortgage subborrowers participating in the women’s mortgage programs. Within 12 months of
their housing purchase, upgrades for improved energy efficiency, reduced waste, or lower overall
consumption will be installed. The output will (i) identify fixed and permanent eligible
improvements that must contribute to improved energy efficiency, reduced waste, or lower overall
consumption that are available locally and can be properly installed and serviced; (ii) establish
methods to measure these improvements; (iii) design the program that will provide financial
compensation to mortgage subborrowers participating in the women’s mortgage programs; and
(iv) create an information campaign to educate women, the banking sector and housing
developers on energy efficiency and waste reduction. Qualifying completed improvements may
include but are not limited to (i) heating, cooling, and water system efficiency; (ii) weatherproofing
and insulation; (iii) water conservation and efficiency; (iv) energy efficiency and heat
management; and (v) sustainable and renewable energy solutions. Eligible upgrades must avoid
disturbing or adding of hazardous materials like asbestos and comply with the laws of the Kyrgyz
Republic in proper disposal or recycling and as defined in the environmental and social
management system (ESMS). Additionally, all upgrades must adhere to program guidelines and
not involve items or activities on the prohibited list.

25.     Subborrower target groups to be supported by the project are those not served by the
existing SMC or the private banks. No overlap exists with the client segments targeted by banks,
because they generally support higher-income clients. The project targets households in the low-
to-moderate income range. Providing programs to enable housing mortgages to the proposed
end-user groups will bring them into the finance and housing sectors, enabling banks to target


12
   Parliament of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan. 2019. Law on Conservation of Energy No. 88 of 1998 and Parliament of
   the Republic of Kyrgyzstan. 2019. Law on Energy Efficiency of Buildings No. 137 of 2011.
13
   ADB. 2025. Kyrgyz Republic: Advancing Green Investment and Resilient Economic Growth Program.
8


new customer bases. The private sector does not serve the low-to-moderate income group, hence
there is no market distortion.

26.      The project aims to address the financing gap left by the private sector by creating Green
Mortgage Program (GMP) and Women’s Mortgage Program (WMP) products to serve as
benchmarks for the banking sector, generating standardized and sustainable green and social
mortgage products. These products will serve as a demonstration, lay the foundation, and
encourage the development of similar products by other lenders in the private sector. The offering
of green mortgages, specifically, will also incentivize private sector developers to emphasize
building affordable housing with a lower carbon and energy impact. The project will raise the
understanding of green housing standards and green mortgage lending with the private sector by
mutually creating these standards and practices with the private sector and leading public
advocacy backed by the linked technical assistance (TA). Adopting green housing standards and
creating green mortgage products will support the development of a green bond market that can
attract longer-term, lower-cost funding for banks. The project supports private sector development
in raising the sector’s understanding of green housing standards and green mortgages,
incentivizing developers to construct green housing and banks to offer green mortgages,
supporting the upgrade of associated building codes and standards, and expanding the
understanding of banks to underwrite longer-term mortgages.

27.     ADB loan funds will be relent by the government to SMC on repayable terms. ADB grant
funds will be made available by the government to SMC on terms and conditions to be agreed
upon between SMC and the Ministry of Finance (MOF). 100% of grant and loan funds will be
onlent by SMC to PFIs to fund 90% of qualified mortgage subloans to be issued by PFIs to
qualified subborrowers. PFIs will contribute 10% of their funds for subloans, and subborrowers
will provide a minimum of 10% down payment to purchase qualified property. The Kyrgyz
Guarantee Fund offers subborrowers a mortgage guarantee covering up to 30% of the financed
amount for a one-time upfront fee of 2%. As part of the project, SMC will allocate a portion of its
earned margin to be set aside and used to pay the full cost of obtaining up to a 20% guarantee
from the Kyrgyz Guarantee Fund for qualifying subborrowers under the women’s mortgage
program and will pay the full cost of obtaining up to a 30% guarantee for vulnerable women-led
households. These guarantee fees will be paid from SMC’s excess interest and interest earned
on the advance account during project implementation.

28.    For the GMP and WMP, the maximum tenor for mortgages will be 25 years with a
maximum loan amount of Som7 million, increasing to Som8.4 million from the third year of ADB
loan effectiveness. The maximum net monthly household income of the subborrower is
Som120,000, increasing to Som140,000 from the third year of ADB loan effectiveness.
The minimum down payment is 10% of the appraised value or purchase price of the residential
property. PFIs may require up to an additional 20% down payment, and other assets can be used
in meeting down payment requirements. The program will pay, on behalf of the mortgage
subborrower, up to 100% of the cost of a mortgage guarantee insurance obtained from the Kyrgyz
Guarantee Fund for up to 20% of the financed amount and up to 30% for women designated as
vulnerable. The maximum debt-to-income ratio will comply with the National Bank of the Kyrgyz
Republic regulations. A residential unit within a multiunit building may be a maximum of
100 square meters, and individual residential houses may be a maximum of 200 square meters.
There is no limitation on the location of the property, and guarantors are allowed. Domestic
                                                                                                                          9


politically exposed persons (PEPs) or their family members are excluded from obtaining or
guaranteeing mortgage subloans.14

29.     Mortgage subloan interest rates will have a maximum of 10.75% for properties inside the
administrative boundaries of Bishkek City or Osh City and a maximum of 9.75% for properties
outside those boundaries, thereby encouraging development in the oblasts. Mortgage subloans
for properties that meet the green standard will have a maximum interest rate of 9.25%. Subloans
will be provided for the purchase of existing residential housing property to be occupied by the
owner, either a single house or a unit in a multiunit building. For green mortgages, the property
must meet a minimum “green standard” to be defined by the project and conform to the Green
Taxonomy of the Kyrgyz Republic.

30.      For the WMP, the property must be occupied by the woman, or the woman’s parents, a
legally recognized spouse, the parents of the spouse, or the woman’s children under 18 years of
age and their legal guardian, or any combination. The ownership title of the property must be
registered in the name of the woman borrower. A woman must be of full legal age and a citizen
of the Kyrgyz Republic, including those designated as vulnerable. A vulnerable woman shall
include (i) a woman with a disability or a woman with legal guardianship of a disabled person;
(ii) an orphan unmarried woman no older than 25; and (iii) a single female household with more
than three children or more than four household members.

31.     The implementation period will be 6 years to allow for time to perform outreach and
education about green housing standards to the banking sector and developers, enabling them
to deliver compliant green housing compatible with the program to the target groups. By the third
year, subloans under the GMP are expected to start taking up. The project will initially focus on
women’s mortgages, incentives for housing in oblasts, and the energy efficiency reward program.
Extensive discussions held with developers and banks indicated that they are committed to
supporting the future of housing development in the Kyrgyz Republic that conforms to green
standards and the Green Taxonomy. The adoption of the Green Taxonomy of the Kyrgyz Republic
on 16 May 2025, which incorporates green housing elements, serves as a further incentive for
the housing sector and banks to support green housing and green mortgages.

32.     All banks in the country were offered the opportunity to participate in the project, subject
to the successful completion of due diligence assessments. Six banks replied with positive
interest: Aiyl Bank, Demir Bank, Doscredobank, Eldik Bank, FINCA Bank, and Kyrgyz Investment
Credit Bank. Aiyl Bank, Demir Bank, and Eldik Bank have completed due diligence and are
envisaged to participate in the project initially. The remaining banks may have the opportunity to
participate in the project, subject to the completion of favorable due diligence assessments.

33.     The MOF has agreed to assume all foreign currency risks from conversions of United
States dollars received from ADB grant and loan funds. SMC shall use the project advance
accounts and other subaccounts solely to pay PFIs (under the financial intermediation loan).
No payments will be made to contractors or suppliers. Any use of the advance funds, including
any amounts advanced to subaccounts for activities other than ADB financing’s share of eligible
project expenditures, will not be accepted.



14
     Domestic PEPs are defined as individuals who are or have been entrusted domestically with prominent public
     functions, such as heads of state or government, senior politicians, senior government, judicial or military officials,
     senior executives of state-owned corporations, and important political party officials. Family members are individuals
     who are related to a PEP either directly (consanguinity) or through marriage or similar (civil) forms of partnership.
10


34.     SMC will repay the MOF the principal amount of loan funds under the same conditions
and timing as the ADB concessional loan, with an 8-year grace period and 24-year repayment
period through 32 years. The terms and conditions for the availability of grant funds by SMC will
be agreed upon between the MOF and the SMC. MOF will charge SMC an interest rate of 2% on
the concessional loan provided by ADB. SMC will add an administrative margin of 1% and an
excess margin of between 1.55% and 3.22% and lend to PFIs at 5.72% for the WMP (Urban),
4.61% for the WMP (Regions), and 4.05% for GMP. PFIs will charge a margin of 4% over the
blended cost of funds, which considers the rate at which SMC will lend to PFIs, blended with the
cost of funds for the funding provided by PFIs for their contribution of 10% of subloan funding.
The blended cost of funds will be 6.75% for the WMP (Urban), 5.75% for the WMP (Regions),
and 5.25% for the GMP.

35.     SMC has committed to using the interest earned from advance funds and excess margin
for the project purposes to augment the achievement of project outcomes and outputs through
the implementation period, primarily using these interest funds to support output 3 to incentivize
raising energy efficiency or reducing waste and consumption for women’s housing. These interest
funds, in agreement with the MOF, will also be used to support output 2 by paying part of the cost
of the Kyrgyz Guarantee Fund’s mortgage insurance product for women mortgagees and
households led by vulnerable women.

36.     Of loan and grant funds, about 60% ($39 million) will be allocated to providing WMP
mortgages, and 40% ($26 million) to GMP mortgages. It is estimated that up to 1,512 mortgage
subloans may be issued, of which up to 910 will be for WMP mortgages and up to 602 will be for
GMP mortgages. It is envisaged that a subsidiary loan agreement will be entered into between
the MOF and SMC, subject to ADB review and confirmation of conformance with the project’s
conditions and objectives. Further, it is envisaged that SMC will enter into subloan project
agreements with PFIs, subject to ADB review and confirmation of conformance with the project’s
terms, conditions, and objectives. No ADB grant or loan funds will be used to support housing
construction or any purpose inconsistent with the project's objectives or contrary to the grant,
loan, and project agreements. No grant or loan funds will be used to support the project
implementation unit. SMC will recycle repayments of principal on subloans into new mortgage
subloans through the project implementation period.

37.     The project addresses constraints by backing the creation and application of green
housing standards developed through public advocacy that will further incentivize the private
construction sector to build green housing. Through offering funding blended with private sector
funds, the project will partially mitigate the gap in affordable long-term funding for mortgages.
Creating mortgage programs that target the low-to-moderate income group helps fill the void in
the commercial bank mortgage market, which operates mainly to back higher income groups.
Joining with commercial banks in offering green and women’s mortgages enables banks to target
new customer bases and develop new sustainable loan products. The project complements the
reforms under the Advancing Green Investment and Resilient Economic Growth Program for the
Kyrgyz Republic, which backs finance sector reforms to accelerate investment in green, inclusive,
and resilient growth and building resilience to climate change. Efforts under this project to develop
and incorporate elements backing green housing standards into updated building codes, along
with offering the country’s first green mortgages, are concurrently considered as actions within
that program.

38.     The project is aligned with strategic focus areas of (i) climate action (climate adaptation
and mitigation); and (ii) resilience and empowerment (poverty reduction and inclusion, and gender
equality). It supports the following Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): (i) SDG 1, end
                                                                                                                11


poverty in all its forms everywhere (1.4); (ii) SDG 5, achieve gender equality and empower all
women and girls (5.a); and (iii) SDG 11, make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe,
resilient, and sustainable (11.1).

C.        ADB Value Addition

39.    SMC has received grant and loan funding from external parties (KfW) in the past and
several rounds of government funding. SMC has proposals pending for further funding from
several development finance institutions. However, these funding proposals are to support the
construction of housing to be offered under SMC’s existing subsidized mortgage schemes.
ADB will be the first funding source for SMC to provide affordable, market-based mortgages
aimed solely at low-to-moderate income groups, offering green mortgages and targeting women
through cooperation with the private sector. ADB will also support the development of green
housing standards to incentivize private sector construction of green housing that conforms to the
standards.

D.        Summary Cost Estimates and Financing Plan

40.    The project is estimated to cost $104.8 million. The summary financing plan is in Table 1.
ADB grant and loan funds will finance the expenditures related to 90% of qualified mortgage
subloans to be issued by PFIs to qualified subborrowers.

                                          Table 1: Financing Plan
                                                                                                        Share of
 Source                                                                    Amount ($ million)
                                                                                                        Total (%)
 Asian Development Bank
    Special Funds resources (Asian Development Fund grant)                         20.0                     19.1%
    Ordinary capital resources (concessional)                                      45.0                     42.9%
 Private sectora                                                                   36.6                     34.9%
 Governmentb                                                                        3.2                      3.1%
                                 Total                                            104.8                     100%
  a
     Private sector mortgagee's downpayments and margins.
  b
     Interest during implementation, excess margin, and interest earned on advances for project incentive schemes.
  Source: Asian Development Bank.

41.      The project contributes directly to the Kyrgyz Republic’s updated NDC by promoting low-
carbon residential development and improved energy performance in housing. It integrates
climate mitigation through two distinct financing mechanisms: (i) a green mortgage program that
supports the purchase of newly built, energy-efficient housing units compliant with the Kyrgyz
Republic’s Green Taxonomy; and (ii) a women’s energy efficiency rewards program, which
incentivizes low-income women mortgage recipients to undertake fixed post-occupancy
improvements—such as insulation, efficient lighting, and ventilation upgrades—targeted at
reducing household energy consumption. While these interventions also generate climate
adaptation co-benefits (e.g., improved thermal comfort, reduced exposure to energy price
volatility, and resilience to heatwaves and water stress), the project does not claim adaptation
finance by the joint multilateral development bank climate finance tracking methodology. The total
mitigation finance attributed to the project is $26 million, representing 40% of the $65 million total
project cost. These measures are estimated to reduce GHG emissions by about 1,118 tons of
CO2 equivalent annually and support systemic shifts in residential energy efficiency, green
building practices, and sustainable mortgage lending in the Kyrgyz Republic.
12


E.         Implementation Arrangements

42.        Implementation arrangements are summarized in Table 2.

                            Table 2: Indicative Implementation Arrangements
     Aspects                                                      Arrangements
      Indicative implementation period       September 2025–September 2031
      Estimated completion date              30 September 2031
      Estimated loan closing date            31 March 2032
      Management
      (i)    Executing agency                Ministry of Construction, Architecture, Housing and Communal
                                             Services
      (ii)  Implementing agency              The State Mortgage Company
      Retroactive financing                  No retroactive finance allowed
      Disbursement                           Disbursement of the loan and grant proceeds will follow ADB's Loan
                                             Disbursement Handbook (2022, as amended from time to time) and
                                             detailed arrangements agreed between the government and ADB.
ADB = Asian Development Bank.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                                      III.      TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

43.     No grant or loan funds will be used to support project implementation. A linked TA,
Preparing the Enhancing Access to Affordable and Energy-Efficient Housing Project, approved
on 5 December 2024, will continue to support project implementation.15 ADB will administer the
TA; select, supervise, and evaluate consultants; organize events; and provide staff to act as
resource persons. The linked TA will (i) support SMC in identifying future sustainable financing
and onlending schemes that can consider adoption of the environment, social and governance
principles; (ii) back the upgrade to SMC’s financial management, risk management, compliance
and anti-money laundering, combating the financing of terrorism, and know-your-customer
controls; (iii) support effecting the gender assessment and action plan; (iv) support
implementation of the ESMS mechanism; (v) back the upgrade to building codes and regulations
incorporating the green taxonomy and green housing standards; (vi) perform outreach to women
and vulnerable women on financial literacy related to mortgage finance; and (vii) support staff of
the project implementation unit to back project oversight and management. The government will
continue to provide counterpart support through counterpart staff, office accommodation, access
to data, support to establish meetings, and other in-kind contributions.

                                              IV.     DUE DILIGENCE

A.         Safeguards

44.    In compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), the project’s safeguard
categories are as follows.

45.     Environment and involuntary resettlement, and Indigenous Peoples. The proposed
project is classified as category FI (treated as category C) for involuntary resettlement and
Indigenous Peoples, and category FI (treated as category B) for environment under ADB’s

15
     ADB 2024. Kyrgyz Republic: Preparing the Enhancing Access to Affordable and Energy-Efficient Housing Project.
                                                                                                   13


Safeguard Policy Statement 2009. The project will not support any activities classified as category
A or B for involuntary resettlement, and/or Indigenous peoples, and category A for environment
in accordance with the Safeguard Policy Statement. An ESMS has been prepared considering
the requirements of the Safeguard Policy Statement and applicable government law and
regulations, and includes: (i) environmental and social policies; (ii) screening, categorization, and
review procedure; (iii) organizational structure and staffing, including skills and competencies in
environmental and social safeguards; (iv) institutional and training requirements; and (v)
monitoring and reporting requirements to ensure effective ESMS implementation.

46.     The project's potential environmental impacts are limited to construction-related activities
for improvements and upgrades. Because asbestos materials have been commonly used in
roofing, ceilings, and insulation, removing or dismantling them during improvements or upgrades
may pose significant health risks. The ESMS includes specific requirements for FI activities
involving small civil works with or without asbestos. The ESMS also specifies the Code of
Construction Practice that will be included in the subborrowers' terms and conditions,
implementation arrangements, stakeholder engagement, grievance redressal mechanism,
monitoring, and reporting requirements. The ESMS and the Project Administration Manual
provide the recommended environmental appraisal checklist, initial asbestos management
requirements, and safeguard monitoring report.

47.     Project financing is exclusively allocated for mortgage subloans and will not fund housing
construction. Funds will be used only for existing single houses or units within multi-story buildings
with clear ownership status, no legacy issues, and ready for purchase. Energy efficiency
renovations are not financed through the loan but are reimbursed upon completion. Since the
loans will be used to purchase existing units/houses and the renovation works will be carried out
within the premises of existing units and houses, no adverse land acquisition and resettlement
impacts are anticipated.

48.     The ESMS recommends policies and procedures related to the environment and social
safeguards to ensure compliance of SMC and PFIs with the Safeguard Policy Statement. If SMC
or a PFI has existing policies or procedures on safeguards, such as ESMSs, these will be updated
to align them with the ESMS. SMC will provide support if a PFI needs to prepare its ESMS.
SMC will appoint a safeguards manager to oversee the implementation of the ESMS and act as
the focal person for safeguards compliance for the project. Each PFI will appoint a safeguard focal
person. The SMC safeguards manager will support each PFI’s safeguard focal person and ensure
all ESMS implementation staff are provided with the necessary resources and capacity-building
support.

B.     Economic and Financial Viability

49.     The proposed project is viable and expected to provide economic benefits to the main
project stakeholders. The project addresses inefficiencies in financial intermediation by
developing standardized green and women's mortgage products, reducing information costs, and
encouraging broader market participation. Enhanced financial inclusion generates economy-wide
benefits through improved capital allocation, increased entrepreneurship, and reduced reliance
on informal financial mechanisms. Energy-efficient housing generates cost savings through
reduced utility expenses, while green building standards and technologies create knowledge
spillovers that enhance construction industry capabilities and economy-wide productivity.
Women’s access to housing finance promotes economic empowerment across urban and rural
areas, contributing to broader economic growth. The project will introduce good international
14


practices in building design, energy management, and environmental certification that will
permanently improve local construction industry capabilities and sustainable housing quality.

50.      SMC demonstrates strong financial performance for the period ending 30 December 2024.
SMC’s balance sheet grew at a compound annual asset growth rate of 71% between fiscal year
(FY) 2020 and FY2024 on the back of multiple rounds of funding from the government and grant
funding from KfW, with equity growing from Som554 million to Som32.7 billion during the same
period. Loans to banks account for Som10.8 billion, constituting 23% of total assets at the end of
2024. A net profit of Som314 million was reported for 2024, with a net-interest margin of 3.2%.
SMC effectively managed expenses as demonstrated by its cost-to-income ratio of 39% in
FY2024. SMC holds an adequate liquidity and funding profile with no exposure to foreign
exchange risks. As of October 2024, SMC held a legacy loan portfolio through the State Affordable
Housing Programs with 14 commercial banks that provided 7,724 mortgages totaling Som12
billion at below-market interest rates of 4%–8%. SMC also operates its own rent-to-own scheme
without the participation of banks, offering properties directly owned. SMC’s most significant
exposure is to state-owned banks.

51.     The PFIs with confirmed due diligence through May 2025, Aiyl Bank, Eldik Bank, and
Demir Bank, are well capitalized, have sufficient liquidity, and are profitable. Their financial
conditions are projected to remain sound throughout the project implementation period.
The banks comply with all prudential regulations and have adequate credit and risk management
in place.
C.         Gender Equality

52.     The project is categorized gender equality objective.16 It addresses persistent gender-
based constraints in women’s access to housing finance and home ownership in the Kyrgyz
Republic. The key gender issues identified during due diligence include women’s limited asset
ownership and economic security, particularly in rural areas, lack of formal income and credit
history, limited financial and legal literacy, which restricts women’s ability to access and manage
mortgage products; absence of sex-disaggregated loan data; and limited representation of
women in housing finance decision-making.

53. To address these barriers, the project includes the key gender-responsive actions:
(i) SMC and PFIs design and launch a dedicated Women’s Mortgage Program; (ii) SMC adopts
a gender policy by the SMC to institutionalize gender equality across housing finance operations;
(iii) SMC integrates of a sex-disaggregated loan tracking system to strengthen gender-sensitive
monitoring; (iv) SMC conducts a study to assess constraints and opportunities for improving
women’s access to mortgage financing, and; (v) SMC adopts a reward program to incentivize
energy efficiency improvement or reduce waste consumption in housing for women including
those vulnerable. Overall, the project will promote home ownership and economic empowerment
for women by allocating a certain percentage of loan proceeds to eligible women subborrowers.
It will also enable women’s access to overall finance by providing women with financial and credit
histories and through the associated benefit of digital and financial literacy.

D.         Poverty and Social Dimensions

54.     The project will contribute to the national objectives of poverty reduction and inclusive
growth by enabling SMCs and PFIs to provide affordable, fixed-rate mortgages in local currency
with longer tenors to address the housing needs of target groups. It aims to (i) enable eligible low-
16
     Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex 5).
                                                                                                          15


to-moderate-income households to purchase housing that meets green standards; and
(ii) help women in the low-to-moderate-income group purchase housing.

55.      The direct beneficiaries of the project will be low-to-moderate-income borrowers.
The women's mortgage program will specifically focus on women, particularly vulnerable women,
including (i) women with disabilities or who have legal guardianship of disabled persons;
(ii) unmarried women who are orphans and no older than 25; and (iii) single women with more
than three children or more than four household members. Additionally, the project aims to foster
social inclusion by paying specific attention to other vulnerable groups, such as people with
disabilities, ethnic and language minorities, and rural populations. The project is expected to
produce direct and indirect effects through several channels of impact. Employment is expected
to indirectly increase through the dynamization of the construction sector, creating new
opportunities. With the necessary adjustments, some informal sector construction workers could
be formalized. These job opportunities could also become more inclusive for women, ethnic
minorities, persons with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups. Access to mortgages and
housing for low-to-moderate income groups, disadvantaged groups, and women, especially
vulnerable women, is expected to increase. A rewards program will enable women borrowers to
improve the energy efficiency of their housing. Through the promotion of housing to the low-to-
moderate-income segment of the population across the country’s oblasts through differentiated
pricing and product offerings, the project will also support the eradication of rural and regional
inequalities in the country.17

56.     Importantly, the project will facilitate access not only to housing but also to ownership of
the physical asset. This will help close the homeownership gap for the project's beneficiaries,
particularly women. Physical accessibility for people with disabilities is a primary consideration,
and the project will link its interventions to necessary disability-inclusive standards. The project
aims to promote beneficiaries' effective voice and participation by involving them or their
representatives in project design and monitoring and evaluation processes whenever possible.
The project also aims to ensure the inclusion of people with disabilities and ethnic and/or language
minorities by providing adapted materials to support their awareness and effective participation.
Progress and results will be tracked using a mix of outcome and output indicators. These
indicators will monitor the implementation and access of GMP and WMP mortgages, the effective
acquisition of legal property by beneficiaries, and the release of rewards to women participating
in the energy efficiency and waste reduction program.

E.         Procurement, Financial Management, and Integrity

57.        No procurement of goods or work will be undertaken. No consulting service will be utilized.

58.     Financial due diligence on SMC was conducted in accordance with ADB’s guidelines and
technical guidance note on financial intermediaries. The overall pre-mitigation financial
management risk is substantial because of (i) weaknesses in SMC’s corporate governance,
especially the frequent changes of management and members of its board of directors in
connection with a lack of finance expertise found among mostly public servant appointees; (ii)
weaknesses in the company’s risk management framework, especially the risk management of
the complex and growing real estate development/construction activities and the management of
the valuation and interest rate risk management of the lease receivables portfolio; (iii) weak
operational profitability because of its mission and governmental oversight; and (iv) internal
operational gaps that may affect the smooth and compliant-with ADB’s financial management

17
     National Statistical Committee of the Kyrgyz Republic. Poverty Rate (accessed on 31 October 2024).
16


requirements implementation of the ensuing project. SMC needs to enhance and strengthen its
capacity in project administration and supervision. The linked TA will provide capacity
development support. Financial covenants will be included and monitored as a risk-mitigating
action. SMC must comply with all regulatory norms and ADB financial covenants throughout
project implementation.

59.     Integrity due diligence was conducted on SMC, its Board of Directors, and key
management members. The results indicate that these do not constitute a significant or potentially
significant integrity risk to the project. ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended from time
to time) and relevant guidelines and procedures were explained to and discussed with the
government; the Ministry of Construction Architecture, Housing and Communal Services; and
SMC.

F.     Sustainability

60.    The project is sustainable, because it will expand the number of people in the low-to-
moderate income group, including women in the Kyrgyz Republic, who are acquiring residential
properties by accessing green mortgage finance and green renovation loans. Improvements to
the housing conditions of people in the low-to-moderate-income group will enable long-term
improvements to livelihood conditions and economic development of the country. The green
housing criteria to be developed and used as eligibility criteria for the program will serve as a
benchmark for mortgage finance and overall green financing activities in the finance sector. The
mortgage programs to be offered will incorporate market-based incentives from the commercial
banking sector. The underwriting criteria developed for the project will remain the basis for SMC’s
future mortgage loan offerings and PFIs. The linked TA will support SMC in enhancing its
sustainable funding strategy to allow it to seek external financing from public and private sector
sources to back green mortgages and other socially targeted lending schemes.

G.     Summary of Risk Assessment

61.    The key assessed pre-mitigation risks and mitigating measures are summarized in
Table 3.

                     Table 3: Summary of Risks and Mitigating Measures
 Risks                                                Mitigation Measures
 SMC’s credit and market risk assessment and          ADB technical assistance will develop SMC’s
 management capacities may not be sufficiently        capacity for governance, internal controls and risk
 robust to ensure compliance with mortgage and        management functions through ADB TA. Financial
 lease sector regulatory requirements or to conduct   covenants will be applied for SMC and participating
 adequate assessments of credit and market risks.     financial institutions.

 Current SMC operational staff resources and          SMC      management     will assess   staffing
 arrangements may find challenges to ensure timely    arrangements and resources and, if necessary,
 and due project implementation.                      hire additional staff.
 SMC accounting software may not be functional        SMC will: (i) update the existing accounting
 enough to ensure separate management and             software; or (ii) install separate accounting
 maintenance of ADB project accounts and              software.
 transactions.
 SMC’s financial manuals and procedures do            SMC will revise policies and procedures to reflect
 not reflect ADB requirements in financial            ADB’s financial management requirements by:
 management.                                          (i) developing and adopting of a manual reflecting
                                                                                                         17


 Risks                                                   Mitigation Measures
                                                         ADB’s requirements, or (ii) updating existing
                                                         manuals.
 SMC internal oversight responsibilities are             SMC’s Board of Directors will review their Charter
 assigned to an inspector where this arrangement         and organizational structure and establish a
 does not constitute a duly established internal audit   dedicated internal audit function.
 function as defined by the Institute of Internal
 Auditor’' Standards.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IIA = Institute of Internal Auditors, SMC = State Mortgage Company.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

                              V.       ASSURANCES AND CONDITIONS

62.    The government and SMC have assured ADB that implementation of the project shall
conform to all applicable ADB requirements, including those concerning anticorruption measures,
safeguards, gender equality, procurement, consulting services, financial management, and
disbursement, as further mentioned in the loan and grant documents.

63.     The government and SMC have agreed with ADB on certain covenants for the project,
which are set forth in the draft loan agreement and project agreement. Before a withdrawal of the
loan and grant proceeds is made for relending to PFIs, a PFI shall have (among others)
established an ESMS satisfactory to ADB.

                                      VI.      RECOMMENDATION

64.   I am satisfied that the proposed loan and grant would comply with the Articles of
Agreement of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and recommend that the Board approve

         (i)     the loan of $45,000,000 to the Kyrgyz Republic for the Enhancing Housing Finance
                 for Affordable and Energy-Efficient Housing Project, from ADB’s ordinary capital
                 resources, in concessional terms, with an interest charge at the rate of 1.0% per
                 year during the grace period and 1.5% per year thereafter; for a term of 32 years,
                 including a grace period of 8 years; and such other terms and conditions as are
                 substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft loan and project
                 agreements presented to the Board; and
         (ii)    the grant not exceeding $20,000,000 to the Kyrgyz Republic from ADB’s Special
                 Funds resources (Asian Development Fund) for the Enhancing Housing Finance
                 for Affordable and Energy-Efficient Housing Project, on terms and conditions that
                 are substantially in accordance with those set forth in the draft grant and project
                 agreements presented to the Board.


                                                                            Masato Kanda
                                                                            President

8 September 2025
18      Appendix


                            DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK

Impact the Project is Aligned with
Gender equality promotion, sustainable economic growth, and green development supported.a
                                                            Data Sources and                Risks and
Results Chain           Performance Indicators            Reporting Mechanisms        Critical Assumptions
Outcome             By 2031
Acquisition of      a. The volume of mortgages            a-b.    SMC       annual   R: Weak economic
energy-efficient,   issued for energy efficient,          progress reports.          conditions cause a
sustainable,        sustainable,     green,       and                                disruption in the supply
green, and          affordable housing to the low-to-                                of housing offered to the
affordable          moderate income group reaches                                    target groups.
housing units       at least 1,000 with at least 60%
by the low-to-      issued to women and 30
moderate income     to     designated      vulnerable
group supported.    individuals. (2025 baseline:
                    None)

                    b. At least 30% of green
                    mortgages issued to women.
                    (2025 baseline: None)
Outputs             By 2031
1. GMP product      1a. At least one new GMP loan         1a-b.    SMC      annual   A: Government backing
for new housing     product created. (2025 baseline:      progress reports.          access to affordable
acquisition by      None)                                                            mortgages sustained.
low-to-moderate
income              1b. Green housing criteria
households,         developed and adopted by
including women,    SMC. (2025 baseline: None)
developed.
2. Access to        2a. At least one WMP offered by       2a-e.   SMC     annual
mortgages by        SMC. (2025 baseline: None)            progress reports, and
women, including                                          SMC and PFI websites
those vulnerable,   2b. Number of housing units
enhanced.           owned by women, including
                    those vulnerable, in the regions
                    supported by SMC increased by
                    at least 150. (2025 baseline:
                    635)

                    2c. By 2027 SMC’s Gender
                    Equality and Inclusion Policyc
                    developed and adopted. (2025
                    baseline: None)

                    2d.       SMC        and      PFIs
                    institutionalized the use of a sex-
                    disaggregated loan tracking
                    systemb leading to product
                    design to increase uptake
                    among women borrowers. (2025
                    baseline: None)
                                                                                                       Appendix       19

                                                                 Data Sources and                    Risks and
Results Chain              Performance Indicators              Reporting Mechanisms            Critical Assumptions
                       2e. At least 2,000 potential and
                       actual borrowers of which 1,500
                       women,        including     those
                       vulnerable,      improved    their
                       financial literacy skillsd (2025
                       baseline: 0)
3. Program to          3a. Reward program adopted             3a.     SMC          annual
incentivize raising    and at least 50 women, including       progress            reports,
energy efficiency      those     vulnerable      receive      website
or reducing waste      incentives      for    purchasing
and consumption        energy-efficient or low-waste
for women’s            housing units through reward
housing created.       program. (2025 baseline: None)
Key Activities with Milestones
1. GMP product for new housing acquisition by low-to-moderate income households, including
    women, created.
1.1 Draft green housing standards prepared by Q1 2026
1.2 Initial outreach on green housing standards started by Q1 2026
1.3 Green housing underwriting criteria incorporates green housing standards by Q4 2026
1.4 GMP offering initiated by Q1 2027
2. Access to mortgages by women, including those vulnerable, enhanced.
2.1 Underwriting criteria for WMP, including those vulnerable, adopted by Q4 2025.
2.2 Underwriting criteria for regional WMP, including those vulnerable, adopted by Q4 2025.
2.3 Draft and adopt subloan agreements with PFIs by Q1 2026.
2.4 Promote new WMP product (that also covers vulnerable women) throughout SMC network by Q2 2026.
2.5 Launch a women and vulnerable-inclusive public awareness and information campaign targeting
    women’s mortgages by Q2 2026.
2.6 Develop and adopt SMC’s Gender Equality and Inclusion Policy by Q2 2026.
3. Program to incentivize raising energy efficiency or reducing waste and consumption for
    women’s housing created.
3.1 Scope of efficiency improvements and costs assessed and finalized by Q4 2025.
3.2 Program details finalized by Q1 2026.
3.3 Program offered to WMP subborrowers, including vulnerable women by 2Q 2026.
3.4 First annual review of incentivization program occurs by Q2 2027.
Inputs
ADB: $20 million Asian Development Fund grant and $45 million concessional loan.
A = assumption, ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMF = design and monitoring framework, DR = development result,
GMP = Green Mortgage Program, OP = operational priority, PFIs = Participating Financial Institutions, R = risk, SMC
= State Mortgage Company, WMP = Women’s Mortgage Program.
a
  Government of Kyrgyz Republic. 2021. Updated Nationally Determined Contributions. Bishkek, Government of
  Kyrgyz Republic. 2018. National Development Strategy 2018-2040. Bishkek, and Government of Kyrgyz Republic.
  2019. Green Economy Development Plan 2019-2023. Bishkek.
b
  A sex-disaggregated loan tracking system will track data on loan applications, approvals, repayment, and down
  payment support for women leading to the design of products aimed at increasing uptake among women borrowers.
c
  The gender equality and inclusion policy will promote gender equality in staffing of SMC, professional development
  of women, and strengthen gender-sensitive service delivery to the population by ensuring better access to housing
  finance for women, especially from vulnerable groups.
d
  PFIs will conduct dedicated consultations with both potential and current female borrowers to enhance their
  understanding of mortgage products, payment terms, and overall financial literacy topics. Tailored training materials
  will be developed and shared with the frontline staff. PFIs will assess the effectiveness of these consultations through
  a satisfaction survey.
  Sustainable Development Goals supported: (i) Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere (1.4); (ii) Goal 5:
  Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls (5.a); and (iii) Goal 11: make cities and human settlements
  inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable (11.1).
Source: Asian Development Bank.
