Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                            The World Bank
                                                                            Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)




                                                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized        Public Disclosure Authorized




                    For Official Use Only
                                                                                           Project Information Document (PID)


                                                                                          Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Aug-2023 | Report No: PIDC34206




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
                                                                      BASIC INFORMATION




                                                                   June 8, 2023                                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                                 The World Bank
                                 Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)



                          A. Basic Project Data
                          Project Beneficiary(ies)        Operation ID                  Operation Name
                          EASTERN AND SOUTHERN            P178986                       Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking
                          AFRICA                                                        (GRIHD) Facility
                          Estimated Appraisal Date        Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          22-Dec-2023                     07-Mar-2024                   Finance, Competitiveness
                                                                                        and Innovation
                          Financing Instrument            Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
                          Investment Project              Eastern and Southern          Eastern and Southern
                          Financing (IPF)                 African Trade and             African Trade and
                                                          Development Bank (TDB)        Development Bank (TDB)

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




For Official Use Only
                          The overarching Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase private capital mobilization to expand access to
                          green, resilient and inclusive housing for target beneficiaries in select countries in Eastern and Southern Africa.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           Maximizing Finance for Development

                           Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                           Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY
                             Total Operation Cost                                                                                         542.50

                             Total Financing                                                                                              542.50
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 180.00

                             Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

                          DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 180.00

                                 IDA Credit                                                                                                180.00

                             Non-World Bank Group Financing


                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                                     The World Bank
                                     Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)


                                  Commercial Financing                                                                                                                                                                                  362.50

                                      Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                                                                                                                 362.50


                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
                         Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                                                        Concept Review Decision
                         High                                                                                                                The review did authorize the preparation to continue



                             B. Introduction and Context

                             Regional Context

                         1. Economic growth in Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) is expected to decelerate amid the persistent sluggishness




For Official Use Only
                         of the global economy made worse by multiple, overlapping global shocks including the COVID-19 pandemic. Growth
                         in 2023 is estimated to decline to 3.0 percent from 3.5 percent in 20221 as the region continues to deal with
                         macroeconomic instability, shrinking fiscal space, low investment growth, soaring commodity prices, and food shortages
                         triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The region’s performance is set to weaken further as the climate change crisis
                         deepens, notably the devastating droughts in the Horn of Africa and detrimental cyclones in Southern Africa.

                         2. Despite these challenges, the region’s demographic boom combined with rapid urbanization presents enormous
                         opportunities for development, equitable growth and prosperity. AFE's population increased from 312 million in 1994
                         to 633 million in 2021. It is expected to grow to 1.1 billion by 2050, accounting for almost half of Africa’s population2. At
                         present, nearly half of the region's population is under 18 and the urbanization rates in many of the countries are some
                         of the highest in the world (Table 1). Most cities are not prepared to absorb the massive influx of populations and cite
                         challenges in providing adequate public services, infrastructure and housing, perpetuating inequality and exclusion.

                         3. On top of this, the manner in which the right to housing is to be realized has implications for climate change and
                         sustainable development. Globally, approximately 37 percent of global energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions
                         come from the building and construction sector stemming from the manufacturing of building materials, such as cement,
                         steel, bricks or glass (9 percent) and the operation of buildings, mostly from electricity use (28 percent).3 While the region
                         has contributed marginally to these figures, ambitious national mass housing programs, e.g. Kenya’s 500,000 homes,
                         Uganda’s 15 new cities, Zambia’s declaration to provide decent and affordable houses for 30,000 civil servants and 15,000
                         nurses, etc. once realized will not only drive-up demand for building materials, amplifying their embedded carbon
                         emissions and environmental footprints4; it will also increase energy demand for cooling and water heightening the risk
                         of carbon lock-in and pressure on scarce water resources. It is thus imperative that new mass housing programs in AFE
                         are conceptualized, planned and implemented with long-term environmental sustainability in mind.




                         1
                           World Bank. 2023. Leveraging Resource Wealth During the Low Carbon Transition. Africa’s Pulse, No. 27 (April)
                         2
                           Brookings Institution. 2020. Urban Economic Growth in Africa: A framework for analyzing constraints to agglomeration, Working Paper 24
                         3
                           UNEP, 2022 Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction: Towards a zero-emissions, efficient and resilient buildings and construction sector (2020)
                         4
                           Beyond their carbon footprint, housing construction is also responsible for other environmental effects. Construction materials rely on inputs from mineral-based extractive processes which, if not properly managed, cause
                         deleterious environmental impacts across the material life cycle such as biodiversity loss and water scarcity. E.g., the extraction, sourcing, use and management of sand, which is a main input for cement, remains largely
                         ungoverned in many African countries, leading to environmental and social consequences that have been mostly overlooked.



                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 3 of 11
                                        The World Bank
                                        Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)


                              Sectoral and Institutional Context

                         4. Housing is a complex sector that requires the alignment of many inputs from multiple economic sectors and direct
                         contributions from households to create sustainable outcomes. The housing value chain in Eastern and Southern Africa
                         confronts a myriad of supply- and demand-side challenges. The dearth of private investment in the sector is of particular
                         concern. Closing the current housing gap in Africa will require an investment of at least US$2.5 billion in new investment
                         annually5. While the sector offers compelling social and economic returns, these arguments provide an insufficient driver
                         for conventional investors. Investors in the region still perceive housing delivery as high risk and both the financial and
                         private sector are reluctant to invest. This is especially true for housing programs that endeavor to embed climate
                         considerations through new technologies and materials which are seen as introducing a new layer of risk to the already
                         “unbankable” transactions. Capital markets, which play an important intermediary role in mobilizing large-scale long-term
                         local currency financing, remain underdeveloped. Institutional investors such as pension funds, sovereign wealth funds
                         and insurance companies hold the necessary local currency resources to scale-up the much-needed financing but require
                         substantive credit-enhancements.

                         5. This confluence of housing and climate change and environmental crises therefore underlines the importance of a




For Official Use Only
                         holistic strategy. A strategy that thinks of housing delivery as an end-to-end process rather than the end product of a
                         physical structure. A value chain solution that causes less harm and delivers more benefits across the development process
                         i.e. from material sourcing and manufacturing to end-user offtake. This “whole-of-carbon” approach will aim to
                         encompass a broad set of environmental factors in the construction and operation of the buildings including limiting their
                         lifecycle green-house gas (GHG) emissions and pollutions and promoting better natural resources and biodiversity
                         management (green), strengthening climate and disaster resilience (resilient), and reducing disparities (inclusive).

                         6. Important obstacles remain to the mainstreaming of an equitable and sustainable housing transformation AFE.
                         While government enabling actions (such as in Kenya, where policy prioritization of housing has catalyzed waves of private
                         sector activities) invites market interest in the sector, these efforts are not enough by themselves. These challenges
                         include: (i) limited local availability of green and climate resilient building materials and technology; (ii) acute public fiscal
                         constraints to deliver green and resilient housing infrastructure services; (iii) high costs for green construction/
                         refurbishment and poor participation of financial institutions in the sector; and (iv) lack of affordable end-user finance.
                         There’s therefore a noted need to ease/eliminate market barriers for key value chain actors i.e. “de-risk” suppliers and
                         manufacturers, developers, investors and financiers, owners and tenants, via a broad range of enabling market reforms
                         as well as catalytic public investments and innovative financial structures, incentives and risk sharing tools.

                         7. An integrated regional approach is proposed to capture the positive externalities that will result from the growth
                         of green, resilient and inclusive housing markets in AFE. Through a regional platform, markets can: augment economies
                         of scale; effectively pool and share risks; facilitate collective action; and promote efficiency gains through specialization,
                         policy harmonization, cross-border trade, and knowledge sharing. Improved regulatory environments and cross-border
                         integration will further ensure that value-chain development and expansion are driven by the private sector, are
                         sustainable, promote innovation and competitiveness, and have a lasting, transformative impact on the ground. At its
                         core, the proposed Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-risking (GRIHD) Facility heeds this call while
                         presenting opportunities for sharing successful models and lessons learned with other regions in this cross-cutting issue.

                              Relationship to CPF

                         8. The proposed Facility is strongly aligned with the World Bank’s (WB) Africa Regional Integration Strategy. The

                         5
                             Shelter Afrique, 2019



                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                             Page 4 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)


                         Facility supports Pillar 2 on Promoting Trade and Market Integration - financial market integration through development
                         of long-term financial markets for housing and Pillar 4 on Reinforcing resilience - climate change. Drawing more on the
                         private sector as an engine of integration is a key action to achieving the strategy. The Facility will complement and strongly
                         align with other interventions, approaches, and strategies of the WBG. These include:
                              ▪    WBG’s Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach in its efforts to mobilize capital toward
                                   housing investments that mitigate and enhance adaptation to climate change.
                              ▪    WBG’s Climate Change Action Plan 2021-2025 to foster transformative public and private investments in five key
                                   sectors in support of the Paris Climate Agreement: (i) energy; (ii) agriculture, food, water, and land; (iii) cities; (iv)
                                   transport; and (v) manufacturing, which together produce over 90 percent of global GHG emissions and face
                                   significant adaptation challenges. The housing sector and its variables are a transversal feature of all five sectors.
                              ▪    Strengthening of WBG’s delivery on Private Capital Facilitation (PCF) by unlocking private capital via co-financing
                                   from private investors through Private Capital Mobilization (PCM) and Private Capital Enabling (PCE) efforts.
                              ▪    WBG’s Jobs and Economic Transformation (JET) approach through employment creation in the process of green
                                   housing provision, including support to labor-intensive programs that generate more direct and indirect jobs.
                              ▪    Addressing gender gaps in the housing value chain by identifying opportunities for supplier and contractor




For Official Use Only
                                   diversity in the housing construction industry and promote inclusion in construction and end-user finance.
                              ▪    Adopting One WBG approach through partnerships with IFC and MIGA to explore complementarity in de-risking
                                   and credit enhancement products and advisory services, in particular IFC’s EDGE and Building Resilience Index
                                   (BRI) tools to advance the WBG’s long-standing commitment to green building and sustainable cities.

                          C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

                         9. The overarching Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Series of Projects (SOP) is to increase private capital
                         mobilization to expand access to green, resilient and inclusive housing for target beneficiaries in select countries in
                         Eastern and Southern Africa.

                         10. An SOP approach is proposed given the need: (i) for long-term, sustained efforts and greater adaptability during the
                         implementation process of this programmatic regional initiative; (ii) to support a learn-by-doing process to build on the
                         lessons and achievements captured from previous project(s) in the series; and (iii) to crowd-in strategic partners to scale-
                         up demonstration results thereby expanding the reach of the Facility as the time-series of projects are launched.

                         11. This Project, SOP 1, will be the first in a series of at least two projects with a PDO that aims to “establish and
                         operationalize the Africa GRIHD Facility to deliver financial de-risking products to value chain actors supporting green,
                         resilient and inclusive housing in select countries in Eastern and Southern Africa”. During this series, there will be a
                         natural focus on the more upstream segments of the value chain i.e. supply side with manufacturers, suppliers of housing
                         construction materials as well as private sector proponents of housing and infrastructure delivery. In subsequent series’,
                         the Facility will expand to the downstream demand side of the sector targeting beneficiary offtakers i.e. buyers/renters.
                         It is envisaged that with (a) the growing awareness and evidence of the business case for green and resilient buildings,
                         and (b) the decline of incremental costs due to the wider adoption of green and resilient building practices along the value
                         chain; an enhanced competitiveness and transformation of the housing sector will emerge.

                          Key Results (From PCN)
                         12. The proposed PDO level indicators for SOP 1 are:
                              a) Amount of private capital leveraged through the GRIHD-Facility (US$)
                              b) Number of loans disbursed to housing value chain actors through financial institutions, disaggregated by gender


                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                              Page 5 of 11
                                   The World Bank
                                   Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)


                                c) Amount of jobs, direct and indirect, created along the housing value chain, disaggregated by gender

                          D. Concept Description

                          13.      The Africa GRIHD Facility (“Facility”) introduces an innovative framework that systematically lowers the risks
                          which hold back private investment in green, resilient and inclusive housing in AFE. Conceptualized as a regional SOP,
                          it will be implemented in a sequenced, phased process. This demonstration/proof of concept phase (Figure 1) will target
                          low-hanging fruits characterized by markets with eligible pipelines to cost-effectively meet the risk-reward expectations
                          of investors and unlock private capital for higher impact including job creation, cross-border trade and broader regional
                          integration. The first series will also focus on easing entry barriers across the pilot countries by establishing standardized
                          procedures and replicable financial arrangements; an important regional harmonization and knowledge-sharing goal.

                                                                                       Figure 1: Conceptual Project Design




For Official Use Only




                          Component 1: Catalyzing Private Capital for Housing Value Chain (US$175 million)

                          Sub-component 1.1: Sustainable De-Risking Solutions (US$145 million)
                          14.     This sub-component will support the establishment, capitalization and operationalization of the Facility as a
                          ring-fenced Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) within the Eastern and Southern Africa Trade and Development Bank (TDB)
                          TDB will serve as the host for the SPV which will be set up as an international body corporate enjoying the same privileges
                          and immunities6 as other TDB Group entities. As a separate self-governing legal entity, the Facility will have its own
                          constitutive documents which provide for the Capital Structure, Governance, Management and Operational matters. The
                          Facility’s risks will be isolated ensuring its independent decision making and easy traceability of financing, while
                          benefitting from TDB’s financial institution network and experience across different jurisdictions in AFE.

                          15.    Operating at a wholesale level, the Facility will partner with a range of sound banks, microfinance and housing
                          finance institutions, i.e. PFIs, to deploy catalytic de-risking financial instruments in support of climate-informed housing
                          value chain solutions at scale. Under SOP 1, see Figure 2, the Facility will focus its efforts on deploying the IDA funds while
                          building the structures for the Facility’s sustainability, i.e. direct injection from investors and capital markets engagement.



                         6 https://www.tdbgroup.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/TDB-Charter-English_certified.pdf




                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                           Page 6 of 11
                                 The World Bank
                                 Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)


                          This platform construct, to manage the inflows and outflows to the eligible investees along the value chain, is
                          recommended for the following reasons:

                             ▪    Seed capital from TDB, via an IDA loan agreement, will help generate a crowd-in effect to foster progressive capital
                                  partnerships from impact investors, DFIs, and domestic institutional investors including from the capital markets.
                             ▪    Given the precedents of TDB’s other constituents, this structure would likely be the most straightforward option
                                  to establish and operate as well as leverage TDB’s track record of lending to local financial institutions.
                             ▪    As constituent of the TDB Group, the Facility would benefit from TDB’s tax exemptions, privileges and immunities.

                                                       Figure 2: Facility Design/Structure – SOP 1, Demonstration Phase




For Official Use Only




                          16.    Adopting an end-to-end approach on both the supply and demand sides of the sector, the Facility will offer a
                          range of complementary de-risking products targeting specific value chain interventions (“windows”):
                                                                    Table 1: Description of Value Chain Windows
                          Window           Overview
                          Window 1:        • This window will support manufacturers and suppliers of green, low-carbon technologies and construction
                          Supply Chain         materials. Typical “green” construction materials and technologies in the region include compressed earth
                                               bricks, local biomass products, prefabrication, modular construction, and solar panel roofs.
                                           • By innovating and maturing supply chains, the Facility will reduce the incremental cost and time taken in
                                               building green, resilient housing stocks and create skilled, local, green jobs.
                          Window 2:        • Via private service providers, this window will facilitate construction or reinforcement of last mile, shared/
                          Housing              common housing infrastructure that will improve adaptive capacity and resilience of residents and housing
                          Infrastructure       stocks, generate long-term economic benefits, and provide multiple environmental and social benefits.
                                           • Eligible projects may fall into the following categories: (i) green infrastructure (stormwater drainage systems,
                                               other nature-based solutions that reduce flood risks and heat stress), (ii) electricity generation (solar, wind), (iii)
                                               safety (solar or LED street lighting), (iv) access roads (local road network; footpaths, cycle ways), (v) utility
                                               connections (water supply), and (vi) waste management (waste collection and recycling).
                                           • Due to an inherently wider viability gap in the provision of offsite, last-mile connections to urban services (i.e.,
                                               from trunk to site; usually a municipality-level responsibility), it will be a bigger challenge to attract private
                                               capital in this window. The team will explore innovative solutions to ease this structural value chain gap,
                                               including the optimum engagement of the municipalities.



                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 11
                                 The World Bank
                                 Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)


                          Window 3:        •   This window will target its support to housing developers and contractors for construction and/or renovation of
                          Home                 green, resilient, and inclusive housing projects.
                          Construction     •   It will incentivize developers to commit to relevant national or local building codes on energy performance or
                          and/or               disaster risk management, absorb the cost of attaining green certification such as IFC’s EDGE, and/or reducing
                          Renovation           the post-disaster reconstruction needs through embedding resilience using a tool like IFC’s BRI.
                          Window 4:        •   Through retail banks and mortgage refinance companies (MRCs), this window will encourage offtake from
                          Home Offtake         target communities (including landlords) in various forms, e.g., rental, tenant purchase schemes, green
                          (triggered in        mortgages by providing competitive consumer finance for climate-smart homes using the lowest marginal,
                          future series)       commercially viable interest rate (in nominal terms). It will only be triggered when sufficient critical mass has
                                               been developed – i.e., the supply of housing units within client countries at a scale to absorb financing products.

                          17.     From an investment perspective, various risks and barriers will have differing levels of financial significance.
                          Generally, revenue exposure is of prime concern for financiers. At this conceptual level, the persistent concerns for FIs in
                          the housing sector appear to revolve around credit risk, currency/foreign exchange fluctuations and political risk. Based
                          on the sub-project in each window, capacity of the value chain actors and the level of PFIs “skin-in-the game”, the Facility
                          will offer de-risking products to cover the prevalent risk(s) thereby improving its investment attraction. Potential de-
                          risking products will come in two main categories i.e. (i) a funded contribution to the investment (such as subordinated




For Official Use Only
                          loans); or (ii) an unfunded instrument to be drawn upon when needed e.g. first/second loss provisions, partial credit
                          guarantees, hedging tools (e.g. cross-country swaps, forward contracts), political insurance, etc. At appraisal, pipeline
                          analysis and market sounding will be undertaken to identify and design these, and potentially other, diverse
                          implementable de-risking instruments that would be applicable in AFE across the spectrum of the housing value chain.

                          18.    Preliminary scoping analysis in Kenya, Uganda, Zambia, Mozambique and Tanzania show that while the
                          ecosystems for green and resilient housing are at nascent stage, tangible opportunities are emerging for sustainable
                          construction. Factors that went into reviewing these initial countries include the presence of (i) a national housing sector
                          development strategy and/or political commitment; (ii) robust building regulatory framework and a national building
                          code or regulations; (iii) developers and SMEs who are piloting green, ecologically responsible construction and energy
                          solutions; and (iv) stable macroeconomic factors. At preparation phase, a robust country selection framework will be
                          prepared towards the objective identification of first mover markets. Additionally, the Facility is designed to work in a
                          complementary and integrated manner with ongoing and/or planned national-level WB operations; it will therefore
                          ensure to coordinate and leverage synergies along the value chain, particularly on urban and land related issues.

                          19.     The Facility’s governance, capital and operational structures are central to its impact and sustainability. With
                          the support of WBG’s Joint Capital Market Program, preliminary options under consideration include the need for an
                          evolving capital structure that will be aligned with the risk-adjusted capital guidance of rating agencies, to secure a strong
                          credit rating down the line. Designing a robust governance framework that accommodates multiple shareholders and
                          their interests is also key. The Facility’s platform design creates opportunities for strategic partners such as IFC to invest
                          via debt or equity and expand their housing investment in Africa, MIGA’s political risk insurance and credit enhancement
                          guarantees to cover cross-border investors and lenders, GuarantCo’s local currency guarantees, Currency Exchange Fund
                          (TCX) currency risk hedging solutions, etc. Rather than having a displacing effect, the proposed operation would be
                          opening up markets for such key players. Preliminary conversations with these parties have been positive and will be
                          deepened throughout the preparation process. Market players such as Shelter Afrique, who have accumulated
                          knowledge and understanding of the sector across the region, will continue to be engaged towards facilitating portfolio
                          development and sourcing of potential deals.

                          20.      This sub-component will also explore leveraging vehicles and subsidiaries within TDB to enhance its de-risking
                          efforts. In particular, the TDB Captive Insurance (TCI) which was incorporated in 2021 to provide risk mitigation services
                          for its parent company TDB and other related group entities, focusing on insurance services for financial assets.

                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                                 The World Bank
                                 Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)



                          Sub-Component 1.2: Business Development and Investment Management (US$30 million)
                          21.    This sub-component will support the capitalization of TDB’s Green Project Preparation Facility (GPPF) - a
                          specialized TDB vehicle to manage GRIHD Facility’s de-risking objectives. Given TDB’s limited exposure and capacity on
                          climate-smart housing, it is proposed that the following functions are outsourced for independent expert support:
                              a) Transaction Support:
                                     ▪ Evaluate and undertake detailed due diligence on the de-risking applications brought forward by the PFIs,
                                         across the different windows and target markets within the AFE region.
                                     ▪ Assessments would cover the transaction cycle i.e. structuring and credit analysis, financial modelling -
                                         including review, stress-testing and carrying out of scenario analysis, and review of commercial and legal
                                         documentation to ensure the GRIHD Facility’s position is appropriately protected.
                              b) Portfolio Management and Development Impact:
                                     ▪ Track financial performance of the transactions and of the PFIs, as well as soundness of target markets.
                                     ▪ Track development impact metrices and regularly review their performance once the transaction is




For Official Use Only
                                         within the GRIHD Facility portfolio, while feeding back learnings to the broader PFI partners.
                                     ▪ Provide operational and administrative support for the proper administration of the transactions, with a
                                         focus on Health, Safety, Environmental and Social (HSES) management.
                              c) Business Development, Investment Strategy and Marketing:
                                     ▪ Actively seek out new deals by engaging proactively with the PFIs and value chain actors in target markets
                                         within the AFE region.
                                     ▪ Continuously improve on the Facility’s investment strategy and business plan and engage closely with
                                         potential strategic partners to foster collaborations and additional investments into the Facility.
                                     ▪ Assessment of securitization options to inform potentialities for the Facility’s capital structure in the
                                         future e.g. green bond issuances, as well as analysis of potential carbon financing avenues which offer
                                         growth opportunities to ensure the GRIHD Facility’s continued sustainability.

                          Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$5 million)

                          22.   This component will support the institutional strengthening and technical capacity building of TDB in this
                          complex and evolving topic. It is anticipated that TDB will co-ordinate this sub-component through its subsidiary “TDF
                          Academy” whose activities may be complemented with additional TA resources and/or in partnership with IFC's EDGE
                          and BRI tools, WBG’s Joint Capital Market Program (J-CAP), as well as other trust fund resources.

                          23.     Based on a thorough capacity needs assessment, a TA package will be developed. From the preliminary
                          engagements, activities are anticipated to fall into two broad categories and will be sequenced depending on immediate
                          and intermediate needs with a view of future SOPs, i.e. (i) build climate and housing intelligence within TDB; and (ii)
                          enhance PFI awareness and understanding on the sector. Activities under these categories will aim to signal to
                          participating countries and their regulators the need for harmonized policies and standardization to ensure the de-risking
                          tools, when deployed, can effectively deliver green, resilient, and inclusive outcomes in their jurisdictions.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate




                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                                 The World Bank
                                 Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)


                          Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                          Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
                          Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



                          To view the Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts, please refer to the Concept Stage ESRS Document.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT




For Official Use Only
                          World Bank
                            Hadija Rahama Diba Kamayo

                            Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                            Sheila W. Kamunyori

                            Senior Urban Development Specialist

                            Uloaku Oyewole

                            Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (TDB)
                            Admassu Tadesse, TDB Group President Emeritus and Managing Director, info@tdbgroup.org

                          Implementing Agencies
                            Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (TDB)
                            Admassu Tadesse, TDB Group President Emeritus and Managing Director, info@tdbgroup.org

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                        June 8, 2023                                                                                                 Page 10 of 11
                                 The World Bank
                                 Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)




                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                       Hadija Rahama Diba Kamayo, Sheila W. Kamunyori, Uloaku Oyewole

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:

                          Country Director:                          Boutheina Guermazi                       25-Aug-2023




For Official Use Only




                        June 8, 2023                                                                                             Page 11 of 11
