Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-risking (GRIHD) Facility (P178986)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                               FINAL Environmental and Social Action Plan
                                               (ESAP)


Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                           MARCH 9, 2024



Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                             1
The ESAP table below presents the various Actions that the implementing agency will fulfil to meet the
requirements of the Bank’s performance standards under OP 4.03.

 ESAP Action                                                                    Completion Date
 PS1: PS 1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
 1.     a. The Eastern and Southern Africa Trade and Development Bank Prior to effectiveness
            (TDB) will Upgrade its Environment & Social Management
            System (ESMS) to incorporate the Bank’s Bank reviewers’
            feedback on aspects of the ESMS that need to be strengthened
            to ensure its ability to mitigate risks and impacts of the Africa
            Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-risking (GRIHD)
            project.
        b. TDB will develop a Guidance Note (GN) for lending via Financial Prior to disbursement of
            Intermediaries (FIs) that will become part of its ESMS. TDB funds from World Bank to
            Management shall endorse the updated ESMS & the GN & its TDB
            disclosure. The ESMS and GN shall have E&S procedures for:
                i.   Lending via FIs including procedures for cascading E&S
                     compliance requirements to the FIs. The GN will be in
                     place prior to TDB disbursing to Participating Financial
                     Institutions (PFIs).
               ii.   Technical Assistance (TA) activities including
                     development of TA Terms of Reference (TOR) consistent
                     with the Performance Standards (PSs) prior to
                     undertaking any TA activity.
              iii.   Incorporating: i) project specific list of restricted
                     activities to exclude high risk activities from direct &
                     indirect lending prior to disbursement to TDB. These
                     include subprojects: for which land acquisition &
                     resettlement concerns are unresolved or land with
                     encumbrances (only for indirect lending); in
                     international waterways/disputed areas; that lead to
                     conversion of natural habitats/ecologically sensitive
                     areas or having adverse impacts on critical
                     habitats/legally protected & internationally recognized
                     areas of high biodiversity value; direct adverse impact on
                     ecosystem services that result in adverse health & safety
                     risks to affected communities; creates adverse impacts
                     on cultural heritage; & where a biodiversity offset is
                     proposed as a mitigation measure. ii) expanding E&S risk
                     section to encompass sectors like housing, solar home
                     systems, mini grids & TA activities including screening
                     procedures for avoiding significant risks/impacts. iii)
                     defining roles of E&S analyst, including field supervision
                     responsibilities if any. iv) enhancing the reporting
                     template, mandating project submissions covering E&S
                     performance, life & fire safety, Occupational Health &
                     Safety (OHS) & workplace environment data, grievance
                     information & E&S Management Plans (ESMP) updates.

                                                  2
ESAP Action                                                               Completion Date
                   v) Incorporating PFI training provisions.
              iv.  As part of a subproject’s ESIA study, TDB and PFIs shall Ongoing during
                   evaluate cumulative impacts of subprojects                implementation
2.    a. TDB will develop and implement an Inclusion Strategy in line with Prior to Disbursement of
          the Bank’s Inclusion Agenda to ensure vulnerable and Funds from World Bank to
          marginalized groups and individuals are able to access benefits TDB
          from subprojects implemented by TDB and PFIs through World
          Bank Financing.
      b. TDB will cascade the Inclusion Strategy down to PFIs. During        Cascade prior to
          implementation TDB and the PFIs will agree on a set of             disbursement of Project
          indicators and an appropriate reporting process for monitoring Funds from TDB to PFIs
          and reporting on the implementation of the strategy. TDB will      Implementation ongoing
          monitor implementation of the strategy by PFIs in line with the throughout the project’s life
          agreed indicators. PFIs will implement the strategy throughout
          the life of the project.
3.    TDB will cascade E&S requirements in line with TDB ESMS/Bank PSs Prior to deal signing between
      to PFIs & monitor PFIs for compliance. TDB will require each PFI to TDB and any PFI
      have an acceptable ESMS and enforce the E&S requirements. The
      ESMS commitments of the PFIs will be explicitly mentioned in the
      loan agreement signed between TDB and the PFI. In this regard:
      a. TDB will require the PFI to have an ESMS that mirrors the TDB
          ESMS & in line with the World Bank PSs/EHS Guidelines, & TDB
          will ensure it is operationalized/implemented for subprojects to
          be supported through the Project fund.
      b. Each accredited PFI will have at least one E&S focal point
          assigned to work with TDB to ensure that the ESMS is in place,
          confirmed by senior PFI management, and maintained and
          monitored. PFIs will ensure applicable E&S requirements are
          included in financing agreements signed with each financed
          subproject/investment and will perform monitoring and
          reporting of E&S performance.
      c. TDB will require the initial group of any selected PFIs to disclose Prior to disbursement of
          their ESMSs. Others will join the project over time and will be Project funds to PFIs
          required to submit their ESMS to TDB for review and approval.
          TDB will share these with the World Bank for no objection. All
          PFIs will be required to disclose their ESMS on their website.
      d. TDB will oversee implementation of PFIs’ ESMSs by reviewing Ongoing during
          PFIs E&S Due Diligence (ESDD)/supervision reports, assessing implementation
          PFIs’ annual reports, performing site supervision & evaluating
          E&S instruments
4.    TDB to include in its financing agreements with PFIs that PFIs will:   Ongoing during
      a. Not support subprojects on list of restricted activities.           implementation
      b. Support projects only on unencumbered land.
      c. Undertake land acquisition audits (with TDB support) to ensure
          the land/site that is being proposed for subproject
          implementation was acquired in line with PS5 requirements.

                                                3
ESAP Action                                                                    Completion Date
5.    On E&S capacity for the Project, TDB will recruit at least 3 E&S
      specialists by end of Q2, 2024. The Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) will
      have its own dedicated E&S staff who will be supported by TDB’s
      team and consultants. To this end:
      a. TDB will assign and maintain throughout implementation period,        Assign specialist prior to
          at least one dedicated/qualified E&S specialist for GRIHD,           effectiveness
          supported by TDB’s E&S consultants.
      b. TDB will report on, & the Bank will assess, availability of the       3 months after effectiveness
          additional E&S staff
      c. TDB will continually assess the availability and adequacy of both     Ongoing during
          human and financial resources for E&S management, and will           implementation
          augment them as necessary to achieve effective and continuous
          environmental and social performance, as foreseen in PS1

       d. Undertake third-party monitoring of ESMS implementation by           Ongoing during
          PFIs including E&S Due Diligences (ESDDs) & supervision of PFIs      implementation
          subproject
       e. TDB to require/ensure PFIs have a focal point for ESMS               Prior to disbursement of
          implementation & qualified consultants on call to support            funds to PFIs for on-lending
          him/her with ESDD/ongoing monitoring of subprojects.                 or in support of PFI portfolios
                                                                               through de-risking
6.     On stakeholder engagement, TDB will:                                    During implementation
       a. Maintain its External Communication Mechanism (ECM) during
           implementation to receive, register, screen, assess, track,
           respond to & act on external inquiries/complaints from the
           public on TDB GRIHD operations
       b. Require PFIs to develop, disclose/implement an ECM to receive,Prior to disbursement from
           register, screen, assess, track, respond to/act on public    TDB to PFIs & during
           enquiries/complaints regarding their operations              implementation
       c. Require subprojects financed by TDB or via PFIs to develop andSubprojects to develop SEP
           implement Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) including a      prior to disbursement of
           Grievance Mechanism (GM) commensurate with subproject E&S    Project funds to them by TDB
           risks                                                        or PFIs
                                                                        Subprojects to implement
                                                                        the SEP throughout
                                                                        implementation
       d. TDB/PFIs will sensitize stakeholders on SEP/GM, how to access Prior to start of subproject
            it, its process, & timeframes                               implementation and ongoing
                                                                        during implementation
       e. Cause PFIs to report complaints/grievances that arise from Ongoing during
            project implementation & how they have been resolved/closed implementation
            out.
7.     TDB will prepare and implement an E&S capacity building plan for Plan finalized & agreed with
       itself and PFIs for GRIHD implementation in line with World Bank Bank within 3 months of
       PSs.

                                                   4
ESAP Action                                                                Completion Date
                                                                           effectiveness & implemented
                                                                           per the schedule therein.
8.     For the management of resettlement risks and impacts under the Ongoing during
       facility, TDB will submit all E&S instruments for sub-projects with implementation
       resettlement activities to the Bank for review and approval.

9.     On reporting, TDB will submit to the Bank reports on E&S, including       3 months after effectiveness
       grievance management performance in line with this ESAP                   & quarterly during
                                                                                 implementation
10.    In line with Bank’s E&S Incident Reporting System (ESIRT), TDB will: During implementation
       a) Notify the Bank within 48 hours of becoming aware of incidents,
       accidents, or other circumstances related to any program
       component, implemented by TDB/PFIs, with material impact on
       compliance with the PSs. Following the notification, TDB will
       undertake/cause PFIs to undertake a root/cause analysis & share
       report with Bank within one week or a time agreed with the Bank. b)
       TDB will require PFIs/subprojects to report within 72 hours of
       becoming aware of occurrence of any incidents/accidents in their
       portfolio that have material impact on compliance with the PSs.
PS 2 Labor/Working Conditions
11.    TDB to ensure PFIs have Human Resources (HR) systems (including Prior to disbursement to PFIs
       systems for working conditions, terms of employment and the
       management of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual
       Harassment (SEA/SH) risks) & OHS procedures in line with PS2, EHS
       Guidelines/GIIP
       TDB/PFIs to ensure via specific clauses in their financing agreements Ongoing during
       that they have HR policy including working conditions and terms of implementation
       employment, OHS procedures complying with local labor laws/PS2.
       Subprojects to develop/implement OHS plans in line with the Bank
       Environment, Health & Safety (EHS) Guidelines/ GIIP
PS3 Resource Efficiency/Pollution Prevention
12.    TDB/PFIs will assess/mitigate via site-specific plans e.g., e-waste, Ongoing during
       hazardous material & resource efficiency management plans for implementation
       risks/impacts related to PS3.
PS 4 Community Health, Safety & Security
13.    TDB/PFIs will assess/mitigate via site specific management plans Ongoing during
       including road safety/traffic management, security, SEA/SH, disaster implementation
       risk, HIV/AIDs etc. related to PS4.
PS 5 Land Acquisition/Involuntary Resettlement
14. a. TBD and PFIs will support subprojects that fall under the following Ongoing during
           two scenarios: (i) subprojects located on available land that had implementation
           been acquired in the past (historical acquisition); (ii) land pending
           acquisition through a willing-buyer willing-seller agreement.



                                                   5
ESAP Action                                                                     Completion Date
      b. In case a subproject is proposed for financing under GRIHD, but
          land acquisition for the subproject is pending, ongoing or planned
          (scenario ii above), TDB and PFIs will assess E&S risks and impacts
          of the acquisition process in line with PS5 via respective ESDDs
          and/or land acquisition audits, to ensure land for such subprojects
          is being acquired in a manner that is consistent with PS5 and does
          not involve acquisition through eminent domain. Such
          subprojects will remain in the pipeline until the acquisition
          process has been completed in line with PS5 to the satisfaction of
          the World Bank.
      c. In scenario ii above, TDB and PFIs will undertake ESDD in line with
          PS5, including land acquisition audits to ensure land historically
          acquired for subprojects has no encumbrances/legacy or any
          residual issues.
      d. Where the DD/audit finds that there are encumbrances, legacy or
          residual issues, TDB or the PFI will propose to the Bank for its due
          diligence and thereafter implement remedial measures in line
          with PS5 before such land can be accepted for subproject
          implementation under GRIHD.
      e. TDB will share with the Bank its PS5 ESDD/land acquisition audit
          reports for review and approval. If encumbrances/legacy issues or
          other non-compliances (including acquisition through eminent
          domain) are identified, the concerned subprojects will not be
          financed under GRIHD until remedial measures have been
          implemented to the Bank’s satisfaction.
      f. In relation to items b, c, d, and e above, TDB/PFIs will support only
          subprojects where land acquisition issues, including any remedial
          measures for historically acquired land have been
          addressed/finalized & the land has no encumbrances. Failure to
          address any issues identified through the DD to the satisfaction of
          the Bank will render such a subproject ineligible for financing
          under the Project.
      g. TDB/PFIs will not finance subprojects in disputed areas
PS 6 Biodiversity Conservation/Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
15.    a. TDB/PFIs will assess/mitigate via site-specific management Ongoing during
           plans, including biodiversity management plan, risks/impacts implementation
           related to PS6 in subprojects under the GRIHD.
       b. Subprojects with significant adverse impacts on critical
           habitats/legally protected & internationally recognized areas of
           high biodiversity value, requiring biodiversity offset as mitigation
           measure are excluded under the project
PS 7 Indigenous Peoples.



                                                  6
ESAP Action                                                                    Completion Date
16.    a. TDB/PFIs will assess risks/impacts related to PS7 in all             Ongoing during
           subprojects under GRIHD.                                            implementation
       b. If a subproject is located in Indigenous People’s (IPs) areas, TDB
           will share with Bank for review/concurrence, instruments like
           Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPPs) for inclusion/access to project
           benefits by IPs.
       c. If TDB ESDD determines that the proposed subproject activities
           may impinge on lands owned/claimed under adjudication by IPs,
           and would create Impacts on lands and natural resources subject
           to traditional ownership or under customary use, lead to
           relocation of indigenous peoples from lands and natural
           resources subject to traditional ownership or under customary
           use and impact on critical cultural heritage, & Free, Prior &
           Informed Consent (FPIC) of IPs is required. In such cases TDB
           must obtain a documented FPIC of IPs in line with PS 7 and TDB
           ESMS prior to financing such subprojects.
PS 8 Cultural Heritage
17.    a. TDB/PFIs will assess/mitigate risks/impacts related to PS8 & put     Ongoing during
           in place measures for handling chance finds during                  implementation
           implementation.
       b. TDB/PFIs will not finance subprojects with significant adverse
           impacts on critical cultural heritage.




                                                   7
