Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                               Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       ( ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 08/17/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03186




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 19, 2023                                                                                  Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P178986                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        Africa GRIHD-Facility        2024

                     Operation Name            Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern      Eastern and Southern Africa, Kenya,       EASTERN AND                  Finance, Competitiveness
                     Africa                    Uganda, Zambia                            SOUTHERN AFRICA              and Innovation

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Eastern and Southern Eastern and Southern African Trade             22-Dec-2023                  07-Mar-2024
                     African Trade and    and Development Bank (TDB)
                     Development Bank
                     (TDB)




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     20-Jun-2023               542,500,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The overarching Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase private capital mobilization to expand access to
                     green, resilient and inclusive housing for target beneficiaries in select countries in Eastern and Southern Africa.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Inadequate housing is a pervasive challenge throughout Eastern and Southern Africa with many countries
                     demonstrating enormous deficits. The soaring demand for housing that is adequate in quality and location, is met by
                     scant new supply, especially for the middle to low-income segments of the population. On top of this, the effects of
                     climate change exacerbate an already vulnerable situation. Climate-fueled disasters were the primary driver of internal
                     displacement during the past decade, forcing approx. 20 million people a year from their homes. The manner in which

                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     the right to housing is to be realized also has implications for climate change. It has been estimated that the building
                     and construction sector accounts for 38% of global energy-related CO2 emissions. While the region has contributed
                     marginally to global GHG emissions in this sector, ambitious national mass housing programs, e.g. Kenya’s 500,000
                     homes, Zambia’s declaration to provide decent and affordable houses for 30,000 civil servants and 15,000 nurses, etc.
                     once realized will not only drive-up demand for building materials, amplifying their embedded carbon emissions and
                     environmental footprints, but will also increase energy demand for cooling and water heightening the risk of carbon
                     lock-in and pressure on scarce water resources. It is thus imperative that new mass housing programs are developed
                     with long-term, environmental and social considerations. This confluence of housing and climate change crises
                     underlines the importance of a holistic strategy. A strategy that thinks of housing delivery as a process that deliberately
                     embeds climate change considerations rather than the end product of a physical structure. A value chain solution that
                     causes less harm and delivers more benefits across the entire housing generation process, from material sourcing and
                     manufacturing to end-user offtake. Within the region, however, important obstacles remain to the mainstreaming of
                     housing that is low-carbon, climate-resilient and energy efficient. While the sector and its green ambitions offer
                     compelling social and economic returns, these arguments provide an insufficient driver for conventional investors. The
                     industry is still nascent and as such, market forces alone will not herald an equitable and sustainable housing
                     transformation. A broad range of enabling regulatory frameworks and policies, as well as catalytic public investments
                     and innovative financial instruments, incentives and risk sharing tools are needed in the sector and its value chain
                     variables to ease/eliminate market barriers for suppliers and manufacturers, developers, investors and financiers,
                     owners and tenants. At its core, the proposed Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-risking (GRIHD) Facility
                     (the "Facility") therefore seeks to introduce an innovative framework which systematically identifies the barriers and
                     associated risks which hold back private investment in energy efficient, resilient and inclusive housing in the region. It is




Public Disclosure
                     designed to put in place credit-enhancement packages to address market risks in three ways: either reducing,
                     transferring or compensating for risk, i.e. “de-risk”. The overall objective is to cost-effectively achieve a risk-return
                     profile that stimulates market-led delivery of low-carbon, climate-resilient results along the housing value chain. This
                     strategic leveraging of scarce resources to mobilize substantial private capital will allow the Facility to expand reach,
                     support scale-up efforts and have higher impact. The Facility is designed as a regional Financial Intermediary Financing
                     (FIF) operation in collaboration with an existing regional partner, the Eastern and Southern Africa Trade and
                     Development Bank (TDB) - with whom both the WB and MIGA have existing operations with. Operating at a wholesale
                     level, the Facility will partner with a range of banks, microfinance and housing finance institutions, i.e. participating
                     financial institutions (PFIs), to deploy catalytic risk capital and instruments in support of climate-informed housing
                     solutions on both the supply and demand sides of the sector. It will offer a range of complementary de-risking products
                     targeting specific value chain interventions (“windows”) in particular: (i) supply, production, and manufacturing of green
                     housing materials; (ii) provision of missing last-mile housing infrastructure that incorporates nature-based solutions; (iii)
                     green and resilient housing construction and renovation; and (iv) support offtake of climate-smart homes. By aligning
                     incentives to ease or eliminate market barriers for key value chain actors, the Facility seeks to cultivate a more vibrant
                     financial and housing sector in the region. The diversity of the proposed interventions is deliberate to trigger the green,
                     resilient and inclusive housing movement from the top of the value chain while providing greater flexibility to cater to
                     the various needs of the investing parties.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings




                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     The Project will apply the World Bank’s OP 4.03, Performance Standards (PSs) for Private Sector Activities to all Project
                     Components that will be managed by TDB. For any activities that may be undertaken by the public sector entities under
                     Window 2 of component 1 and TA activities under component 2, the ESF requirements will be applicable. For activities
                     that will be undertaken by participating governments, the U-ESMF will define E&S assessment requirements and
                     measures and tools.

                     Currently, the exact pilot countries, PFIs and subprojects and scope and nature of their activities to be financed from the
                     Project funds are not yet defined. These will be defined during the project preparation and the specific E&S
                     requirements and risks emanating from the scope and nature of activities will be analyzed and discussed in detail in the
                     A-ESRS, and the ESAP.

                     The Project will likely support medium to large scale construction of green housing and development of associated
                     infrastructure for last mile access, support to manufacturing green building materials, financing energy efficiency
                     measures, and other types of interventions. The nature of funding to individual interventions from PFI, using the SPV’s
                     de-risking tools, can range from direct project finance, to working capital for eligible SMEs, to corporate finance for
                     green energy companies, to retail consumer finance for green home offtake.

                     The exact location of the potential investments/subprojects will only be known during implementation, and hence,
                     there will be a greater focus on assessing TDB’s existing E&S processes and capacity to conduct robust E&S assessments.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




Public Disclosure
                     TDB has an ESG structures and ESMS systems in place that will support the Facility implementation. It’s E&S Policies are
                     well-formulated with institutional commitment to integrate E&S sustainability across all its operations, complete with
                     an exclusion list. The policy is based on the IFC (and other DFIs) Performance Standards and the existing ESMS has all
                     elements of an ESMS such as E&S policy, procedures for categorization, E&S screening, E&S due diligence, monitoring
                     requirements and external communication mechanism. TDB developed its first Environmental Policy in June 2005
                     supported by the Netherlands Development Finance Company FMO. In 2010, TDB undertook an exercise to harmonize
                     all its policies which were approved by Board of Directors in September 2010. These provided the basis for E&S risk
                     assessment carried out by TDB. In 2015, the policies and procedures underwent a further comprehensive review with
                     TA support from the African Development Bank (AfDB).

                     TDB subjects its ESMS to periodic reviews performed by external consultants to ensure it continues to be in line with
                     international best practice. The last ESMS review was completed in 2021 with the next expected at the end of 2023.
                     Following the 2021 review, TDB made changes in its ESMS to integrate step-by step guidelines to assist in implementing
                     the ESMS, bench-marking E&S policy to international practice, standardization of tools and templates; clarification of
                     roles and responsibility, provision of grievance mechanism; and considering the new responsible finance trends and
                     tools. The 2021 review introduced the requirements for E&S screening of the partner financial institutions (FIs) to
                     ensure that FIs are meeting PS 2 and ESF requirements. It also brought adjustments on the loan E&S screening structure
                     to include the 2019 Equator Principles and EDFI E&S Harmonized Standards/requirements. Through the Bank financed
                     RIFF project, TDB further enhanced its E&S, GBV, labor and climate management capacity

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS



                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                  High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                           High
                     The environmental risk is rated high at concept stage (before mitigation). The project is designed to support green
                     and resilient housing solutions, which is not only complex on its own, but is also at embryonic stage in the African AFE
                     sub region in which Facility is planned to be implemented. At this stage, the location of green housing the sub
                     projects and the details of the PFIs TDB will finance are unknown. Under the Project, TDB through PFIs will finance
                     medium to large scale green construction materials manufacturing, housing infrastructure and housing development
                     projects in the five client countries. Construction activities associated with the subprojects, and the operation of
                     manufacturing facilities, usually generate E&S risks and impacts with respect to: environmental pollution; OHS;
                     efficient use of resources such as water and energy; the degradation of natural resources especially water bodies and
                     soil from mining of raw materials for building material; community health and safety, road safety, emergency
                     preparedness; biodiversity loss from land conversion from sourcing of raw material; existing environmental damage
                     at construction sites and off-site- soil and water contamination, etc.; transport related EHS risks; potential EHS issues
                     with house rehabilitation, related to env liabilities (such as asbestos, lead based paint, on-site wastewater disposal,
                     etc.) and potential financing of housing in areas that don't have the appropriate support infrastructure (thus indirect
                     EHS impacts/risks) such as water supply, wastewater collection and disposal, roads, energy supply, etc. Some of the
                     construction phase impacts especially those related to OHS, environmental pollution, waste management, resource
                     use, road safety, emergency preparedness, etc. will be witnessed during the operational phase of manufacturing
                     facilities and infrastructure projects across the housing value chain.




Public Disclosure
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                                                  High
                     The social risk rating for the project is rated as "high" at the concept stage (before mitigation). This is because the
                     location of activities, details of the PFIs and nature and size of financing are still unknown. The focus is expected to be
                     on medium to large scale green construction materials manufacturing, housing development and green housing
                     infrastructure projects that are likely to result in involuntary resettlement impacts, complex labor management
                     issues, and may be in areas where IPs/SSAHUTLCs are present, areas with a high prevalence of Gender Based Violence
                     and Sexual Exploitation (GBV/SEA) which can be exacerbated by the project, areas affected by conflict or violence, or
                     areas hosting refugees. Some of the other risks include inadequate stakeholder engagement, child and forced labor,
                     and elite capture, exclusion of women and other disadvantaged. At the PFI level, the E&S risk will mainly be due to
                     their commitment and understanding of E&S risks and impacts associated with the green housing projects value
                     chain, and their E&S capacity to identify and manage E&S risks and impacts. To support PFIs in managing E&S risks in
                     the project, TDB will develop a template ESMS along with tools and guidance notes that the PFIs can readily adapt.
                     World Bank and TDB will agree on a list of restricted activities defining what kinds of subprojects may not be financed
                     by TDB from the ringfenced Project funds. This agreement will entail either temporary or permanent exclusion of
                     certain green housing subprojects from financing under the project.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant



                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                                        Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      The project will likely have many E&S risks/impacts. Potential environmental risks include air & noise pollution; water
                      & energy use, OHS; waste generation & management; sourcing of construction raw materials; site selection risks,
                      impacts on water bodies, soil and biodiversity due to raw material sourcing; biodiversity loss due to conversion of
                      biodiversity areas, environmental damage at construction sites/off-site; soil and water contamination, risks of
                      transporting related materials from manufacturing sites; house rehabilitation risks & liabilities, e.g. asbestos, lead
                      based paint, wastewater disposal. Potential social risks/impacts include involuntary resettlement, impacts on or
                      exclusion of IP/SSAHUTLC, community health, SEA/SH, child/forced labor, labor issues, PFIs E&S capacity, etc.
                      Risks/impacts will be managed through TDB's exclusion list, preparation and implementation of relevant E&S risks
                      management instruments & E&S capacity building of borrower and sub-borrower E&S staff

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      TDB has a publicly disclosed external communication mechanism (ECM) which allows TDB to receive, record, assess,
                      process & address external stakeholders project related inquiries and complaints. Also, TDB has guidance documents
                      for subprojects on stakeholder engagement and grievance mechanism. During preparation, TDB policies on inclusion
                      of marginalized and disadvantaged groups will be assessed and if inadequate, TDB will institute will be required to
                      develop one in the context of the Facility to enable marginalized/disadvantaged groups to access Project benefits PFIs
                      will be required develop an ECM and will require their subprojects to develop a SEP commensurate with the risks and
                      impacts of the subprojects in line with PS1. TDB and its sub-borrowers will disclose project information on their
                      websites and ensure it is publicly accessible.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Due to large-scale housing & related infrastructure subprojects to be supported, labor risks are anticipated, including
                      labor influx, child/forced labor, gender exclusion, cultural conflicts, & OHS hazards. TDB's HR processes including labor
                      management procedures comply with PS 2. TDB, the supported PFIs & their sub-borrowers, will manage
                      labor/working conditions in line with PS2 (BP 4.03 para. 17(b)), including employees GRM. Per its ESMS which has
                      integrated SEA/SH management, TDB doesn't fund projects with harmful labor practices. PFIs will mirror TDB's labor
                      management procedures for subprojects, including SEA/SH prevention/response & child/forced labor prevention. The
                      ESMS template will provide guidance on this aspect. PFIs must assess/monitor subprojects for national labor law &
                      PS2 compliance. PS 2 applicability to SMEs in the value chain will be assessed, with specific consistency measures
                      included in the financing agreement. TDB will require PFIs HR policy to comply with PS2

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      This Standard is relevant since there is a likelihood of pollution, resource efficiency, and waste generation risks due to
                      the Project's focus on large-scale housing & related infrastructure development including construction materials
                      manufacturing. TDB will support green housing projects directly or through PFIs, with a focus on GHG emissions
                      reduction, resource efficiency, and minimized E&S impacts. TDB has experience in E&S risk management across
                      sectors including housing sector. The Bank assessed implementation of TDB ESMS under RIFF & found it adequate for
                      subprojects supported by TDB. During preparation, the ESMS and Guidance note for indirect lending will be reviewed
                      to affirm its relevance to subprojects under the Facility. The ESMS will be updated before appraisal to address
                      identified gaps. TDB will require PFIs to undertake E&S DD of green housing subprojects against this PS. TDB will
                      provide PFIs with PS3 screening template, tools & Guidance Notes to ensure compliance.


                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                                       Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                 Relevant

                      Precise subprojects and PFIs remain unknown, but the Project's focus on large-scale housing & related infrastructure
                      development raises community health and safety (H&S) concerns, including labor influx, GBV/SEA, child labor, STDs &
                      Covid-19. Also, housing safety, infrastructure design, services, traffic, and road safety lead to H&S risks. TDB's ESMS
                      includes procedures for managing E&S risks and mandates its borrowers to develop plans for E&S risk management.
                      This prerequisite is part of financing agreements signed before construction commences. TDB will require PFIs to
                      assess and monitor compliance with PS4 to ensure subprojects under the Facility identify, address, and mitigate
                      community H&S risks. The upcoming ESMS template will integrate guidance and tools for PFIs to screen subprojects
                      against PS4. The TDB SEA/SH management capacity will be addressed to align it with operations under this project.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                     Relevant

                      The Project's focus on medium-large-scale housing value chain subprojects has risks related to PS5. The
                      approach/responsibility for land acquisition remain unclear but will be clarified before appraisal. TDB's experience in
                      managing involuntary resettlement risks is weak & will be strengthened under the project. Due to these risks, the WB
                      will review & clear subprojects with adverse involuntary resettlement impacts to qualify for Facility financing. There
                      will be a gradual process for sharing E&S instruments of initial subprojects with WB for approval. TDB will conduct
                      land acquisition completion audits to be reviewed & cleared by the Bank initially. TDB & WB to agree on effective
                      approach for managing E&S risks of subprojects on land involving change of use, e.g. government-led acquisition after
                      documented consultation with users/other parties, or preparation of RPF. TDB to provide PFIs with ESMSs templates
                      & tools for identifying/assessing & mitigating land acquisition risks



Public Disclosure
                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                      Relevant
                      Resources

                      Subprojects and PFIs are unknown, but due to potential large-scale housing & related infrastructure subprojects,
                      biodiversity concerns are anticipated making PS6 relevant. Some subprojects may impacts modified/natural habitats,
                      rely on ecosystem services, or lead to biodiversity area conversion due to raw material sourcing and subproject
                      location. To mitigate these, the restricted activities list will exclude subprojects adversely affecting critical habitats,
                      legally protected/ high biodiversity value areas, & those requiring biodiversity offsets. TDB's ESMS is designed to
                      identify and evaluate risks in directly financed subprojects but it will be reviewed before appraisal and TDB and the
                      WB will agree on an action plan to address identified gaps. PFIs' ESMS will have tools for PS6 screening to identify
                      risks/impacts, assess direct/indirect effects on biodiversity/ecosystem services & residual impacts. TDB's ongoing
                      monitoring will ensure proper application of exclusions/restrictions.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                 Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      IP/SSAHUTLCs may be present in countries & areas where TDB & PFIs will finance subprojects. Initially, countries to be
                      covered under the first project in the SOP have groups who are classified as IP/SSAHUTLCs, e.g. the Batwa, IK, Tepet,
                      and Benet in Uganda, & Ogiek, Turkana, & Maasai in Kenya. The complexity of potential impacts, context, and capacity
                      of sub-borrowers to manage IP risks will influence social risk assessment of proposed subprojects. TDB has an IP policy
                      but its practical application remains unverified, even under RIFF. TDB commits to not financing any subproject
                      impinging on lands owned or claimed by IPs without their full documented consent, as per the current exclusion list in

                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      TDB's ESMS policy. In line with this, TDB will be required to conduct free, prior, and informed consent (FPIC)
                      consultations with IPs if a subproject under the GRIHD is located in IP area, without while ensuring access to project
                      benefits by IPs. PS 7 requirements will apply fully to PFIs.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      TDB-financed subprojects may have direct, indirect, & cumulative risks/impacts on cultural heritage. TDB’s ESMS
                      prohibits financing of any subproject, infrastructure or trade finance activity impacting upon World Heritage sites &
                      other protected areas. TDB has experience with projects with impacts on cultural aspects of some of the affected
                      communities, e.g., on matters of handling graves. Cultural heritage gaps in TDB’s ESMS will be identified prior to
                      appraisal & supplemented by PS8 requirements. Since subproject funds will be channeled via PFIs, TDB will cascade
                      the PS8 requirements to PFIs & ensure PFIs have capacity in their ESMS and staff to identify, assess & manage risks as
                      per PS8. The guidance note for PFIs will include specific guidance on assessment of PS8 impacts & development of
                      chance find procedure. All TDB/PFIs subprojects under the Facility must consult with affected communities to identify
                      cultural heritage of importance & include their views in decision-making.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                 Relevant

                      ESS9 will be relevant to this project, which includes the provision of projects funds to PFIs for on-lending to
                      subprojects under the facility. Part of the financing will be extended to PFIs (to be selected during the implementation
                      phase), through TDB, to on-lend. The management of safeguards aspects will be done according to the World Bank
                      Performance Standards & ESF. All PFIs will be required to develop and implement an ESMS and have E&S capacity in




Public Disclosure
                      line with the requirements of the World Bank OP 4.03 and ESS9.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework
                       Project is being implemented under OP 4.03, thus the borrower's framework will be considered in full.

                       TDB has established ESG structures and ESMS systems that will support Facility implementation. TDB's E&S Policies are
                       well-crafted, reflecting institutional commitment to integrate E&S sustainability across operations, complete with an
                       exclusion list. The policy aligns with IFC/WB Performance Standards. The existing ESMS includes E&S policy,
                       categorization procedures, screening, due diligence, monitoring, and communication mechanisms. TDB began its E&S
                       journey in 2005, developed policies in 2010, and underwent a comprehensive review in 2015 with AfDB support.

                       TDB subjects its ESMS to periodic reviews performed by external consultants to ensure it continues to be in line with
                       international best practice. The last ESMS review was completed in 2021 with the next expected at the end of 2023.
                       Following the 2021 review, TDB made changes in its ESMS to integrate step-by step guidelines to assist in


                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                       implementing the ESMS, bench-marking E&S policy to international practice, standardization of tools and templates;
                       clarification of roles and responsibility, provision of grievance mechanism; considering the new responsible finance
                       trends and tools, and E&S requirements for E&S requirements for FIs. Through the Bank financed RIFF project, TDB
                       further enhanced its E&S, GBV, labor and climate management capacity. It is now developing a Guidance Note on E&S
                       risk management in its lending through FI.

                       TDB has strengthened its internal E&S capacity to four E&S staff by hiring one additional E&S Specialist through RIFF
                       TA. It is in the process of hiring two E&S analysts. In addition, it retains services of an ESG consulting firm to assist in
                       the ESDDs and monitoring of E&S issues. It’s committed, as part of its E&S capacity building plan, to enhance staff
                       capacity to manage E&S risks. During appraisal, the WB will further assess TDB’s E&S capacity required to better
                       management the facility E&S risks and appropriately advice TDB on any enhancement needed including their timings
                       to be defined in the ESCP and ESAP.

                       Moreover, TDB has appointed a Senior Executive Member of Management as TDB's Climate Champion on climate
                       strategy. In addition, TDB has developed their Climate Strategy including Climate Policy Statement, Climate Strategy
                       and Taxonomy, and Guidelines/tools (and templates) for assessing climate vulnerability and related physical risks,
                       among other deliverables. The Strategy is awaiting internal approvals.



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                    Yes
                       The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the COMESA Trade and Development Bank (TDB)



Public Disclosure
                       and other participating financial institutions (PFIs) are the implementing agencies for the Bank financed project. Other
                       financing partners are in the process of being identified.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Hadija Rahama Diba Kamayo                 Title:           Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                     Email:                   hkamayo@worldbank.org

                     TTL Contact:             Sheila W. Kamunyori                       Job Title:       Senior Urban Development Specialist

                     Email:                   skamunyori@worldbank.org

                     TTL Contact:             Uloaku Oyewole                            Job Title:       Senior Financial Sector Specialist


                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                                          Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     Email:                   uechebiri@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                Hadija Rahama Diba Kamayo, Sheila W. Kamunyori, Uloaku Oyewole

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)       Helene Monika Carlsson Rex Recommended on 17-Aug-2023 at 11:51:34 EDT

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:       James Chacha Maroa

                     ADM Social Specialist:              Margaret Auma Ombai




Public Disclosure




                    Sep 19, 2023                                                                                           Page 10 of 10
