Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                              Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 03/09/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03015




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 21, 2024                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P178986                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        Africa GRIHD-Facility        2025

                     Operation Name            Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-Risking (GRIHD) Facility

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Eastern and Southern                                                EASTERN AND                  Finance, Competitiveness
                     Africa                                                              SOUTHERN AFRICA              and Innovation

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Eastern and Southern Eastern and Southern African Trade             15-Aug-2024                  28-Feb-2025
                     African Trade and    and Development Bank (TDB)
                     Development Bank
                     (TDB)




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     08-Feb-2024               556,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Development Objective of the first in the Series of Projects (SoP1) is to increase private capital mobilization into
                     green, resilient, and inclusive housing value chains in select countries in Eastern and Southern Africa.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Inadequate housing is a pervasive challenge throughout Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) with many countries
                     demonstrating enormous deficits. The soaring demand for housing that is adequate in quality and location, is met by
                     scant new supply, especially for the middle to low-income segments of the population. On top of this, the effects of
                     climate change exacerbate an already vulnerable situation. Climate-fueled disasters were the primary driver of internal
                     displacement during the past decade, forcing approx. 20 million people a year from their homes. The manner in which

                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     the right to housing is to be realized also has implications for climate change. It has been estimated that the building
                     and construction sector accounts for 38% of global energy-related CO2 emissions. While the region has contributed
                     marginally to global GHG emissions in this sector, ambitious national mass housing programs, e.g. Kenya’s 500,000
                     homes, Zambia’s declaration to provide decent and affordable houses for 30,000 civil servants and 15,000 nurses, etc.
                     once realized will not only drive-up demand for building materials, amplifying their embedded carbon emissions and
                     environmental footprints, but will also increase energy demand for cooling and water heightening the risk of carbon
                     lock-in and pressure on scarce water resources. It is thus imperative that new mass housing programs are developed
                     with long-term, environmental and social considerations. This confluence of housing and climate change crises
                     underlines the importance of a holistic strategy. A strategy that thinks of housing delivery as a process that deliberately
                     embeds climate change considerations rather than the end product of a physical structure. A value chain solution that
                     causes less harm and delivers more benefits across the housing construction process, from material sourcing and
                     manufacturing to end-user offtake. Within the region, however, important obstacles remain to the mainstreaming of
                     housing that is low-carbon, energy efficient and climate-resilient. While the sector and its climate ambitions offer
                     compelling social and economic returns, these arguments provide an insufficient driver for conventional investors. The
                     industry is still nascent and as such, market forces alone will not herald an equitable and sustainable housing
                     transformation. A broad range of enabling regulatory frameworks and policies, as well as catalytic public investments
                     and innovative financial instruments, incentives and risk sharing tools are needed in the sector and its value chain
                     variables to ease market barriers for suppliers and manufacturers, developers, investors and financiers, owners and
                     tenants. At its core, the proposed Africa Green, Resilient and Inclusive Housing De-risking (GRIHD) Facility (the "Facility")
                     seeks to introduce an innovative framework which systematically identifies the barriers and associated risks which hold
                     back private investment in energy efficient, resilient and inclusive housing in the region. It is designed to make available




Public Disclosure
                     financial instruments to address market risks in three ways: either reducing, transferring and/or compensating for risk,
                     i.e. “de-risk”. The overall objective is to cost-effectively achieve a risk-return profile that stimulates private sector-led
                     delivery of climate smart results along the housing value chain. This strategic leveraging of scarce resources to mobilize
                     private capital will allow the Facility to expand reach, support scale-up efforts and have higher impact. Designed as a
                     regional Financial Intermediary Financing (FIF) operation, the Facility will be housed in the Eastern and Southern Africa
                     Trade and Development Bank (TDB) - with whom both the WB and MIGA have existing operations with. Operating at a
                     wholesale level, the apex Facility will partner with a range of banks, microfinance and housing finance institutions, i.e.
                     participating financial institutions (PFIs), to deploy catalytic risk capital and instruments in support of climate-informed
                     housing solutions on both the supply and demand sides of the sector. Over the life of the Series, it will offer a range of
                     complementary de-risking products targeting specific value chain interventions (“windows”) in particular: (i) Window 1:
                     supply, production, and manufacturing of green housing materials; (ii) Window 2: provision of missing last-mile housing
                     infrastructure that incorporates nature-based solutions; (iii) Window 3: green and resilient housing construction and
                     renovation; and (iv) Window 4: support offtake of climate-smart homes. Nonetheless, in recognition of the need for the
                     Facility to take a measured approach in rolling out its interventions, a phased implementation of the value chain
                     windows under SOP 1 is adopted for a streamlined focus on Windows 1 and 3 only. By aligning incentives and helping to
                     share some of the market concerns facing key value chain actors, the Facility seeks to cultivate a more vibrant and
                     sustainable financial and housing sector in the AFE region. The diversity of the proposed interventions is deliberate to
                     trigger the green, resilient and inclusive housing movement from the top of the value chain while providing greater
                     flexibility to cater to the various needs of the investing parties.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings

                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     GRIHD is a regional project that will be implemented in the Eastern and Southern Africa countries. Currently, Kenya,
                     Mozambique, Zambia, and Tanzania have been identified as four potential pilot countries. The salient physical features
                     and key environmental aspects of the region includes: a variety of landforms such as mountains, plateaus, plains, and
                     deserts. Examples include the Great Rift Valley, Mount Kilimanjaro, the Ethiopian Highlands, and the Sahara Desert. The
                     Nile, Zambezi, Congo, and Limpopo rivers traverse the region. Lake Victoria, Lake Tanganyika, Lake Malawi, and Lake
                     Kariba are significant freshwater bodies. The region is known for its rich biodiversity, encompassing various ecosystems,
                     including tropical rainforests, savannas, wetlands, and coastal areas. The region experiences a range of climates, from
                     tropical to subtropical and desert. The region is abundant in natural resources. It has several important rivers, including
                     the Nile, which provides water for agriculture and other uses. The biological environment of the region is diverse, with a
                     variety of plant and animal species. The region is home to several large wildlife reserves, including the Masai Mara
                     National Reserve in Kenya and the Kidepo Valley National Park in Uganda. Despite the region's natural resources, the
                     physical and biological environment faces many challenges, including deforestation, land degradation, water scarcity,
                     and climate change which lead to food insecurity, poverty, and conflict in some areas.

                     Socio-culturally, the region is home to a large and diverse population, with countries like Rwanda, Ethiopia, Kenya and
                     DRC having high population densities, while others like Seychelles and Eswatini have smaller less dense populations. The
                     region exhibits a wide range of ethnic groups, languages, and cultures. There are numerous ethnic communities,
                     including Bantu, Nilotic, Cushitic, and Afro-Asiatic, etc. with some of the countries being home to Indigenous
                     Peoples/Sub Saharan Africa Historicaly Underserved Traditional Local Communities (IP/SSAHUTLCs). For example, Kenya
                     is home to hunter-gatherer IP/SSAHUTLCs such as the Ogiek, Endorois, Ilchamus, and Waatha, among others as well as
                     the Maasai, Turkana and Somali pastrorlaists among others while Uganda is home to the Batwa. SSAHUTLCs in the




Public Disclosure
                     region are among the most vulnerable groups and continue to be subjected to various forms of discrimination, in
                     particular because of their livelihood and attachment to their culture, lands, and territories. The region is also home to
                     some fragile, conflict & violence (FCV) countries such as Somalia and Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). The
                     countries have varying levels of economic development e.g. Kenya, Rwanda, and Ethiopia, have relatively well-
                     developed economies, while others, e.g. Malawi, Zambia, and Somalia, face socio-economic challenges including
                     poverty, limited access to healthcare, and education. Key social issues include increasing rural-urabn migaration,
                     rural/urban poverty, uneven economic development especially in urban areas, unemployment/low incomes and gender
                     inequality. Increased displacement of populations due to fragility, conflict and violence, including social unrest has
                     disrupted access to basic social services in many countries including Somalia and DRC.

                     Several countries in the region face significant housing deficits and growing housing needs. In Kenya, the estimated
                     current housing deficit stands at a minimum of 2.5 million units, with an annual need of approximately 369,000 units
                     from 2020 to 2030. Mozambique is grappling with a housing deficit of at least 2 million units and an annual requirement
                     of 218,000 units over the same period. Tanzania also contends with a substantial deficit, totaling at least 1.2 million
                     units, and an annual housing need of 429,000 units. Similarly, Zambia is experiencing a housing shortage of at least 1.5
                     million units, with an annual demand of 118,000 units between 2020 and 2030. These statistics underscore the pressing
                     challenge of providing adequate housing in these nations and the imperative for strategic interventions to meet the
                     growing demand, in a climate conscious manner.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     TDB is a multilateral development financial institution with an asset base of over US$8 billion. TDB has two major
                     lending activities: trade finance loans (low risk), and project and infrastructure finance loans (medium to high risk). TDB


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                       Page 4 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     lends to public sector, large, small, and medium corporations, and other FIs. Energy, including hydro, geothermal, wind,
                     and oil and gas, is a top financed sector due to trade facilities for oil and gas purchase.
                     Review of TDB's portfolio, as of June 2023, shows the focus is on sectors such as agribusiness, banking, oil & gas and
                     infrastructure. A very small (0.34%) proportion of TDB’s portfolio constitutes lending for housing. However, TDB has
                     expressed great interest in increasing this to become a significant part of the loan portfolio. Given its mandate, TDB is
                     especially committed to green, resilient, inclusive housing solutions. Approximately 71% of TDB's portfolio consists of
                     trade finance. Within the trade finance portfolio, the highest exposure is to the banking sector, followed by agribusiness
                     and oil & gas. In project finance, the infrastructure sector holds the highest exposure, accounting for nearly 50% of the
                     project finance portfolio. ICT and manufacturing are the two other sectors with 10% exposure each.

                     Twenty (20%) of TDB’s gross portfolio as of June 2022 constitutes lending through financial intermediaries. Most of
                     these are line of credits for SMEs and trade finance. As of June 2022, TDB has one financial intermediary (FI) client in
                     Kenya and two each in Uganda and Zambia. Its exposure in these countries is around 2.35% of the total portfolio as of
                     June 2022. TDB currently has fourteen FIs clients in the AFE region and one multi-regional bank. The FI pipeline for the
                     facility includes twelve banks in the region and five multi-regional banks. TDB’s approach to E&S risk management in its
                     lending activities through FIs is as yet nascent. Its Environment and Social Management System (ESMS) was updated in
                     2021 to include the requirements for PFIs.

                     TDB's commitment to environment and social (E&S) sustainability dates to 2005 when it first developed its
                     Environmental Policy with support from the Netherlands Development Finance Company, FMO. In 2010, TDB
                     harmonized its E&S policy. In 2015, these policies were comprehensively reviewed through African Development Bank’s




Public Disclosure
                     (AfDB) TA. TDB's current E&S Management System (ESMS) aligns with international standards like International Finance
                     Corporation’s (IFC) Performance Standards (PS) and the E&S requirements of other Development Finance Institutions’
                     (DFI) and is relied upon by other financiers such as AFD and EIB.

                     TDB’s Current ESMS: TDB has a functional ESMS which includes procedures and processes for screening, E&S Due
                     Diligence (ESDD) and E&S monitoring and reporting, which are adequate for direct lending to subprojects under the
                     Facility. TDB also has a publicly disclosed External Communication Mechanism (ECM), of which grievances management
                     is a subset. The ESMS includes clear process flow and procedures that are linked to credit and investment cycles, and
                     which conforms to international best practice. The ESMS has procedures for categorization of PFIs as category FI-1, FI-2
                     and FI-3, and E&S requirements for PFIs which include having an E&S policy, ESMS, and PS2 compliant Human Resources
                     (HR) policies and procedures. However, the current ESMS lacks guidelines for lending through PFIs and for TA activities.
                     To bridge this gap, TDB has prepared a Guidance Note (GN), which has been reviewed and cleared by the World Bank
                     for application to lending through PFIs and for TA activities. The GN will become part of TDB’s main ESMS. In addition to
                     the GN, the Bank (E&S specialists, RSC and RSA reviewers) have provided consolidated feedback to TDB to enable them
                     to update the ESMS internally to the satisfaction the Bank, in readiness for the implementation of both GRIHD and
                     Accelerating Sustainable and Clean Energy Access Transformation (ASCENT) projects. It is expected that TDB will finalize
                     its internal ESMS update by end of Q1, 2024.

                     In addition to the internal update, which is normaly endorsed by the TDB senior management for adoption and
                     disclosure, TDB also subjects its ESMS to periodic reviews performed by external consultants to ensure it continues to
                     be in line with international best practice. The last external ESMS review was completed in 2021. Following the 2021
                     review, TDB made changes to its ESMS to integrate step-by step guidelines to assist in implementing the ESMS, bench-


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     marking E&S policy to international best practice, standardization of tools and templates; clarification of roles and
                     responsibility, provision of grievance mechanism; and considering the new responsible finance trends and tools. The
                     2021 review introduced the requirements for E&S screening of the partner financial institutions (FIs) to ensure that FIs
                     are meeting PS 2 and ESF requirements. It also brought adjustments on the loan E&S screening structure to include the
                     2019 Equator Principles and EDFI E&S Harmonized Standards/requirements. Through the Regional Infrastructure
                     Financing Facility (RIFF) project, TDB enhanced its capacity on E&S, gender-based violence (GBV) especially as it relates
                     to sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment (SEA/SH), labor, and climate management.

                     E&S staffing. TDB currently has four E&S staff and has retained an Environment and Social Governance (ESG) consulting
                     firm to assist it with ESDDs and E&S monitoring. As part of its capacity-building, TDB trains its staff involved in
                     processing transactions on E&S. The SPV will have its own dedicated E&S staff who will be supported by TDB’s E&S team
                     and consultants. To this end, 3 additional E&S staff are expected to be on board by end of Q2, 2024.

                     E&S performance. TDB's performance under RIFF has been deemed satisfactory, demonstrating compliance with the
                     ESAP and responsiveness to all WB requests. Notably, TDB has developed its capacity in GBV, climate management, and
                     stakeholder engagement as part of the RIFF project. Under RIFF, TDB adhered to the requirement of obtaining prior
                     approvals from the World Bank (WB) for component 1 subprojects. TDB successfully submitted subproject ESDD reports
                     and E&S instruments to the bank for review and approval. While it did not involve lending through PFIs, it demonstrates
                     TDB's commitment and capacity to undertake E&S risk management aligned with international best practices and its
                     internal ESMS.




Public Disclosure
                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                               High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                        High
                     The environmental risk is rated high. The project is designed to support green and resilient housing solutions, which is
                     not only complex on its own, but is also at it’s embryonic stage in the African AFE sub region in which Facility is
                     planned to be implemented. At this stage, the location of the sub projects and the details of the PFIs TDB will finance
                     are unknown. Under the Project, TDB through PFIs will finance medium to large scale green construction materials
                     manufacturing and housing development and renovation projects. Construction activities associated with the
                     subprojects, and the operation of manufacturing facilities, usually generate E&S risks and impacts with respect to:
                     environmental pollution; occupational health & safety (OHS); efficient use of resources such as water and energy; the
                     degradation of natural resources especially water bodies and soil from mining of raw materials for building material;
                     community health and safety, road safety, emergency preparedness; biodiversity loss from land conversion from
                     sourcing of raw material; existing environmental damage at construction sites and off-site- soil and water
                     contamination, etc.; transport related EHS risks; potential environment, health & safety (EHS) issues with house
                     rehabilitation, related to environmental liabilities (such as asbestos, lead based paint, on-site wastewater disposal,
                     etc.) and potential financing of housing in areas that don't have the appropriate support infrastructure (thus indirect
                     EHS impacts/risks) such as water supply, solid and waste water collection and disposal, roads, energy supply, etc.
                     Some of the construction phase impacts especially those related to OHS, environmental pollution, waste
                     management, resource use, road safety, emergency preparedness, etc. will be witnessed during the operational


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     phase of manufacturing facilities and infrastructure projects across the housing value chain consequently the “High”
                     environmental risk ratting.
                                                                                                                                               High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating for the project is High. This is because the location of activities, details of the PFIs and nature and
                     size of financing are still unknown, and because of the potential social impacts of proposed activities under Windows
                     1 and 3. The focus is expected to be on medium to large scale green construction materials manufacturing, and
                     housing development projects that are likely to result into involuntary resettlement impacts, complex labor
                     management issues, potential location of subprojects may be in areas where IPs/SSAHUTLCs are present, areas with a
                     high prevalence of GBV and SEA/SH which can be exacerbated by the project, areas affected by conflict or violence, or
                     areas hosting refugees. While it is expected that land acquisition will be undertaken in a manner that is consistent
                     with PS5, and that TDB will undertake land acquisition audits for already acquired land to ensure the acquisition
                     process complies with PS5, the complexities involved in undertaking such audits is as yet unknown, especially in
                     situations where land may have exchanged hands many times, and the capacity of PFIs to undertake such audits is yet
                     to be determined. Some of the other risks include potential for: inadequate stakeholder engagement, child and
                     forced labor, elite capture, and exclusion of women and other disadvantaged groups from accessing project benefits.
                     At the PFI level, the E&S risk will mainly be related to their level of commitment and understanding of E&S risks and
                     impacts associated with the green housing value chain, and their E&S capacity to identify and manage E&S risks and
                     impacts.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered



Public Disclosure
                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                      Relevant

                      The project, categorized as FI-1 based on review of prospective project activities, will apply OP/BP 4.03 which is more
                      suitable for TDB whose ESMS incorporates IFC Performance Standards as the underlying technical standards for its
                      lending operations. Also, TDB’s private sector clients, who constitute the primary focus of this project, are familiar
                      with and apply these standards. The Project will support medium to large scale construction/renovation of green,
                      resilient housing, and manufacturing facilities for green, resilient building materials, financing energy efficiency
                      measures, and other interventions. The exact countries, PFIs and subprojects to be financed under the Project are not
                      yet defined. There is a pipeline of twelve banks in the AFE region and five multiregional banks, but the exact PFIs are
                      not yet known. These will be defined during implementation based on a due diligence system which will include a
                      review of potential partner’s ESMS and performance and risk level of the loan portfolio and proposed housing
                      activities to be supported through lending or de-risking by TDB’s SPV. Under the Facility, TDB will mostly finance
                      subprojects through PFIs, but there may be circumstances (especially in countries where there are no FIs that meet
                      project requirements) in which TDB might lend directly to subprojects in the housing value chain. Therefore, TDB’s
                      E&S risk management procedures for direct and indirect lending are of relevance to the Facility. TDB has an existing
                      ESMS and staff which ensure that all projects it supports, go through a process of ESDD and regular monitoring. E&S
                      procedures for direct lending: TDB’s ESMS has adequate procedures and processes for screening, ESDD and E&S
                      monitoring and reporting, for direct lending to subprojects under the Facility. The ESMS includes clear process flow
                      and procedures linked to credit and investment cycles, and which conform to international best practice. These


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                          Page 7 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      include a comprehensive decision tree/matrix with clearly assigned responsibilities and accountabilities for each step,
                      supported by formal guidance and tools to help persons fulfil their roles in the process consistently. The E&S
                      procedures include procedures for categorization of direct and indirect lending (through financial intermediaries),
                      ESDD, monitoring, institutional roles, and grievance mechanism. TDB requires subprojects to undertake ESIAs, and to
                      develop ESMPs and RAPs among other E&S instruments relevant to other performance standards, in a manner that is
                      commensurate with the subproject’s E&S risks classification. TDB also requires additional specialist studies for
                      identified thematic risks and impacts requiring further investigation. While the ESMS does not specifically address
                      housing and housing related projects as envisaged under GRIHD, the various templates and E&S procedures included
                      in the ESMS are considered adequate for guiding ESDD and monitoring of housing projects. E&S procedures for
                      indirect lending: TDB’s ESMS has a procedure and process for screening, ESDD, and E&S monitoring and reporting of
                      PFIs. The ESMS includes procedures for categorization of PFIs as category FI-1, FI-2 and FI-3, and E&S requirements
                      for PFIs. The E&S requirements for PFIs include having an E&S policy, ESMS, and PS2 compliant HR policies and
                      procedures. It, however, lacks supporting tools and templates on how to undertake ESDD and ongoing monitoring of
                      PFIs. TDB has therefore developed a Guidance Note for Lending through Financial Intermediaries. The Guidance Note
                      builds on IFC interpretation Note on Financial Intermediaries (Nov. 2018) and TDB’s ESMS and aims to provide specific
                      guidance to support the assessment, and management of E&S risks associated with TDB’s lending activities through
                      PFIs. The Note has been cleared by the Bank and will be appended to the main ESMS. Finalization of the Note and its
                      endorsement for adoption and disclosure by the TDB Senior Management (or board), is a condition of disbursement
                      of funds to TDB under the Facility. This has been reflected in the ESAP. Subproject screening and review: TDB has a
                      system in place for the screening and review of subprojects, which includes due diligence by its own specialists for
                      low to moderate subprojects and external consultants for high category subproject. Subprojects are subjected to E&S




Public Disclosure
                      review at various stages starting with the ESMS Specialist working closely with other specialists (including legal) at the
                      New Deal Forum before submitting it to the ESMS Coordinator who reviews it in consultation with the operational
                      and technical committee. This is then submitted to the ESMS Manager who reviews it in consultation with the
                      corporate credit committee. From here the proposal is submitted to the Compliance and Credit Management
                      Department from where it is processed up to the Board level as necessary. The E&S team members sit on various
                      credit committees to ensure E&S is considered at transaction onboarding and that risks are appropriately categorized
                      and weighted. The proposed Project will adopt the following measures to avoid, mitigate, and offset/compensate for
                      E&S risks and impacts. i. Institutional Exclusion List. The TDB ESMS incorporates an exclusion list. This will be cascaded
                      down to PFIs; but TDB may have to adjust or expand the exclusion list based on specific types of lending in the two
                      windows supported by the GRIHD project. ii. Project Specific List of Restricted Activities. In addition to the
                      institutional Exclusion List, a project specific list of restricted activities is proposed. Subprojects which present one of
                      the restricted activities would not be eligible for financing. The restrictions would be annexed to the loan agreements
                      between TDB and accredited PFIs, and TDB will conduct spot checks to ensure compliance with the list. The list
                      includes the following activities: • Production or activities that would: (i) impinge on the lands owned or claimed
                      under adjudication by IPs; (ii) create impacts on lands and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under
                      customary use by IPs; (iii) lead to relocation of IPs from lands and natural resources subject to traditional ownership
                      or under customary use, or, (iv) have impacts on critical cultural heritage, all of which require free prior and informed
                      consent (FPIC) of Indigenous peoples, except when such consent has been secured and documented in writing in line
                      with the TDB ESMS and PS5. • Subprojects having direct adverse impact on ecosystem services that may result in
                      adverse health and safety risks to affected communities. • Subproject/activity involving removal of non-replicable
                      cultural heritage, except when such removal is carried out in conformity to the PS8 guidance. • Subproject/activity
                      that leads to conversion of natural habitats/ecologically sensitive areas or having adverse impact on critical habitats


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                         Page 8 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      or legally protected and internationally recognized areas of high biodiversity value. • Subproject/activity where a
                      biodiversity offset is proposed as the mitigation measure. • Subprojects located on international waters. •
                      Subprojects located in disputed areas. iii. TDB will continually assess availability and adequacy of human and financial
                      resources for E&S management, and will augment them as necessary to achieve effective and continuous
                      environmental and social performance, in line with PS1. iv. Cascading down of E&S requirements: TDB will require
                      each PFI to have an ESMS that mirrors the TDB ESMS and enforce the E&S requirements on subprojects to be
                      supported with Project funds. The PFIs ESMS commitments will be explicitly mentioned in the loan agreement signed
                      between TDB and the PFI. Each PFI will have at least one E&S focal point assigned to work with TDB to ensure the
                      ESMS is in place, confirmed by senior PFI management, and maintained and monitored. PFIs will ensure applicable
                      E&S requirements are included in financing agreements signed with each financed subproject/investment and will
                      perform monitoring and reporting of E&S performance. TDB will review ESMS of PFIs that already have one. If the
                      ESMS is deemed inadequate, TDB will require PFIs to upgrade it to TDB's satisfaction before disbursing funds under
                      the Facility. PFIs without an ESMS will be obligated to adopt TDB’s ESMS as their own or establish their own, which
                      meets TDB’s requirements. PFIs that do not commit to establishing an ESMS and to having E&S capacity will not be
                      eligible to under the Facility. TDB will retain oversight role and carry out ESDD on E&S instruments submitted by PFIs
                      prior to submitting them to WB for no-objection. TDB will only submit to the Bank subproject E&S instruments such
                      as ESIAs, ESMPs, etc. which in its judgement, have fulfilled the E&S requirements of TDB’s ESMS and are aligned to
                      the Bank’s PSs. TBD will perform ongoing monitoring of PFI’s E&S performance and report to the WB on PFIs E&S
                      performance and compliance as part of its annual reporting. TDB is at liberty to access Bank support or advice as
                      necessary should their monitoring of PFI’s E&S performance necessitate such support. v. Cumulative impacts: TDB
                      and PFIs will mandate all subprojects to conduct E&S impact assessments proportional to the scale and associated




Public Disclosure
                      risks of subprojects. The ESIA shall encompass various aspects, including alternative analysis, to ensure that
                      designated subproject sites avoid critical natural habitats and other environmentally, socially, and culturally sensitive
                      areas, while minimizing land acquisition. Furthermore, the ESIA shall evaluate cumulative impacts of subprojects. The
                      process of identifying risks and impacts should encompass all relevant environmental and social considerations,
                      including those outlined in Performance Standards 2 through 8, and those likely to be affected by such risks/impacts.
                      In all baseline studies and impact assessments, consultations with experts, authorities and communities must be
                      consulted.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      TDB has a publicly disclosed ECM to receive and address inquiries and complaints from the public and stakeholders.
                      Additionally, TDB provides guidance documents to subprojects on stakeholder engagement and grievance
                      mechanisms. All PFIs will be required to develop an ECM and require their subprojects to create a Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) commensurate with the risks and impacts of their activities. SEPs are essential under
                      Performance Standard 1, especially when communities are affected. TDB and PFIs must include SEP requirements and
                      procedures in their ESMS, consistent with PS1. These requirements include identifying and engaging with key
                      stakeholders, especially Indigenous Peoples' representatives and vulnerable groups, and defining responsible parties,
                      timelines, information disclosure requirements and budgets for the engagement process. Regarding information
                      disclosure, PFIs will disclose their ESMS and ECM on their websites, and the World Bank will be permitted, in writing,
                      to disclose a summary of these on its website. PFIs will also be required to disclose subproject information on their
                      website. Subprojects will be required to develop a SEP and a grievance mechanism and to disclose the same along
                      with subproject instruments at appropriate venues that are accessible to the community level stakeholders. SEP and


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      Grievance Mechanism will be disclosed in an easily accessible manner and in a culturally appropriate local language(s)
                      and format, understandable to affected communities, as foreseen in PS1. Venues for disclosure could be the offices
                      of the local administration or the village level community governance systems.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      This PS is relevant to the Project because the operation will support relatively large-scale production of green housing
                      materials and housing development subprojects under windows 1 and 3 which will involve labor force - including
                      contracted workers and primary supply workers. Also, TDB and the PFIs it will support, will have to manage the
                      working conditions of their workforce in accordance with relevant aspects of national laws and PS2 on Labor and
                      Working Conditions as required by para. 17(b) of BP 4.03, including a functional internal grievance redress
                      mechanism for employees of TDB and the PFIs. Under the Bank financed RIFF project, TDB’s human resources
                      processes were strengthened and are now aligned to the PS2 requirements. TDB now has in place and maintains
                      appropriate labor management procedures, including procedures relating to working conditions and terms of
                      employment, nondiscrimination and equal opportunity, grievance mechanisms and occupational health and safety.
                      TDB, as part of its due diligence of PFIs, will review their human resource policies and procedures against the national
                      regulatory requirements and PS2 (for all World Bank financed projects). TDB will continue to do so for the PFIs that
                      are onboarded under the Facility. All PFIs that will be enrolled for the Facility implementation will have to have PS2
                      compliant human resources policy & procedures especially an employee grievance mechanism, sexual harassment
                      procedure, and prohibition of child or forced labor. Potential labor related risks are expected and are likely to include
                      a) labor influx due to the relatively large scale and long duration construction; b) risks of child and/or forced labor
                      which are known to occur in the construction industry in participating countries; c) labor related challenges/ conflict



Public Disclosure
                      between local, national and foreign workers over access to benefits and cultural differences; d) exclusion of women
                      from employment in construction facilities; e) w inappropriate working and living conditions in construction and
                      residential facilities, including not gender-separated rooms and toilets.; f) SEA/SH affecting both the communities
                      around construction sites as well as project workers; g) security of workers; and h) OHS risks on sites such as working
                      at height, exposure to dust, potential injury from falling objects and movement of heavy machinery for those working
                      in construction of housing projects, and facilities that produce/manufacture house materials and OHS risks related to
                      operations & maintenance of subprojects supported under the facility. These potential risks will be assessed as per
                      the procedure defined in TDB and PFIs ESMSs, including the potential scale of the risks as influenced by the sub-
                      project location, scale and contextual factors which are likely to vary between countries, as part of the preparation of
                      a subproject proposed for financing under the Facility. The confirmed risks will be mitigated by the application of PS2
                      and World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) General environment, health & safety guidelines (EHSGs) and relevant industry
                      sector guidelines which PFIs will be expected to apply as part of the operation. In addition, TDB does not directly
                      finance any project, infrastructure or trade finance activity involving production or activities involving harmful or
                      exploitative forms of forced labor/child labor as per TDB’s exclusion list in its ESMS. Also, TDB has incorporated the
                      GBV & SEA/SH management principles and procedures in its ESMS. For the anticipated and other labor related risks,
                      TDB will require the PFIs to ensure that the subprojects they support have detailed employment and labor
                      management procedures, including procedures for the management of sexual harassment in the workplace, the
                      prevention and response mechanisms for SEA/SH, and the prevention of child and forced labor. Furthermore, all PFIs
                      will be required to assess and monitor compliance of subprojects with national labor laws as well as PS2
                      requirements. SMEs that employ less than 20 persons are required to comply only with national labor laws. While
                      they are not required to comply with the PS2 requirements, they must at a minimum: (i) adopt a human resource


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      policy appropriate to its size and workforce, which sets out its approach to managing employees. The policy must
                      provide information regarding their rights under national labor and employment law, including their rights related to
                      wages and benefits; (ii) document and communicate to all employees and workers (including contract workers) their
                      working conditions and terms of employment; (iii) adopt non-discrimination and equal opportunity policy; (vi) provide
                      an employee grievance mechanism; (v) adopt a policy on child and forced labor; and (vi) provide workers with safe
                      work environment. All PFIs will monitor compliance with these requirements as part of their ESDD and ongoing
                      monitoring.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      Under the Facility, TDB (through PFIs) will support housing projects- in the value chain, and housing development,
                      through PFIs (and in certain circumstances, retail). As the Facility and its windows are deliberately designed to finance
                      these subprojects that would deliver green results on the ground, they are expected to achieve higher GHG emissions
                      reduction, resource efficiency for each housing unit and facility in the value chain, and manage or minimnize
                      environmental footprint compared to other similar subprojects. In fact, the project seeks to achieve the ambitions of
                      PS 3 by incentivizing housing development including the whole development and supply chain cycle to adopt green
                      housing technologies and use of construction material that are environmentally friendly. Moreover, the construction
                      and operation of the sub-projects to be supported will not potentially lead to conversion of biodiversity areas on
                      account of raw material sourcing and/or even their location. However, given that the project may support relatively
                      large-scale housing development, including green construction materials manufacturing plants, a wide range of
                      pollution and resource efficiency issues are expected to arise in the supported subprojects. Consequently, PS3 is
                      relevant for the project due to financing of new housing development, rehabilitation of existing housing and



Public Disclosure
                      infrastructure, which may pose risk of environmental pollution and degradation of natural resources (soil, water,
                      ecosystem services) and lead to waste generation such as construction waste, solid and wastewater and can result in
                      impacts if not well identified and mitigated. TDB has experience in E&S risk management for subprojects across
                      sectors including housing sector. It already has an ESMS in place, implementation of which has been assessed by the
                      World Bank during the course of RIFF. The ESMS and its implementation has been found to be adequate for this kind
                      of subprojects supported by TDB previously. Housing development in areas lacking essential infrastructure like water
                      supply, sewage, electricity, and roads can lead to environmental problems, including groundwater contamination,
                      groundwater depletion, and air pollution from backup generators. To address these concerns, PFIs will only provide
                      financing for housing development projects (under window 3) situated in areas that already have the necessary
                      supporting infrastructure in place. Projects in locations without this infrastructure will not receive support. TDB will
                      require the PFIs to undertake an ESDD of the green housing solution subprojects against the E&S requirements which
                      include the exclusion list, World Bank eligibility criteria, participating country’s regulations and World Bank PS. TDB
                      and the PFIs will ensure that the sub project activities efficiently use resources, particularly water and energy and
                      prevent or mitigate the pollution or degradation of natural resources that include soil and water arising from their
                      operations. TDB will ensure that the PFIs have the capacity in their ESMS and staff to identify, assess and manage
                      risks. As such, the screening process of TDB, which include GHG emissions and climate risks assesment and the PFIs
                      will seek to ensure the sub-projects onboarded meet the threshold for PS 3 before qualifying for financing. Any
                      emerging impacts will be assessed in the ESIA and managed by the ESMPs as seen fit from E&S assessments. All
                      subprojects, whether supported directly or through PFIs, will be required to assess PS 3 related risks by undertaking
                      an E&S impact assessment (ESIA) or an initial environmental examination, depending on the project's size and
                      complexity. Once these impacts are identified, the subprojects will be responsible for developing and implementing


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      suitable ESMPs to mitigate and address these effects. The PFIs will review and validate the sufficiency of the
                      assessments and ESMPs in accordance with PS 3.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      All the subprojects and PFIs will not be known until implementation, however given that the project will support
                      relatively large-scale housing development, a broad range of community health and safety (H&S) issues are expected
                      to arise. Community H&S risks that are typical of projects involving construction are expected. These include influx of
                      labor (in-migration) and the related issues of GBV, SEA/SH, child labor and exploitation. In-migration and construction
                      activities can also lead to increased risk of disease transmission such as sexually transmitted infections (STIs) including
                      HIV/AIDS, Covid-19 and other communicable diseases as well as the potential for conflict / tensions between the
                      labor force and local community. Other risks are related to housing safety because of man-made (fire, explosions,
                      etc.), natural (storms, floods, etc.) events, infrastructure and equipment design and safety, safety of services and
                      traffic and road safety. Individual subprojects are likely to be rated as substantial or lower because of the project
                      specific list of restricted activities. It is proposed that subprojects having direct adverse impact on ecosystem services
                      that may result in adverse health and safety risks to affected communities are excluded under the Facility. The TDB
                      ESDD ToR (Annex 7 of the ESMS) has provisions for the management of social risks related to PS4, and requires its
                      borrowers to have plans for the prevention and management of such risks. TDB will ensure that the PFIs, through
                      which the subproject will be supported under the Facility, follow the same E&S procedures that TDB follows for such
                      projects if financed directly by them. The requirements for assessing and monitoring compliance with this PS will be
                      cascaded down to PFIs to ensure that the subprojects supported under this facility identify, address, and mitigate
                      community health and safety risks. TDB’s GBV risk management capacity was enhanced under the RIFF project. To



Public Disclosure
                      this end, TDB accessed the services of an International GBV consultant through the grant made available by the World
                      Bank, as part of the RIFF LOC, to assist them with the development of a specific guidance note that supports risk
                      analysis, prevention and response measures related to SEA/SH in all TDB-financed activities, and to train the TDB staff
                      on GBV risk management activities throughout the RIFF implementation period. The guidance note defines the role
                      and responsibilities of TDB’s borrowers and includes a code of conduct as well. The note will be shared with the PFIs,
                      and they will be required to implement the measures listed in the note in all the subprojects they finance. Also, TDB
                      has retained the services of the GBV consultant who they would be able to deploy to support PFIs in case of need for
                      such support. All subprojects to be supported under the Facility will have to assess and mitigate the PS 4 risks in full
                      compliance with the PS 4 requirements. PFIs will be required to undertake ESDD with a view to confirm that PS 4 risks
                      have identified and necessary ESMPs including a SEA/SH Action Plan when required are prepared and implemented
                      to mitigate the identified risks.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      Since the Facility’s focus is on providing financing to medium to large scale housing development in relation to green
                      housing solutions, subprojects could potentially involve land acquisition, restrictions on land use and/or involuntary
                      resettlement that may involve physical and/or economic displacement with potential adverse impacts on people’s
                      livelihoods. These could occur largely in window 1, in the event that new green construction materials manufacturing
                      plants are being set up under the project, and in window 3 where large housing development projects will be
                      supported under the Facility. TDB’s practical experience in the implementation of its ESMS in relation to involuntary
                      resettlement (whether small or large), is still limited as this is yet to be affirmed even under the Bank supported RIFF
                      project. To date, TDB’s experience in implementing involuntary resettlement subprojects has been limited to working


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                       Page 12 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      as a part of a syndication where the lead implementer was IFC, AfDB or some other development bank. Additionally,
                      the PFIs, who will play a significant role in implementing the Facility, will only be identified during the Facility's
                      implementation phase. It is expected that their capacity and experience in managing involuntary resettlement
                      impacts may be limited. To mitigate the potential involuntary resettlement risks and impacts, TDB and PFIs will
                      support only those subprojects where unencumbered land is readily available. Within the facility, there are two
                      anticipated scenarios concerning land acquisition for subprojects: (i) subprojects situated on available land that had
                      been acquired in the past (historical acquisition); (ii) land to be acquired or currently under acquisition for a
                      subproject through a willing-buyer willing-seller agreement. In the case of historical acquisition, TDB and PFIs must
                      demonstrate through the ESDD/land acquisition due diligence including land acquisition audits, that there are no
                      pending or legacy issues related to the land, and that the acquisition process that was applied is complete with no
                      residual risks. If residual risks and issues are identified, the sub-project must address them in accordance with PS5 to
                      remain eligible under the facility. Failure to mitigate residual risks in compliance with PS5 will render the sub-project
                      ineligible under the facility. Regarding scenario (ii), TDB and PFIs can retain subprojects with ongoing or pending land
                      acquisition in their potential subprojects pipeline. However, such subprojects can only be financed under the facility
                      when land acquisition has been completed and TDB has affirmed that the acquisition process complies with PS5. In
                      this scenario, land will only be acquired through a Willing Buyer-Willing Seller (WB-WS) principle, and subprojects on
                      land that is acquired through eminent domain will be ineligible for funding under the facility. In particular, the
                      ESDD/land acquisition audit should affirm that the land under scenario (ii) is not being acquired through eminent
                      domain, but rather, that the acquisition is through WB-WS principle. The funding agreement will explicitly define
                      what is meant by WB-WS, and the World Bank will collaborate with TDB to clarify in their ESMS, how this provision
                      will be operationalized. In scenario (i), the World Bank will review and clear the land acquisition due diligence and




Public Disclosure
                      audit reports as well as any potential remedial plans to ascertain their consistency with PS5. In scenario (ii), the World
                      Bank will review and provide clearance on the WB-WS Sale Agreement before TDB finances subprojects on land
                      acquired through this mode of land transaction. For direct financing, TDB will share with the Bank for review and
                      approval, all E&S instruments for subprojects with resettlement activities which have been prepared in line with the
                      applicable PSs, to TDB’s satisfaction. For indirect financing through PFIs, TDB will provide the World Bank with its
                      evaluation of the due diligence conducted by PFIs and the E&S Instruments such as land acquisition completion audit
                      for review and approval. TDB and PFIs will only support subprojects where all land matters have been resolved and
                      concluded, and where the land required for a proposed subproject is both available and free of any encumbrances or
                      legacy issues such as substantiated complaints about land acquired forcibly and/or purchased below market price .
                      TDB and PFIs will be required to carry out a land acquisition completion audit of the land acquisition process or an
                      audit of how the land proposed for housing development under window 3 was secured for the subprojects to ensure
                      it has no legacy and outstanding issues. To ensure TDB’s E&S capacity in relation to this PS is fast tracked, TDB will
                      only submit to the Bank subproject instruments that in their view, are ready for financing. The World Bank and TDB
                      will work closely under GRIHD Facility to enable TDB to build its E&S capacity for the management of subprojects to
                      be financed by PFIs that involve land acquisition.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The Facility is designed to support green and resilient housing solutions and technologies and it seeks to achieve the
                      ambitions of PS 6 by incentivizing housing development including the value chain to adopt green housing
                      technologies and use of construction material that are environmentally friendly and sustainably sourced. As such,


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      significant PS 6 related impacts are not envisaged. However, given that the project may support relatively large-scale
                      housing projects, biodiversity issues are expected to arise in some supported subprojects. Some subprojects might (i)
                      be in modified or natural habitats; (ii) potentially affect or be dependent on ecosystem services; and (iii) potentially
                      lead to conversion of biodiversity areas on account of raw material sourcing and location of subprojects. To limit the
                      level of environmental risk exposure in the subprojects, the list of restricted activities will exclude subprojects having
                      adverse impact on critical habitats and/or legally protected and internationally recognized areas of high biodiversity
                      value and subprojects where a biodiversity offset is proposed as the mitigation measures. The mentioned concerns
                      are likely to primarily apply to window 1, which could involve sourcing raw materials from areas with potential
                      biodiversity impacts. In windows 3, the subprojects will mainly be located in urban and peri-urban areas under SOP1,
                      and therefore, they are less likely to have interactions with biodiversity issues. The ESMS of TDB is designed to
                      identify and assess these risks in subprojects directly financed by TDB. The ESMS of PFIs will provide tools to facilitate
                      PS6 screening of subprojects. The tools will enable the PFIs to identify PS6 relevant risks and impacts, consider direct
                      and indirect subproject-related impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem services, and identify any significant residual
                      impacts. The process will consider relevant threats to biodiversity and ecosystem services, especially focusing on
                      habitat loss, degradation and fragmentation, invasive alien species, overexploitation, hydrological changes, nutrient
                      loading, and pollution. It will also consider the differing values attached to biodiversity and ecosystem services by
                      Affected Communities and other stakeholders as appropriate. Where natural habitats might be impacted, the
                      relevant PS6 alignments will be applied, including consideration of subproject-related impacts across the potentially
                      affected landscape or seascape. TDB, through its ongoing monitoring and supervision, will ensure that proposed
                      exclusions, restrictions, and requirements are well applied by the PFIs. All subprojects will be required by the PFIs to
                      undertake an appropriate assessment of biodiversity risks and impacts and develop and implement ESMPs which




Public Disclosure
                      could include a biodiversity management plan. PFIs, through their ESDD and ongoing monitoring, will ensure that the
                      subprojects are designed, constructed and operated in compliance with the PS 6 requirements. Where relevant, TDB
                      and PFIs would require subprojects to engage specialist biodiversity consultants/institutions to carry out
                      comprehensive biodiversity baseline studies in the project areas. Based on the outcomes of the baseline studies, an
                      analysis of alternatives should be conducted with the aim to avoid critical natural habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      IPs/SSAHUTLCs as defined by PS7 may be present in the countries and areas in which TDB and the PFIs are expected
                      to finance subprojects under the Facility. Countries to be covered under the first project in the Series of Projects
                      (SOP) have groups who are classified as IPs/SSAHUTLCs. In Uganda IPs/SSAHUTLCs are referred to as vulnerable and
                      include the Batwa in the West, IK, Tepet in the Karamoja Region and Benet in the Elgon Region. In Kenya,
                      IPs/SSAHUTLCs are referred to as Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) and include hunter-gatherers such as
                      the Ogiek, Sengwer, Sanye, Waatha among others, as well as pastoralists including the Turkana, Somali and Maasai.
                      The pastoralists mainly occupy the arid and semi-arid lands of northern Kenya and towards the border between
                      Kenya and Tanzania in the south. Subprojects falling under window 3 will most likely be situated in urban and peri-
                      urban areas in SOP1. However, Window 1 subprojects might potentially be situated in remote or rural areas where
                      IPs/SSAHUTLCs could be present. The scope and complexity of potential impacts, the context and the capacity of the
                      sub-borrowers who will be responsible for managing risks to IPs/SSAHUTLCs will greatly affect the social risk
                      assessment of the proposed subprojects. TDB’s practical experience on the application of PS7 is yet to be affirmed
                      even under the RIFF project. TDB is, however, committed to prohibit financing of any subproject infrastructure that


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                      would impinge on the lands owned, or claimed under adjudication, by Indigenous Peoples, and or that would create
                      impacts on lands and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under customary use, lead to relocation of
                      indigenous peoples from lands and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under customary use, and
                      those with impacts on critical cultural heritage of IPs, without full documented consent of such indigenous people as
                      per the current exclusion list in the TDB ESMS policy document. Given the anticipated limited experience of PFIs in
                      dealing with PS7-related risks and impacts, PFIs will not support subprojects that necessitate the process of free prior
                      and informed consent (FPIC). This exclusion is suggested due to the complex nature of assessing and managing
                      impacts associated with PS7. The restriction on FPIC requiring subprojects will be formally incorporated into the
                      financing agreements established between TDB and the PFIs, ensuring clear compliance with this policy. For direct
                      financing by TDB, if FPIC is required, TDB will ensure they obtain documented FPIC of IPs/SSAHUTLCs prior to using
                      Facility funds to finance subprojects in IPs/SSAHUTLCs areas. To ensure and facilitate inclusion of IPs/SSAHUTLCs in
                      the GRIHD project benefits, TDB and PFIs will adopt, enhance, and implement the inclusion strategy that is being
                      prepared under the RBF component of ASCENT, and will support subprojects that pilot ethno-engineered green
                      housing solutions in IPs/SSAHUTLCs populated areas that are designed and implemented in a participatory and
                      culturally appropriate manner with and for of IPs/SSAHUTLCs. TDB will enhance the strategy by including in it, the
                      GRIHD inclusion requirements. In cases where subprojects will be implemented in IP areas, an Indigenous People Plan
                      (IPP) would be prepared to ensure IPs are consulted on subproject matters in a culturally appropriate manner in line
                      with PS7, and that they are able to access subproject benefits, especially employment of unskilled and semi-skilled
                      labor.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      TDB-financed subprojects may have direct, indirect, and possibly cumulative risks or impacts on cultural heritage.
                      TDB’s ESMS prohibits financing of any subproject, infrastructure or trade finance activity impacting upon World
                      Heritage sites and other protected areas. TDB has experience with projects that have impacted cultural aspects of
                      some of the affected communities, e.g., on matters of handling graves. In these subprojects, TDB mandated that
                      project proponents conduct culturally sensitive consultations with the community to agree on culturally acceptable
                      solutions. These consultations and agreements on mitigation measures were duly documented. Similarly, TDB will not
                      finance subprojects or activity that involves removal of non-replicable cultural heritage, except when such removal is
                      carried out in strict conformity to the guidance provided by PS8. Given that the funds will be provided to subprojects
                      via PFIs, TDB will cascade down the E&S requirements to the PFIs. TDB will ensure that the PFIs have the capacity in
                      their ESMS and staff to identify, assess and manage risks as per PS 8. All subprojects, whether supported directly by
                      TDB or through PFIs under the Facility, must consult with affected communities to identify cultural heritage of
                      importance, and to incorporate into the decision-making process the views of the affected communities on such
                      cultural heritage. The requirements for managing the potential project impacts on tangible and intangible cultural
                      heritage of IPs will follow PS7 guidance and standards.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                Relevant

                      The project will apply OP 4.03 and the management of E&S risks and impacts will be done in accordance to the World
                      Bank Performance Standards (PSs) under OP 4.03 (which are aligned to the IFC PSs). Each PFI will be required to have
                      in place and to implement an ESMS that mirrors the TDB ESMS. In addition, they will be required to have E&S risks
                      and impacts management capacity in line with the requirements of the OP 4.03 PSs.



                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)




                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               No
                       The Project is being implemented under OP 4.03. In this regard, TDB has established ESG structures and ESMS systems
                       that will support Facility implementation in line with OP 4.03. TDB's E&S Policies are well-crafted, reflecting
                       institutional commitment to integrate E&S sustainability across operations, complete with an exclusion list. The policy
                       aligns with IFC/WB Performance Standards. The existing ESMS includes E&S policy, categorization procedures,
                       screening, due diligence, monitoring, and communication mechanisms. TDB began its E&S journey in 2005, developed
                       policies in 2010, and underwent a comprehensive review in 2015 with AfDB support.

                       TDB subjects its ESMS to periodic reviews performed by external consultants to ensure it continues to be in line with
                       international best practice. Following the 2021 review, TDB made changes in its ESMS to integrate step-by step
                       guidelines to assist in implementing the ESMS, bench-marking E&S policy to international practice, standardization of
                       tools and templates; clarification of roles and responsibility, provision of grievance mechanism; considering the new
                       responsible finance trends and tools, and E&S requirements for E&S requirements for FIs. Through the Bank financed




Public Disclosure
                       RIFF project, TDB further enhanced its E&S, GBV, labor and climate management capacity. as part of the preparation
                       of GRIHD and ASCENT, TDB has developed a Guidance Note to guide its lending operations through PFIs.

                       TDB has an internal E&S capacity to four E&S staff and is expected to higher an additional three E&S staff to augment
                       its current capacity. In addition, it retains services of an ESG consulting firm to assist in the ESDDs and monitoring of
                       E&S issues. The Facility's ESAP requires TDB to dedicate an E&S specialist to the the Project.

                       Moreover, TDB has appointed a Senior Executive Member of Management as TDB's Climate Champion on climate
                       strategy. In addition, TDB has developed their Climate Strategy including Climate Policy Statement, Climate Strategy
                       and Taxonomy, and Guidelines/tools (and templates) for assessing climate vulnerability and related physical risks,
                       among other deliverables. The Strategy is awaiting internal approvals.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No
                       Common Approach is not being considered for the Project.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     As part of the the ESAP conditions, TDB will is required to: (i) update its ESMS, incorporating the Bank's comments and
                     to ensure it is approved by TDB's Senior Management or board as appropriate prior to effectiveness; (ii) approve, adopt


                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Africa Green, Resilient And Inclusive Housing De-risking (grihd) Facility (P178986)



                     and implement the Guidance Note for lending through PFIs which has been cleared by the Bank prior to disbursement
                     of funds from World Bank to TDB; (iii Prepare, approve and adopt, (after clearance by the Bank), an Inclusion Strategy
                     prior to disbursement of Project funds to TDB; (iv) Cascade the Inclusion Strategy to PFIs prior to disbursement of
                     Project Funds from TDB to PFIs; (v) Cascade E&S requirements in line with TDB ESMS/Bank PSs to PFIs prior to
                     disbursement of Project Funds from TDB to PFIs.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:        Hadija Rahama Diba Kamayo               Title:          Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                   hkamayo@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:             Sheila W. Kamunyori                     Job Title:      Senior Urban Specialist

                      Email:                   skamunyori@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:             Uloaku Oyewole                          Job Title:      Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                   uechebiri@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                     Hadija Rahama Diba Kamayo, Sheila W. Kamunyori, Uloaku Oyewole

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:            James Chacha Maroa

                     ADM Social Specialist:                   Margaret Auma Ombai




                    Dec 21, 2024                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
