Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank                                                               C-ESRS
                                        Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)




Public Disclosure Authorized                         Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                              Concept Stage
                                                                        (ESRS Concept Stage)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                   World Bank Performance Standards (OP 4.03)


       For Official Use Only
                                                                                      May 2023




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                Date Prepared/Updated: | Report No: ESRSXXXXXX




                               January 15, 2023                                                                  Page 1 of 28
                                   The World Bank
                                   Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         I. BASIC INFORMATION

                         A. Basic Project Data

                         Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                         Africa                        Africa                           P178986

                         Project Name                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility Project

                         Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                         Finance, Competitiveness      Investment Project               Oct 25, 2023                   Oct 18, 2023
                         and Innovation                Financing

                         Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                         Republic of Kenya             Trade and Development
                         Republic of Uganda            Bank (TDB)
                         Republic of Zambia


                         Proposed Development Objective(s)




For Official Use Only
                         The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase private capital mobilization to to expand access to green,
                         resilient and inclusive housing for target beneficiaries in select countries in Eastern and Southern Africa.



                        Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount
                         IDA Credit                                                                                                           180.00
                         Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                                    362.50
                         Total Project Cost                                                                                                   542.50


                         B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                         Policy, para. 12?
                         NO

                         C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including Project structure, components, activities, technical design,
                         flow of funds, etc.]

                         The Africa GRIHD Facility introduces an innovative framework that systematically lowers the risks which hold back
                         private investment in green, resilient, and inclusive housing in AFE. Conceptualized as a regional Series of Projects (SOP),
                         it will be implemented in a sequenced, phased process. This demonstration/proof of concept phase (Figure 1) will target
                         low-hanging fruits characterized by markets with investment-ready pipelines as well as the presence of enabling macro-
                         fiscal conditions as required by the WB policy framework on FIF. The overall objective is to cost-effectively meet the

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                    Page 2 of 28
                                     The World Bank
                                     Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         risk-reward expectations of investors and unlock private capital for higher impact. The Project will focus its initial efforts
                         on Kenya, Uganda, and Zambia, and over the next set of series’ aim to expand its reach to other countries in the region.


                                                                                               Figure 1: Project Design




                         The Facility is conceptualized as a regional intervention in collaboration with an existing regional entity, the Eastern and




For Official Use Only
                         Southern Africa Trade and Development Bank (TDB), to extend the additional benefits of economies of scale, pooling of
                         risks including the cross-border climate change risk, learning and efficiency gains, and specialization so that participating
                         countries gain higher value than each acting alone.

                         The Project has two components:
                         Component 1: Catalyzing Private Capital for Housing Value Chain (US$175 million)

                         Component 1 has two sub-components.
                         Sub-component 1.1: Sustainable De-Risking Solutions (US$145 million)
                         This sub-component will support the establishment, capitalization, and operationalization of the Facility as a ring-fenced
                         Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) within the Eastern and Southern Africa Trade and Development Bank (TDB). TDB will serve
                         as the host for the SPV which will be set up as an international body corporate enjoying the same privileges and
                         immunities1 as other TDB Group entities. The Facility’s risks will be isolated ensuring its independent decision making
                         and easy traceability of financing, while benefitting from TDB’s financial institution network and experience across
                         different jurisdictions in AFE.
                         Operating at a wholesale level, the Facility will partner with a range of sound banks, microfinance, and housing finance
                         institutions, i.e., participating financial institutions (PFIs), to deploy catalytic de-risking financial instruments in support
                         of climate-informed housing solutions. Adopting an end-to-end approach on both the supply and demand sides of the
                         sector, the Facility will offer a range of complementary de-risking products targeting specific value chain interventions
                         (“windows”):



                        1 https://www.tdbgroup.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/TDB-Charter-English_certified.pdf



                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                        Page 3 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                                                            Table 1: Facility Windows under Sub-component 1

                          Window         Overview
                          Window 1:      • This window will support manufacturers and suppliers of green, low-carbon technologies and
                          Supply Chain      construction materials. Typical “green” construction materials and technologies in the region
                                            include compressed earth bricks, local biomass products, prefabrication, modular construction,
                                            and solar panel roofs.
                                         • By innovating and maturing supply chains, the Facility will reduce the incremental cost and
                                            time taken in building green, resilient housing stocks and create skilled, local, green jobs.
                          Window 2:      • Via private service providers, this window will facilitate construction or reinforcement of last
                          Housing           mile, shared/ common housing infrastructure that will improve adaptive capacity and
                          Infrastructure    resilience of residents and housing stocks, generate long-term economic benefits, and provide
                                            multiple environmental and social benefits.
                                         • Eligible projects may fall into the following categories: (i) green infrastructure (stormwater
                                            drainage systems; other nature-based solutions that reduce flood risks and heat stress
                                            reduction), (ii) electricity generation (solar, wind), (iii) safety (solar or LED street lighting), (iv)
                                            access roads (local road network; footpaths, cycle ways), (v) utility connections (water supply),
                                            and (vi) waste management (waste collection and recycling).
                                         • By de-risking investment in last-mile infrastructure, the Facility will mitigate the uptake of
                                            housing that lacks critical services. Further, by ensuring climate resilience and environmental
                                            and social benefits, the Facility will reduce the cost of greening or climate-proofing housing




For Official Use Only
                                            stocks more broadly.
                          Window 3:      • This window will target its support to housing developers and contractors for construction
                          Home              and/or renovation of green, resilient, and inclusive housing projects.
                          Construction • It will incentivize developers to commit to relevant national or local building codes on energy
                          and/or            performance or disaster risk management, absorb the cost of attaining green certification such
                          Renovation        as IFC’s EDGE, and/or reducing the post-disaster reconstruction needs through embedding
                                            resilience using a tool like IFC’s BRI.
                          Window 4:      • Through retail banks and mortgage refinance companies (MRCs), this window will provide
                          Home              competitive consumer finance for climate-smart homes using the lowest marginal,
                          Offtake           commercially viable interest rate (in nominal terms). It will only be triggered when sufficient
                                            critical mass has been developed – i.e., the supply of housing units within client countries at a
                                            scale to absorb financing products (see Window 3).
                                         • It will encourage offtake from target communities (including landlords) in various forms, e.g.,
                                            rental, tenant purchase schemes, green mortgages.

                         The deployment of funds into these windows will depend on the transaction and its risk profile, i.e., as equity, quasi-
                         equity, loans, risk-sharing instruments, guarantee, performance-based grants, etc. The number of SMEs/PSP/
                         developers who will participate in the Facility is not known at this concept stage but will be considered further prior to
                         appraisal, with some, potentially already having been selected.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Fund Management and Business Development (US$30 million)

                         This sub-component will support the capitalization of TDB’s Green Project Preparation Facility (GPPF) - a specialized
                         vehicle to be established within TDB to manage the GRIHD Facility’s de-risking objectives. Given TDB’s limited exposure


                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                     Page 4 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         and expertise on climate-smart housing interventions, it is proposed that the below functions of the GPPF are
                         independently and professionally managed:
                         a) Transaction Support:
                             • Evaluate and undertake detailed due diligence on the de-risking applications brought forward by the PFIs,
                                 across the different windows and target markets within the AFE region.
                             • Assessments would cover the transaction cycle i.e. structuring and credit analysis, financial modelling -
                                 including review, stress-testing and carrying out of scenario analysis, and review of commercial and legal
                                 documentation to ensure the GRIHD Facility’s position is appropriately protected.
                         b) Business Development:
                             • Actively seek out new deals by engaging proactively with the PFIs and value chain actors in target markets
                                 within the AFE region.
                         c) Portfolio Management and Development Impact:
                             • Track development impact metrices and regularly review their performance once the transaction is within the
                                 GRIHD Facility portfolio, while feeding back learnings to the broader PFI partners.
                             • Provide operational and administrative support for the proper administration of the transactions, with a focus
                                 on Health, Safety, Environmental and Social (HSES) management.
                         d) Investment Strategy and Marketing:
                             • Continuously improve on the Facility’s investment strategy and business plan and engage closely with potential
                                 strategic partners to foster collaborations and additional investments into the Facility.
                             • Assessment of securitization options to inform potentialities for the Facility’s capital structure in the future, as
                                 well as analysis of potential carbon financing avenues which offer growth opportunities to ensure the GRIHD




For Official Use Only
                                 Facility’s continued sustainability.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$5 million)
                         This component will support the institutional strengthening and technical capacity building of TDB in this complex and
                         evolving topic. It is anticipated that TDB will co-ordinate this sub-component through its subsidiary “TDF Academy”
                         whose activities may be complemented with additional TA resources and/or in partnership with IFC's EDGE and BRI
                         tools, WBG’s Joint Capital Market Program (J-CAP), as well as other trust fund resources.

                         Based on a thorough capacity needs assessment, a TA package will be developed. From the preliminary engagements,
                         activities are anticipated to fall into two broad categories and will be sequenced depending on immediate and
                         intermediate needs with a view of future SOPs, i.e. (i) build climate and housing intelligence within TDB; and (ii) enhance
                         PFI awareness and understanding on the sector, including environmental and social risk management requirements.


                         D. Scope of application of Performance Standards (PSs) [and Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), if relevant]

                         The Project will apply the World Bank’s OP 4.03, Performance Standards (PSs) for Private Sector Activities to all
                         Project Components that will be managed by TDB given:
                              a) TDB - the regional implementing partner - satisfies the definition of “Private Entity” as provided in paragraph 3
                                 of the OP i.e. TDB is majority-owned by governments but operates on commercial principles according to its
                                 Charter. TDB follows a rigorous approach in its lending process akin to what is expected in a commercial bank:
                                 loans are overcollateralized and there is a recovery unit in place; the Board has approved a Credit Risk Appetite
                                 Strategy within which lending is conducted by the business units; there are strict exposure limits; all borrowers
                                 are rated, and financial statements are compliant with IFRS 9 (on the recognition of credit risk). Moreover, TDB

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                   Page 5 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                                  regularly issues commercially priced bonds in the capital markets (see two Eurobonds issued in 2017 and 2019).
                                  TDB is also rated investment grade by Moody’s (Baa3 (stable)) and Fitch (BB+ (Positive)). Additionally, TDB is
                                  managerially autonomous, and its Member States are not involved in the day-to-day management.

                              b) The use of OP4.03 based on TDB’s profile as a commercial private entity has been previously approved under
                                 the Regional Infrastructure Finance Facility (RIFF) (P171967).

                              c) The proposed Project activities are considered Private Sector Activities per paragraph 4 of the OP.

                                   ▪       Under component 1, the objective of the proposed operation is to establish, capitalize, and operationalize
                                           the Facility as a ring-fenced SPV within TDB. TDB will on-lend long-term finance to PFIs to support their
                                           housing portfolios, per the four windows. Under component 1.1, the Facility will work with PFIs that have
                                           demonstratable portfolio experience in housing, preferably in green buildings, thereby relying on their
                                           capacity for product development, underwriting, risk management, etc.; and (ii) under component 1.2, it
                                           is proposed that the Facility outsources the expertise and experience of a qualified fund manager, while
                                           building internal capacity of in-house specialists, dedicated to the topic.

                                           Access to funds under the Facility will be restricted to interventions that are designed, constructed,
                                           maintained and/or operated by private entities. In the case of Window 2, which relates to the provision of
                                           public goods i.e., Housing Infrastructure, their delivery will be conditioned on the use of the most efficient
                                           and effective mechanism, including Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) where risks and physical activities
                                           are carried out by the participating private entities. In this regard, eligible subprojects to be financed via




For Official Use Only
                                           Window 2 are considered private sector activity as defined under OP 4.03, paragraph 6 and the associated
                                           requirements of the PSs will be applicable to all subprojects. However, the public sector may be responsible
                                           for providing land that is free from all encumbrances to the private entities, for building and operating
                                           green housing infrastructure. For such aspects, the relevant environment & social framework (ESF)
                                           requirements (ESS 5, 7 and 10) will apply to the public sector entities.

                                   For component 2, TDB will co-ordinate the TA activities through its subsidiary “TDF Academy.” From the
                                   preliminary engagements, activities are anticipated to fall into two broad categories and will be sequenced
                                   depending on immediate and intermediate needs with a view of future SOPs, i.e. (i) build climate and housing
                                   intelligence within TDB; and (ii) enhance PFI awareness and understanding on the sector, including
                                   environmental and social risk management requirements. At this stage, no collaboration is required with
                                   government agencies for the adoption of the TA outputs (beyond the Project). The TA activities will be further
                                   defined during project preparation and will be undertaken in a manner which is consistent with the
                                   requirements of the World Bank’s Performance Standards.

                                  •    Finally, TDB as an apex institution, carries primary responsibility for identifying, assessing, and managing
                                       E&S risks associated with the activities of the PFIs. TDB – which has developed an Environmental and Social
                                       Management System (ESMS) with support of the WB under the Regional Infrastructure Finance Facility
                                       (RIFF) - will be fully responsible for identifying, assessing and managing the E&S risks associated with the
                                       subprojects it finances via the PFIs. In this regard, TDB reviews its ESMS periodically. The last review was
                                       undertaken in 2021, and the next review is expected to be done before the end of 2023. The review of the
                                       ESMS has led to Integration of ESMS procedures setting out, in one document, clear step-by step guidelines
                                       to assist in implementing the ESMS, bench-marking E&S policy to international practice, standardization of
                                       tools and templates that provide clear guidelines in the assessment of E&S risk of transactions; clarification

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                        Page 6 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                                       of roles and responsibility, provision of grievance mechanism; and, considering the new responsible finance
                                       trends and tools. The 2021 version of the ESMS introduces the requirements for E&S screening of the
                                       partner financial institutions (FIs) to ensure that FIs are meeting PS 2 requirements; It also brings
                                       adjustments on the loan E&S screening structure to include the 2019 Equator Principles and EDFI E&S
                                       Harmonized Standards/requirements. Under RIFF, TDB has established a strong human resource base that
                                       oversees the management of E&S aspects, including E&S due diligence (ESDD) and the review of E&S
                                       instruments submitted by the PFIs before sharing the same with the World Bank (WB) for either clearance
                                       or concurrence. Section E of this ESRS provides information on the current E&S capacity of TDB.

                                   ▪       TDB’s ESMS includes procedures for categorization of PFIs as category FI-1, FI-2 and FI-3, and E&S
                                           requirements for PFIs. The E&S requirements for PFIs include having an E&S policy, ESMS, and PS 2
                                           compliant HR policies and procedures. While the ESMS articulates the E&S requirements and the steps to
                                           be followed, it lacks the operational tools and templates for ESDD & monitoring of PFIs. In this project,
                                           beneficiary PFIs, which are also private commercial entities under OP4.03, will eventually finance the
                                           eligible physical activities/ subprojects. This means that TDB will need to ensure that its ESMS allows it to
                                           conduct proper ESDD on PFIs and cause them to comply with the applicable PSs and other relevant
                                           requirements via developing and implementing E&S risk screening, assessment, and monitoring measures
                                           at their level and retaining adequate E&S internal capacity to do so. TDB is, currently, developing E&S
                                           Guidance Note and requisite operational/implementation tools for Financial Intermediaries/PFIs. The
                                           Guidance Note builds on IFC interpretation Note on Financial Intermediaries (Nov. 2018) and TDB’s ESMS
                                           and aims to provide specific guidance that actively supports the assessment, and management of E&S risks
                                           associated with TDB’s lending activities through PFIs. On the other hand, TDB will continue reviewing its




For Official Use Only
                                           ESMS regularly to ensure its adequacy and alignment with the current trends of the responsible and
                                           sustainable finance. The next review is expected to be done by end Q4/2023. Some additional gaps that
                                           TDB would be required to address as part of its ESMS update relate to including specific E&S procedures
                                           for housing projects, housing infrastructure projects to be anchored by public sector entities, and
                                           procedures for integrating E&S considerations into the TA activities supported by TDB.

                                  •    Under the Facility, TDB may finance some subprojects in the housing value chain directly. TDB’s existing
                                       ESMS has procedures and tools for assessing E&S risks associated with such projects. The World Bank will,
                                       however, review the existing ESMS to confirm its adequacy and relevance to the kinds of subprojects to be
                                       supported under this Project, and identify any gaps. TDB will address the identified gaps in the updated
                                       ESMS before appraisal.

                                  •    TDB, as part of its existing ESMS, requires each PFI to have an ESMS. For the Facility, it will retain an
                                       oversight role or carry out ESDD on E&S instruments submitted by the PFIs prior to submitting them to WB
                                       for no-objection. TBD will perform ongoing monitoring of PFI’s E&S performance. To support the PFIs in the
                                       E&S risk management, TDB will develop an ESMS template which will include detailed tools and guidance
                                       document on screening subprojects specific to GRIHDF in line with PS1-8. The ESMS template with various
                                       tools will be developed before appraisal and this requirement will be included in the E&S Action Plan (ESAP)
                                       to be agreed with TDB. The ESMS commitments of the PFIs will be explicitly mentioned in the loan
                                       agreement signed between TDB and the PFI. The WB will have a no objection to the ESMS of each PFI before
                                       such a loan agreement can be finalized and signed. Each PFI will have at least one E&S focal point assigned
                                       to work with TDB to ensure that the ESMS is in place, confirmed by senior PFI management, and maintained
                                       and monitored. PFIs will ensure applicable E&S requirements are included in financing agreements signed
                                       with each financed subproject/investment and will perform monitoring and reporting of E&S performance.

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                       Page 7 of 28
                                      The World Bank
                                      Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)




                                     •    The project operational manual to be developed and managed by TDB will include specific requirements of
                                          PFI ESMS and monitoring arrangements, including occasional spot checks of financed activities. This
                                          requirement will also be included in TDB’s ESMS along with associated tools for ongoing monitoring. Some
                                          of these checks may be scheduled during World Bank implementation support missions to enable the WB
                                          experts to participate in the review of subprojects and related documentation.

                                 d) TDB’s ESMS is based on IFC PSs, and its private sector clients – who are the focus of the proposed Project - are
                                    familiar with and using them. The precedence set under the RIFF project2 and the ongoing application of the
                                    PSs would allow the proposed Facility to leverage the heavy lifting already completed with TDB. The WB has
                                    also greatly supported the strengthening of TDB’s ESMS in line with the requirements of the PSs and built TDB’s
                                    E&S staff capacity to this effect. TDB has in the past communicated its strong preference to apply PS.

                                 e) For any activities that may be undertaken by the public sector entities under Window 2 of component 1 and TA
                                    activities under component 2, the ESF requirements will be applicable. The principles, processes and procedures
                                    for ensuring consideration of E&S aspects will be defined in an Umbrella Environment & Social Management
                                    Framework (U-ESMF) to be developed for all public sector entities. To that extent, the participating
                                    governments will prepare E&S instruments that include resettlement policy framework (RPF), stakeholder
                                    engagement plan, and an U-ESMF consistent with the ESF requirements. To enable the development of the U-
                                    ESMF to be adopted by all three participating countries, two suggestions are proposed: (i) TDB hires
                                    independent E&S specialist to develop and facilitate the adoption of thew U-ESMS by each participating
                                    countries; or, (ii) if this is to be done in-house by the participating countries, then TDB will facilitate the E&S




For Official Use Only
                                    specialists responsible for this project to come together and prepare the U-ESMF.


                            E. Environmental and Social Overview

                            E.1. Project location(s) and salient characteristics relevant to the ES assessment [geographic, environmental, social]

                            For this first project in the series, the Facility will cover the geographies of Kenya, Uganda and Zambia, with additional
                            countries being included in subsequent projects in the series - potentially Mozambique, Lesotho and Tanzania - where
                            contextual factors such as high urbanization would justify the implementation of the operation. The Project’s E&S
                            assessment and risk management design focuses on analyzing salient characteristics and parameters appropriate for FI
                            lending operations. Currently, the exact scope and nature of activities to be financed from the Project funds are not yet
                            defined. These will be defined during the project preparation and the specific E&S requirements emanating from the
                            scope and nature of activities will be presented in the A-ESRS, and the ESAP. The upgraded ESMS of TDB will include a
                            guidance note with necessary procedures and tools for assessing E&S impacts of lending through PFIs, subproject
                            activities and TA. For activities that will be undertaken by participating governments, the U-ESMF will define E&S
                            assessment requirements and measures and tools. The project team will turn to existing green taxonomies and
                            classifications, such as EDGE3, EU Taxonomy4, and China Green Industry Catalogue5, to establish the range of eligible
                            activities. It is likely that the focus may be on supporting large to medium scale construction of green housing and
                            development of associated infrastructure for last mile access, support to manufacturing green building materials,

                        2 RIFF is a hybrid project being implemented by TDB and a regional public entity, COMESA, with the PSs being applied by TDB while the ESF/ESSs

                        being applied to COMESA.
                        3 https://edgebuildings.com/
                        4 https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/sustainable-finance/eu-taxonomy-sustainable-activities_en
                        5
                            http://www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/4342400/2021091617180089879.pdf

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         financing energy efficiency measures, and other types of interventions. The nature of funding to individual interventions
                         can range from direct project finance, to working capital for SMEs, to corporate finance for green energy companies, to
                         retail consumer finance for green home offtake.

                         The exact location of the potential investments/subprojects will only be known during implementation, and hence,
                         there will be a greater focus on assessing TDB’s existing E&S processes and capacity to conduct robust E&S assessments.
                         Specifically, as part of the project preparation, the World Bank will assess the following key aspects: (i) the nature,
                         performance and risk profile (including risk management systems) of the TDB's current portfolio prior to World Bank's
                         investment with a focus on infrastructure, housing supply chain and housing development portfolio, in relation to the
                         GRIHDF; (ii) the scope and nature of the World Bank's proposed support under the Facility; (iii) the quality,
                         comprehensiveness and appropriateness of the key components of TDB's existing ESMS including existing E&S policies
                         and procedures, organizational capacity and competency, and current monitoring and reporting arrangements; (iv)
                         TDB's labor and working conditions and the current policies and organizational structure for managing these aspects;
                         and (v) TDB’s current approaches for engaging with stakeholders as part of its E&S policies, procedures, and
                         organizational capacity assessment. TDB is currently in the process of developing a Guidance Note for its lending
                         through financial intermediaries. The WB will review this as part of project preparation and may recommend additional
                         tools and processes to address the E&S requirements for PFIs under the Facility.

                         I.    TDB’s current portfolio E&S risk profile

                         Established in 1985, TDB is a multilateral, treaty-based development financial institution with an asset base of over




For Official Use Only
                         US$8 billion, with more than half representing loans to projects contributing directly to Sustainable Development Goals
                         (SDGs). TDB approaches its interventions in a manner that pro-actively supports sustainable development, including the
                         reduction of climate risks and expansion of clean energy. TDB’s proactive position in integrating sustainability in its
                         operations is demonstrated not only by the development of an ESMS on the Environmental, Social and Governance
                         (ESG) risk side, but also by actively pursuing the formulation of Climate Finance Framework, Sustainability Reporting
                         Framework, and SDG Bonds Framework. Some of these efforts are supported by the WB under the regional RIFF project.

                         Sectoral exposure: Initial review of TDB's portfolio shows the focus is on relatively high-risk sectors such as agriculture,
                         trade, industry, infrastructure, energy and tourism. Its loan book is dominated by petrochemicals and agribusiness, with
                         gross exposure of 36 percent and 23 percent in 2017, respectively. Energy is currently TDB’s top financed sector and
                         includes hydro, geothermal, wind, and oil and gas, with oil and gas as the top exposure sector due to trade facilities for
                         countries to purchase oil and gas. During appraisal the team will ascertain the most efficient measures to ring-fence
                         WB's financing from supporting upstream oil and gas investments (even if indirectly), in line with corporate
                         commitments.

                         A very small (0.34%) proportion of TDB’s portfolio as of June 2022, constitutes lending for housing. This includes retail
                         housing and housing development projects.

                         Direct lending activities: TDB conducts two major types of lending activities: (1) trade finance loans generally with
                         maturities of less than a year to a maximum of 36 months; and (2) project and infrastructure finance loans with
                         maturities from three to 10 (a maximum of 15) years. While trade finance is mostly low risk given the shorter tenor and
                         nature of financing, project finance is mostly medium to high risk as it is typically long term, and the sectors are
                         inherently risky. In terms of investment size and borrowing entity profile, TDB extends lending to public sector
                         (governments and state-owned enterprises, representing 63 percent of its portfolio, as of December 31, 2018), large as
                         well as small and medium corporations, and other FIs. The nature of TDB’s operations means that it lends larger

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                    Page 9 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         amounts to a smaller number of entities. This leads to high portfolio concentration, which can potentially increase the
                         magnitude of E&S risks and impacts.

                         Current TDB exposure to financial sector on-lending: Twenty (20%) of TDB’s gross portfolio as of June 2022 constitutes
                         lending through financial intermediaries. As of June 2022, TDB has one FI client in Kenya and two each in Uganda and
                         Zambia. Its exposure in these countries is around 2.35% of the total portfolio as of June 2022. While there are two
                         financial intermediaries in Uganda, the current exposure of TDB in Uganda through PFIs is nil. Since the nature of such
                         lending and due diligence are different from TDB’s direct lending activities and TDB’s approach to E&S risk management
                         in its lending activities through FIs is as yet nascent (ESMS updated in 2021 to include the requirements for PFIs), it may
                         put the institution on an additional learning curve to managing a new green finance facility. However, the project design
                         contemplates training of dedicated TDB staff to develop and manage a due diligence system for participating FIs, as well
                         as systems to track portfolios and monitoring key project indicators. As of July 2022, TDB had a capacity of 4 staff
                         members who are directly responsible for E&S risk management in the TDB portfolio. During project preparation, the
                         World Bank will assess the existing capacity, and if considered to be limited or inadequate to manage the E&S risks
                         under the complex GRIHDF, then TDB will be asked to enhance its capacity and this requirement will be included in the
                         ESAP.

                         Climate change at TDB: TDB has managed prior portfolio of climate lending with DFIs, e.g., in 2021 Agence française de
                         Développement (AFD) and TDB signed a Statement Letter formalizing their commitment towards a US$120M credit
                         facility which will be targeting climate-oriented projects on the continent. As proof of its commitment to climate
                         lending, TDB initiated the development of a Climate Strategy in April 2022, with a proposed completion date of Q1,
                         2023. The strategy development process started with the appointment of a Senior Executive Member of



For Official Use Only
                         Management as TDB’ Climate Champion, with the aim of leading all TDB’s climate initiatives which will be
                         delivered over the coming years; and to help in the establishment of a set of targets that would help TDB to
                         deliver green finance benefits. The Climate Champion is also responsible for overseeing and facilitating the
                         integration of climate products, in a coherent manner, within TDB’s mandate.

                         Performance under RIFF: TDB continues to implement its ESMS and to report regulation on the ESAP implementation.
                         It has completed an independent E&S monitoring for higher risk subprojects, in line with the ESAP. The final report is
                         pending. TDB expects the E&S guidance for lending through PFIs to be ready by Q3 of 2023. TDB has submitted E&S
                         Instruments and Environmental and Social Due Diligence (ESDD) reports for three of the seven subprojects in its
                         pipeline. The instruments reviewed required upgrading as they were of poor quality. Under RIFF, all subprojects are
                         directly financed by TDB.

                        II.    Scope and Nature of the Proposed World Bank Support and its Environmental and Social Implications

                         The objective of the proposed Facility is to expand access to long-term finance to eligible FIs for the delivery of low
                         carbon, resilient and energy efficient affordable housing solutions in the region. The Project has two components, both
                         of which are proposed to be mainly implemented and managed by TDB. Detailed assessment of the potential E&S risks
                         and impacts of the Project will be undertaken as part of the Appraisal stages due diligence, but below is a presentation
                         of the initial E&S assessment.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Sustainable De-Risking Solutions (US$145 million)

                         This component will expand access to green affordable housing finance along four complementary windows; each of
                         which will be deployed according to individual country needs and market demands. The diversity of the proposed
                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                  Page 10 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         solutions is a deliberate programmatic strategy to unlock the value of the green building sector in the region: triggering
                         the green affordable housing movement from the top of the value chain while providing greater flexibility to cater to
                         the different stages of development within the various investing countries. It is also an approach that endeavors to
                         generate a sufficient and scalable “pipeline” for the Facility in this embryonic market that is currently too small to scale.

                         World Bank and TDB will agree on a list of restricted activities defining what kinds of subprojects may not be financed
                         by TDB from the ringfenced project funds. This list of restricted activities will be included in the A-ESRS, TDB’s updated
                         ESMS, and U-ESMF for participating governments, and it will form part of funding agreements signed between TDB and
                         the PFIs. This agreement will entail either temporary or permanent exclusion of certain green housing subprojects and
                         green housing infrastructure from financing under the project. This is likely to include activities involving construction
                         in protected areas or activities involving slum clearance/ upgrading and construction of bulk large scale green housing
                         infrastructure.

                         The Table below presents an analysis of the potential E&S risks and impacts of the proposed project in relation to each
                         of the four Windows. During project preparation, a more complete set of potential E&S risks and impacts will be
                         developed highlighting both direct, indirect, and cumulative risks/impacts as these can be quite relevant when dealing
                         with housing projects.

                          Window                  Potential Social Risks and Impacts            Potential Environmental Risks and Impacts
                          Window 1:               •   Involuntary resettlement (physical and    •   Pollution (air, water and soil) associated with the
                          Manufacturing and           economic) due to the need to create           extraction and processing of natural resources and




For Official Use Only
                          Supply Chain                room for construction of factories that       the further manufacturing of construction
                                                      manufacture green construction                materials
                                                      materials                                 •   Air pollution from sources of energy supply used
                                                  •   Location of construction materials for        for manufacturing of construction material.
                                                      manufacturing plants in areas with        •   Sourcing of sand and other materials for building
                                                      unclear land tenure systems or                material from riverbeds leads to impacts on water
                                                      unregistered community lands                  aquifers and causes water pollution, and riverbank
                                                  •   Location of construction materials            instability.
                                                      manufacturing plants in areas where       •   Mining for resources required for building material
                                                      IPs/SSAHUTLCs live or in areas where          could at times lead to land conversion contributing
                                                      their livelihood and/or socio-cultural        to biodiversity loss
                                                      heritage are located                      •   resource utilization of water and energy by
                                                  •   SEA risks in relation to communities in       construction material production
                                                      areas where green construction            •   Existing environmental damage at such sites -
                                                      materials are harvested from and SH at
                                                                                                    soil and water contamination, etc. and even
                                                      the manufacturing/supply workplace
                                                                                                    off-site
                                                  •   Child and/or forced labor
                                                                                                •   Transport related EHS risks of materials from
                                                  •   Labor related challenges if locals are
                                                      not employed in manufacturing or the          manufacturing sites
                                                      supply chain entities                     •   Occupational health and safety (during
                                                  •   Community health risks such as                manufacturing of building material and
                                                      HIV/AIDS and Covid-19                         construction)
                                                                                                •   Waste generation and management
                                                                                                •   Environmental issues related to site selection for
                                                                                                    factories or other facilities, such as site drainage,
                                                                                                    biodiversity impacts, areas prone to natural
                                                                                                    hazards

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                          Page 11 of 28
                                    The World Bank
                                    Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                                                                                                       •   Together, building and construction are
                                                                                                           responsible for 39% of all carbon emissions in the
                                                                                                           world6. These GHG emissions are mostly
                                                                                                           associated with how buildings are used but a part
                                                                                                           of this also comes from the production and supply
                                                                                                           of construction materials
                                                                                                       •   Given the project targets “green” technologies,
                                                                                                           due diligence would go beyond “traditional” risk
                                                                                                           factors and focus on technologies that reduce
                                                                                                           carbon footprint of subprojects and / or finance
                                                                                                           activities related to energy and resource efficiency,
                                                                                                           renewable energy, and climate change adaptation
                                                                                                           (this would be determined via developing the
                                                                                                           eligibility criteria for investments based on
                                                                                                           selected green taxonomies, classifications, and
                                                                                                           certifications)
                                                                                                       •   E&S capacity of PFIs in terms of policies,
                                                                                                           procedures and processes and capacity of TDB to
                                                                                                           ensure adherence to its E&S policies, principles,
                                                                                                           procedures and processes.
                             Window 2: Housing        •    Involuntary resettlement (physical and      •   Pollution (air, water and soil) associated with the
                             Infrastructure (to            economic) due to the need to create             construction and operation of infrastructure to
                             serve housing                 room for the infrastructure                     serve housing developments such as roads,
                             developments such             construction sites, especially for




For Official Use Only
                                                                                                           power, water supply and sewer, etc
                             as stormwater                 greenfield projects.
                                                                                                       •   Air pollution from sources of energy supply used
                             drainage systems,        •    Location of infrastructure construction         during construction and operation of infrastructure
                             access roads, sewer,          site in areas with unclear land tenure          to support housing development.
                             water supply                  or unregistered community lands
                                                                                                       •   Sourcing of resources for construction such as
                             connections,             •    Location of construction sites in areas         sand, water and other material.
                             solar/wind electricity        where IPs/SSAHUTLCs live or in areas
                                                                                                       •   Occupational health and safety during construction
                             generation, etc.)             where their livelihood and/or socio-
                                                                                                           and operation of infrastructure facilities to support
                                                           cultural heritage are located
                                                                                                           housing development
                                                      •    SEA risks in relation to communities
                                                                                                       •   Waste generation and management
                                                           where the green housing infrastructure
                                                                                                       •   Environmental issues related to site selection for
                                                           is located and SH at the construction
                                                                                                           for sewage plant, water supply infrastructure, etc.,
                                                           workplace
                                                                                                           such as site drainage, biodiversity impacts, areas
                                                      •    Child and/or forced labor
                                                                                                           prone to natural hazards
                                                      •    Labor related challenges if locals are
                                                                                                       •   E&S capacity of PFIs in terms of policies,
                                                           not employed in the construction sites
                                                                                                           procedures and processes and capacity of TDB to
                                                           or if there is no equal pay for equal job
                                                                                                           ensure adherence to its E&S policies, principles,
                                                      •    Discrimination against women in                 procedures, and processes.
                                                           construction sites
                                                      •    Community health risks such as
                                                           HIV/AIDS and Covid-19
                             Window 3: Home           •    SEA risks in relation to communities        •   Pollution (air, water and soil) associated with green
                             Construction/                 where the Green Home                            home construction
                             Renovation                    Construction/Renovation site is             •   Air pollution from sources of energy supply used
                                                           located and SH at the construction              during construction green homes.

                        6
                            World Green Building Council
                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                               Page 12 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                                                     workplace                                   •    Sourcing of resources for construction of green
                                                 •   Child and/or forced labor                        homes such as sand, water, building material.
                                                 •   Labor related challenges if locals are      •    Occupational health and safety during construction
                                                     not employed in the construction sites      •    Waste generation and management
                                                     or if there is no equal pay for equal job   •    Environmental issues related to site selection for
                                                 •   Discrimination against women in                  green home development projects such as site
                                                     construction sites                               drainage, biodiversity impacts, areas prone to
                                                 •   Community health risks such as                   natural hazards
                                                     HIV/AIDS and Covid-19                       •    E&S capacity of PFIs in terms of policies,
                                                                                                      procedures and processes and capacity of TDB to
                                                                                                      ensure adherence to its E&S policies, principles,
                                                                                                      procedures, and processes.
                                                                                                 •    Potential EHS issues with house rehabilitation,
                                                                                                      both related to env liabilities (such as
                                                                                                      asbestos, lead based paint, on-site
                                                                                                      wastewater disposal, etc.)
                                                                                                 •    Potential financing of housing in areas that do
                                                                                                      not have the appropriate level of adequate
                                                                                                      support infrastructure (thus indirect EHS
                                                                                                      impacts/risks) such as water supply,
                                                                                                      wastewater collection and disposal, roads,
                                                                                                      energy supply, etc.




For Official Use Only
                                                 E&S capacity of PFIs in terms of policies, procedures and processes, and capacity of TDB to ensure
                                                 adherence to its E&S policies, principles, procedures, and processes.
                                                 It is likely that these activities will support “green” lending, where E&S risks can generally range from
                                                 occupational health and safety, to labor, to pollution.

                          Window 4: Home         E&S capacity of retail banks and mortgage finance institutions and capacity of TDB to ensure
                          Offtake                adherence to its E&S policies, principles procedures, and processes.


                         Sub-Component 1.2: Fund Management and Business Development (US$30 million)

                         Sub-component 1.2 will support the capitalization of TDB’s Green Project Preparation Facility (GPPF) - a specialized
                         vehicle to be established within TDB to manage the GRIHD Facility’s de-risking objectives. The key E&S risks in this
                         component is related to not assessing or inadequately assessing the E&S risks as part of transaction support, portfolio
                         management, business development and preparation of investment strategy. TDB will be required to ensure the GPPF
                         is adequately staffed, and all its activities are guided by TDB’s World Bank approved ESMS and Guidance Note for
                         Financial Intermediaries. This requirement will be included in the ESAP to be developed for implementation by TDB.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$5 million)
                         Activities under this component will be implemented by TDF Academy, a TDB subsidiary. The key E&S risks are
                         associated with the capacity of TDF Academy to integrate E&S considerations into all TA activities. The TA (including
                         development of ToR and the outputs of any studies, regulations etc.) would need to be consistent with the requirements
                         of the applicable World Bank PSs and the TDB ESMS. . For TA activities undertaken by TDB, World Bank PSs and TDB
                         ESMS will guide the TOR preparation, scoping of studies and research papers. To this end, TDB will update its existing



                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                          Page 13 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         ESMS to define procedures for integration of E&S aspects in TA activities and will ensure that TDF implements the E&S
                         procedures for TA activities. This requirement will form part of the ESAP to be agreed with TDB.

                         It is likely that implementation of the TA and associated downstream risks would be the responsibility of the
                         governments of participating countries. The greater E&S risks are therefore associated with the ability of participating
                         governments to manage E&S risks resulting from the implementation of the TA outputs post the project. In particular,
                         this may be so, if the E&S capacity of participating governments is not built as part of the TA support activities. For TA
                         activities to be undertaken by the public entities/ participating governments, World Bank ESF will apply. A U-ESMF,
                         consistent with the requirements of the ESSs, will be developed to guide the participating governments.

                         E. 2. Client’s Organizational Capacity/Borrower’s Institutional Capacity

                         Both components of the proposed Project will mainly be implemented by the TDB. However, public sector involvement
                         is expected in Window 2 of sub-component 1.1 and certain TA activities under component 2. Overall, TDB has structures
                         and systems in place that will support the Facility implementation. In its cooperation with various financing institutions
                         such as the World Bank, Africa Development Bank, the French Development Agency and European Investment Bank
                         among others, TDB has gained experience in ESG risk management. In particular, TDB has an ESMS which guides TDB’s
                         E&S risk assessment & management, and it requires the financial institutions/SMEs/ projects that it finances to adhere
                         to its E&S compliance requirements. While TDB has existing procedures for E&S risk management for lending through
                         PFIs, it is in the process of preparing a Guidance Note for its lending through financial intermediaries to strengthen its
                         procedures by developing tools and templates for operationalization. The Bank will review the draft Guidance Note and
                         may recommend development of additional tools and templates to address the specific types of projects/subprojects




For Official Use Only
                         financed under Windows 1-4 and the types of financial instruments. TDB will also need to prepare capacity building
                         plans for PFIs and streamline reporting processes. The requirement to develop a capacity building plan will be included
                         in the ESAP to be prepared with A-ESRS. National building standards will be applied to green affordable housing
                         subprojects supported by TDB under the operation.

                         ESMS and E&S Policy: TDB has an ESMS with a well-formulated E&S Policy and a clearly articulated institutional
                         commitment to integrate E&S sustainability across all its operations, complete with an exclusion list. The policy is based
                         on the IFC (and other DFIs) Performance Standards and the existing ESMS has all elements of an ESMS such as E&S
                         policy, procedures for categorization, E&S screening, E&S due diligence, monitoring requirements and external
                         communication mechanism. TDB subjects its ESMS to periodic reviews performed by external consultants to ensure it
                         continues to be in line with international best practice. TDB developed its first Environmental Policy in June 2005
                         supported by the Netherlands Development Finance Company FMO, which indicates a relatively long-standing
                         commitment to sustainability at the early era of sustainable finance (for comparison, the Equator Principles originated
                         in 2004 when global banks like Citi commenced doing the same). In 2010, TDB undertook an exercise to harmonize all
                         its policies and the harmonized ESM policy was formally approved by the Board of Directors in September 2010. These
                         policies provided the basis for E&S risk assessment carried out by TDB. In 2015, the policies and procedures underwent
                         a comprehensive review with Technical Assistance (TA) support from the African Development Bank (AfDB). The last
                         ESMS review was completed in 2021. Following the review, TDB made changes in its ESMS to incorporate E&S
                         requirements for PFIs and a grievance mechanism. Hence, TDB's E&S policies and procedures currently in place
                         reference international lenders' standards, including IFC Performance Standards. Other financiers that rely on the TDB’s
                         current ESMS in their financing support to TDB are AFD and EIB. Through the Bank financed RIFF project, TDB further
                         enhanced its E&S, GBV, labor and climate management capacity. It is now developing a Guidance Note to guide E&S
                         risk management in its lending through financial intermediaries.

                         E&S Capacity: In recent years, anticipating potential increase in subprojects and additional supervision needs, TDB

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                 Page 14 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         strengthened its ESMS and E&S capacity and has employed one additional E&S Specialist through RIFF Technical
                         Assistance. This enhances the internal capacity to four staff members directly involved in the TDB’s E&S Risk
                         management activities. In addition, there is an Environmental, Social and Governance consulting firm with a diversified
                         pool of experts (i.e., climate, hydrology, air and noise, and socioeconomic experts) contracted to assist TDB in the ESDDs
                         and monitoring of E&S issues. TDB is also committed to ongoing staff development, and, as part of its E&S capacity
                         building plan, it continuously offers E&S trainings and awareness programs to enhance staff capacity to manage E&S
                         risks throughout the transaction management process. TDB aims to train 50% of its staff in various E&S related topics.
                         The Facility will leverage the existing and planned E&S capacity of TDB to manage any E&S risks that may arise during
                         the implementation of the project. However, WB will assess the E&S capacity during the project preparation, and should
                         it become necessary to increase E&S staff capacity to enable better management of the E&S risks under the Facility,
                         then the Bank will appropriately advice TDB on the need to do so with associated timings for such staff to be in place as
                         per the timeline to be defined in the ESAP, which will be developed as part the A-ESRS.

                         GBV Capacity: TDB’s GBV risk management capacity was enhanced under the RIFF project. To this end, TDB accessed
                         the services of an International GBV consultant through the grant made available by the World Bank, as part of the RIFF
                         LOC, to assist them with the development of a specific guidance note that supports risk analysis, prevention and
                         response measures related to sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual harassment (SH) in all TDB-financed
                         activities, and to train the TDB staff on GBV risk management activities throughout the RIFF implementation period.

                         Capacity to Manage Labour Issues: On management of labour issues in the projects it finances, TDB has mainstreamed
                         adherence to requirements of IFC Performance Standard 2, on Labour & Working Conditions. TDB further aims at
                         ensuring that its clients respect the Core Labour standards of the International Labour Organization and the host




For Official Use Only
                         country, as well as promoting the relevant rights under the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights for the
                         projects to be financed. In addition, TDB is in the process of working to retain the services of an experienced and
                         reputable consulting firm to help them develop their Human Rights Risk Management Guidance Note in compliance
                         with the international good practice principles and IFC Performance Standards. TDB expects to complete this
                         assignment by end of Q4/2022. If this will not have been completed by appraisal, then the requirement for its
                         completion will be included as an ESAP condition.

                         Capacity to Manage Climate Related Risks: On climate strategy, TDB has appointed a Senior Executive Member of
                         Management as TDB’s Climate Champion. This Champion will lead all climate initiatives of TDB and help it establish a
                         set of corporate targets and oversee and facilitate the integration of climate products, in a coherent manner, within
                         TDB’s mandate. In addition, TDB has procured a firm to support them in the development of a Climate Strategy. The
                         firm is already on board and commenced the assignment in April 2022, with expected outputs that include Climate
                         Policy Statement, Climate Strategy and Taxonomy, as well as Guidelines/tools (and templates) for assessment of climate
                         vulnerability and related physical risks, among other deliverables. TDB expects this assignment will be completed by
                         mid Q1/2023.

                         Protocols and procedures to carry out E&S risk management functions: TDB’s ESMS includes clear process flow and
                         procedures that are linked to credit and investment cycles, and which conforms to the international best practice. Those
                         include a comprehensive decision tree/matrix with clearly assigned responsibilities and accountabilities for each step,
                         supported by formal guidance and tools to help the responsible persons fulfil their roles in the process consistently.
                         TDB’s E&S procedures include procedures for categorization of direct and indirect lending (through financial
                         intermediaries), E&S due diligence and monitoring, institutional roles, and grievance mechanism. The ESMS includes
                         E&S requirements for PFIs, but it lacks specific tools for undertaking E&S due diligence and monitoring of PFIs. TDB is in
                         the process of developing a Guidance Note for its lending through financial intermediaries. This Note will include tools

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                 Page 15 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         and templates for guiding the implementation of ESMS for PFIs. While the From the review of its ESMS, TDB has clear
                         steps for E&S screening of transactions which includes initial assessment of a transaction against the exclusion list and
                         categorization. This is followed by an in-depth ESDD, which is undertaken internally by the TDB E&S staff for moderate
                         and low risk projects or by external experts for high risk and some substantial risk projects. E&S clauses are included in
                         the legal loan covenants. ESMS does not specifically address housing and housing related projects as envisaged under
                         GHFF, however, the various templates are considered adequate for guiding ESDD of housing projects. The ESMS does
                         provide E&S requirements for different types of financial instruments. TDB will develop an ESMS template for PFIs which
                         will incorporate specific tools for undertaking ESDD of housing projects and E&S requirements for different types of
                         financing.

                         Subproject screening and review: TDB has a system in place for the screening and review of subprojects submitted to
                         it for direct financing, which includes due diligence by its own specialists for low to moderate subprojects and external
                         consultants for high category subproject. Subprojects are subjected to E&S review at various stages starting with the
                         ESMS Specialist working closely with other specialists (including legal) at the New Deal Forum before submitting it to
                         the ESMS Coordinator who reviews it in consultation with the operational and technical committee. This is then
                         submitted to the ESMS Manager who reviews it in consultation with the corporate credit committee. From here the
                         proposal is submitted to the Compliance and Credit Management Department from where it is processed up to the
                         Board level as necessary. The E&S team members sit on various credit committees to ensure E&S is considered at
                         transaction onboarding and that risks are appropriately categorized and weighted (also best practice).


                         II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (E&S) RISKS AND IMPACTS




For Official Use Only
                         A. Environmental and Social Categorization                                 FI-1
                         B. Environmental and Social Risk Classification                            High

                         The environmental risk is rated high at concept stage (before mitigation). The project is being designed to support green
                         housing solutions in the housing sector, which is not only complex on its own, but the green housing concept is only in
                         its embryonic stage in the African sub region in which it is planned to be implemented. At this stage, the location of
                         green housing projects and the details of the PFIs TDB will finance with the project funds are unknown. Under the
                         Project, TDB through PFIs will finance (as equity, quasi-equity, loans, risk-sharing instruments, guarantee, performance-
                         based grants, etc.) medium to large scale green construction materials manufacturing, green housing infrastructure and
                         green housing development projects in the three client countries. Construction activities associated with the
                         subprojects, as well as the operation of manufacturing facilities, usually generate E&S risks and impacts with respect
                         to: (i) environmental pollution; (ii) occupational health, and safety; (iii) efficient use of resources such as water and
                         energy; (ii) the degradation of natural resources especially water bodies and soil from mining for raw materials required
                         for building material; (iv) community health and safety, road safety, emergency preparedness; (v) biodiversity loss from
                         land conversion resulting from sourcing of raw material for construction material; (vi) resource utilization of water and
                         energy by construction material production; (vii) existing environmental damage at construction sites - soil and water
                         contamination, etc. and even off-site; (viii) transport related EHS risks of materials from manufacturing sites; (ix)
                         potential EHS issues with house rehabilitation, both related to env liabilities (such as asbestos, lead based paint, on-site
                         wastewater disposal, etc.) and (x) potential financing of housing in areas that don't have the appropriate level of
                         adequate support infrastructure (thus indirect EHS impacts/risks) such as water supply, wastewater collection and
                         disposal, roads, energy supply, etc.


                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                   Page 16 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)




                         TDB has an existing ESMS and staff which ensures that all projects it supports, either directly or through
                         intermediaries, go through a process of E&S due diligence and regular monitoring. The ESMS includes
                         procedural steps for E&S due diligence and monitoring PFIs, but it needs tools for ESDD and monitoring. TDB
                         addressing this gap by developing a Guidance Note. The Bank will review the Note as part of project
                         preparation and will require TDB to address gaps, if any. At the PFI level, the E&S risk will mainly be on account
                         of their commitment and understanding of E&S risks and impacts associated with the green housing projects
                         and their E&S capacity to identify and manage E&S risks and impacts. To support PFIs in managing E&S risks
                         in the project, TDB will develop a template ESMS along with tools and guidance that the PFIs can readily adapt.

                         For activities to be undertaken by the participating government and public entities, an U-ESMF will be developed which
                         will guide integration of E&S aspects in the project activities.

                         The social risk rating for this project is rated as high at the concept stage (before mitigation). The Project will provide
                         funds to an apex FI, which is TDB, for on-lending to PFIs. The PFIs will in turn finance subprojects to business entities in
                         the housing value chain. As noted above, at this stage the location of activities, details of the PFIs and nature and size
                         of financing are still being considered. However, the focus is expected to be on medium to large scale green
                         construction materials manufacturing, housing development and green housing infrastructure projects that are likely
                         to result in significant involuntary resettlement impacts, complex labor management issues, and may be in areas where
                         IPs/SSAHUTLCs are present, areas with a high prevalence of Gender Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation (GBV/SEA)
                         which can be exacerbated by the project, areas affected by conflict or violence, or areas hosting refugees. Some of the




For Official Use Only
                         other risks include inadequate stakeholder engagement, and elite capture (exclusion of women and other
                         disadvantaged groups and their needs not addressed).

                         TDB has an ESMS in place that recognizes the above social risks in the context of its existing operations, as well as a E&S
                         staffing capacity supported by consultants. Nevertheless, its capacity to monitor and supervise green housing solutions
                         in the three pilot counties, as well as the capacity of their potential PFIs in this sector is not yet fully known and will be
                         assessed during appraisal. As part of preparation further consideration will be given to identifying three participating
                         countries’ key challenges and structuring the relevant incentives and mechanisms that would deliver sustainable private
                         sector-led green affordable housing solutions which would include confirming how to ensure subprojects are inclusive,
                         identifying target localities ensuring affordability.

                         World Bank and TDB will agree on a list of restricted activities defining what kinds of subprojects may not be financed
                         by TDB from the ringfenced Project funds. This agreement will entail either temporary or permanent exclusion of certain
                         green housing subprojects from financing under the project. To this end, two options may be considered to limit the
                         level of E&S risk exposure to the supported TDB portfolio in this sector, with associated impacts on the above risk
                         classification. As such, the World Bank and TDB will determine the approach to be taken as early as possible during
                         project preparation to ensure the ESMS and all necessary tools and guidance documents are in place.

                              ▪   Option 1: An approach which consists of providing funding for subprojects with only limited E&S risks and
                                  impacts in the first few subprojects to be implemented under the first operation in the series. If TDB successfully
                                  manages the E&S risks in the first few subprojects, then higher risk subprojects would be allowed towards the
                                  tail end of the project, to enable lesson learning in support of subsequent projects in the SOP. Restrictions
                                  would be conditioned on specific TDB actions to strengthen its capacity to supervise implementation of the
                                  green activities. These actions would be agreed with the TDB and specified in the ESAP. TDB may be required
                                  to upgrade its ESMS at a later date to incorporate the learnings from the implementation of the first

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                     Page 17 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                                  subprojects.

                              ▪   Option 2: Investments that involve relatively higher risk situations/ circumstances - in line with how those are
                                  formulated in the WB’s OP 4.03 / Performance Standards – would be permanently restricted and integrated
                                  into the overall World Bank's eligibility criteria for providing funding to the participating governments. Examples
                                  of such restrictions could include agreeing with both TDB and the participating governments that the
                                  governments would only extend IDA green equity resources to TDB on condition that TDB does not apply the
                                  green bond to finance subprojects with, e.g. negative impacts on critical habitats; or subprojects involving large-
                                  scale resettlement (clear definition is yet to be agreed upon); or to subprojects involving substantial migrant
                                  labor/ labor influx (to be defined); or those subprojects which would require free prior and informed consent
                                  (FPIC) to be met per PS 7. This exclusion/ eligibility will be cascaded down to the PFIs to ensure that they do not
                                  support high risk subprojects.

                         III. APPLICABLE ES STANDARDS

                         A. Performance Standards (PSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                         PS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                         Overview of application of PS1: A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts
                         relevant to the Project.
                          This PS applies to the proposed Project. Implementation of project activities are likely to result in several E&S risks and




For Official Use Only
                          impacts. The anticipated social risks which will need to be assessed and determined under PS1 include: (i) involuntary
                          resettlement (physical and economic); (ii) potential location of construction materials, manufacturing plants, and
                          housing infrastructure sites, in areas with unclear land tenure systems or unregistered community lands; (iii) potential
                          location of construction materials, manufacturing plants and housing infrastructure sites in areas where IPs/SSAHUTLCs
                          live or in areas where their livelihoods and/or socio-cultural heritage are located; (iv) SEA/SH risks at the manufacturing
                          or construction facilities; (v) child and/or forced labor; (vi) labor related challenges; and community health problems
                          such as HIV/AIDS and Covid-19. Similarly, the anticipated environmental risks and impacts associated with the two
                          components are those related to: (i) air and noise pollution; (ii) water and energy use, (iii) occupational health and
                          safety; (iv) waste generation and management; (v) sourcing of raw material for construction of manufacturing plants
                          and housing projects; (vi) environmental issues related to site selection for infrastructure projects such as site drainage,
                          biodiversity impacts; (vii) impact on water bodies, soil and biodiversity as a result of raw material sourcing for the
                          manufacture of building material, (viii) biodiversity loss because of conversion of biodiversity areas for raw material
                          sourcing and construction activities, (ix) existing environmental damage at construction sites - soil and water
                          contamination, etc. and even off-site; (x) transport related EHS risks of materials from manufacturing sites; (xi) potential
                          EHS issues with house rehabilitation, both related to env liabilities (such as asbestos, lead based paint, on-site
                          wastewater disposal, etc.) and (xii) potential financing of housing in areas that do not have the appropriate level of
                          adequate support infrastructure (thus indirect EHS impacts/risks) such as water supply, wastewater collection and
                          disposal, roads, energy supply, etc.

                         Additional risks across all Windows relate to the E&S capacity of PFIs, retail banks and mortgage institutions in terms
                         of their E&S policies, principles, procedures and processes, and the capacity of TDB to ensure adherence to its E&S
                         policies, principles, procedures, and processes by the institutions it finances.

                         The proposed Project will be required to adopt the following steps to avoid, mitigate, and offset/compensate for the

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                    Page 18 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         E&S risks and impacts.

                             i. Institutional Exclusion List. Exclusion list is the first step in mitigating the potential E&S risks and impacts of the
                                project. The TDB ESMS (and potentially the institutions that it finances) already incorporates an exclusion list.
                                This will be assessed and if need be, additions will be made to it to make it more aligned with the risks associated
                                with this Project and the green housing solutions value chain.

                            ii. Project Specific List of Restricted Activities. Two options are being considered to mitigate the level of E&S risk
                                exposure in the subprojects. Both options would be based on a list of restricted activities which would be agreed
                                between TDB and the World Bank and applied specifically to the Facility’s financing. The list can be used in two
                                ways (1) One option is an approach whereby only projects with limited E&S risks and impact are being funded
                                among the first subprojects proposed for financing in the first series and where those on the restricted list would
                                not be supported. Once TDB gains experience and becomes comfortable with its capacity to manage E&S risks
                                associated with green infrastructure construction activities to a level deemed acceptable by the Bank, the
                                activities in the restricted list could be considered for inclusion under the Facility’s financing; (2) the other option
                                is to apply the restriction list permanently and subprojects which present one of the restricted activities would
                                not be eligible for financing under the 1st series. This second option, however, has the potential of drastically
                                reducing the number of subprojects qualifying for financing under the GHFF. The Bank and TDB will therefore
                                agree, prior to appraisal, on the preferred option or on the approach to be applied for effective management of
                                E&S risks while allowing TDB to implement the project as envisioned. Such an approach could include TDB
                                working closely with the World Bank on all proposed subprojects at the initial stages of the project, with the
                                World bank reviewing and clearing all E&S instruments initially, and gradually handing over these responsibilities




For Official Use Only
                                to TDB as TDB gains experience and builds its trach record. To this end, the two options will be assessed during
                                appraisal and the agreed upon option will be included in the Project design. The restrictions would be annexed
                                to the loan agreements between TDB and accredited PFIs, and spot checks would be carried out to ensure
                                compliance with that list of exclusions.

                                Process of E&S Risks and Impacts Identification. TDB’s ESMS has a procedure and process for screening, E&S due
                                diligence, and E&S monitoring and reporting of PFIs. It, however, lacks supporting tools and templates on how
                                to undertake an ESDD and ongoing monitoring of PFIs. TDB is in the process of addressing this gap through
                                development of a Guidance Note for its lending through financial intermediaries. As part of project preparation,
                                the Bank will review the Guidance Note, sample ESDD reports, and monitoring reports to confirm adequacy of
                                the E&S risk assessment and the Note.

                                TDB’s ESMS requires the subprojects to undertake Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) or
                                develop E&S Management Plans (ESMPs) commensurate with the E&S category and risks and impacts, as well as
                                additional studies for identified thematic risks and impacts. TDB will require the PFIs to have an acceptable ESMS
                                and enforce the same requirements on the subprojects to be supported with the Project funds. The ESMS
                                template for the PFIs will include the E&S processes to be followed by the PFIs and the E&S requirements for the
                                subprojects. Potentially, the subprojects to be supported by the PFIs under the facility would be required to
                                prepare ESMPs which could include construction management plan, OHS plan, waste management plan,
                                involuntary resettlement management plan, biodiversity management plan, labor influx management plan, GBV
                                and SEA management plans, among others, depending on the nature and location of the subprojects. Since the
                                exact investment subprojects and their locations will not be known until the Facility enters implementation
                                phase, it can be assumed that any of the thematic risks covered by the WB PSs can arise. Therefore, the World
                                Bank will require TDB to take all the requisite measures to ensure that the PFIs have the capacity in the form of


                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                      Page 19 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                                an acceptable ESMS and staff to assess E&S risks at the level of subprojects receiving financing associated with
                                Bank support will comply with applicable legislations of the participating countries and the WB's related PSs
                                including consideration of vulnerable and marginalized groups. More specifically, PS1 (including stakeholder
                                engagement, information disclosure and consultations in all aspects of the project) and PS2, will be applicable to
                                TDB and the PFIs. In addition, any of the eight (8) PSs could be relevant to subprojects to be supported by the
                                PFIs depending on the outcomes of the identification and assessment of E&S risks and impacts process through
                                PS1.

                         Stakeholder engagement: TDB has an external communication mechanism (ECM) which is publicly disclosed. The ECM
                         allows TDB to receive, record, process & assess and address external inquiries and complaints from the public and other
                         stakeholders regarding their operations. In addition to the ECM, TDB has guidance documents for subprojects on
                         stakeholder engagement and grievance mechanism. During project preparation, TDB policies on inclusion of
                         marginalized and disadvantaged groups will be assessed. If such a policy is non-existent then TDB will be required to
                         develop one in the context of the Facility to ensure that marginalized and disadvantaged groups benefit from the
                         Project.

                         Additional staffing requirements for TDB will be determined prior to the appraisal and included in the ESAP.

                         For project activities (under Window 2 of Component 1 and TA activities under Component 2) to be managed by the
                         participating governments/ public sector entities, the U-ESMF will guide the integration of E&S aspects. The U-ESMF
                         will define the stakeholder engagement and grievance mechanism as also the E&S measures for managing E&S impacts.




For Official Use Only
                         PS 2 Labor and Working Conditions
                         Overview of the relevance of PS2:
                         This PS is relevant to the Project as TDB, and the PFIs it will support, will have to manage the working conditions of
                         their workforce in accordance with relevant aspects of national laws and PS2 on Labor and Working Conditions as
                         required by para. 17(b) of BP 4.03, including a functional internal grievance redress mechanism for employees of TDB
                         and the PFIs.

                         Furthermore, this PS applies to the Project given that the operation will support relatively large-scale housing
                         development and infrastructure subprojects which will involve labor force - including contracted workers and primary
                         supply workers. Potential labor related risks are expected and are likely to include a) labor influx due to the relatively
                         large scale and long duration construction; b) risks of child and/or forced labor which are known to occur in the
                         construction industry in participating countries; c) labor related challenges/ conflict between local, national and foreign
                         workers over access to benefits and cultural differences; d) exclusion of women from employment in construction
                         facilities; e) working and living conditions in construction and residential facilities; f) SEA/SH affecting both the
                         communities around construction sites as well as project workers; g) security of workers; and h) OHS risks on sites such
                         as working at height, exposure to dust, potential injury from falling objects and movement of heavy machinery for
                         those working in construction of housing projects, construction of housing infrastructure and facilities that
                         produce/manufacture house materials . These potential risks will be assessed as per the procedure defined in the ESMS
                         of TDB and the PFIs, including the potential scale of the risks as influenced by the sub-project location, scale and
                         contextual factors which are likely to vary between countries, as part of the preparation of a subproject proposed for
                         financing under the Facility. The confirmed risks will be mitigated by the application of PS 2 which PFIs will be expected
                         to apply as part of the operation.

                         Under the Bank financed RIFF project, the TDB’s human resources processes were strengthened and are now aligned

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                  Page 20 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         to the PS 2 requirements. TDB now has in place and maintains appropriate labor management procedures, including
                         procedures relating to working conditions and terms of employment, nondiscrimination and equal opportunity,
                         grievance mechanisms and occupational health and safety.

                         In addition, TDB does not directly finance any project, infrastructure or trade finance activity involving production or
                         activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor/child labor as per TDB’s exclusion list in its ESMS. Also,
                         TDB has incorporated the GBV/SH management principles and procedures in its ESMS. For the anticipated and other
                         labor related risks, TDB will require the PFIs to ensure that the subprojects they support have detailed employment
                         and labor management procedures, including procedures for the management of sexual harassment in the workplace,
                         the prevention and response mechanisms for SEA, and the prevention of child and forced labor. Tools and guidance on
                         this will be included in the ESMS template that will be developed for PFIs. Furthermore, all PFIs will be required to
                         assess and monitor compliance of subprojects with national labor laws as well as PS 2 requirements. The World Bank
                         will assess the applicability of PS 2 to small and medium enterprises in the value chain as part of appraisal. The A-ESRS
                         will document the outcome of this assessment by the Bank and will recommend specific measures for SMEs. These will
                         be required to be part of the financing agreements between TDB and the PFIs.

                         TDB will require all PFIs to have PS 2 compliant human resources (HR) policy & procedures especially an employee
                         grievance mechanism and sexual harassment procedure.

                         PS 3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                         Overview of the relevance of PS3




For Official Use Only
                         The exact subprojects and PFIs will not be known until implementation. However, given that the project may support
                         relatively large-scale housing development and infrastructure, including, potentially, construction materials
                         manufacturing plants, a wide range of pollution and resource efficiency issues is expected to arise in the supported
                         projects. In general, PS3 is relevant for the project due to financing of new housing development, rehabilitation of
                         existing housing and infrastructure, which may pose risk of environmental pollution and degradation of natural
                         resources (soil, water, ecosystem services) and can result in impacts if not well identified and mitigated.

                         Under the Project, TDB will support housing projects- in the value chain, infratsructure and housing development,
                         either directly or through PFIs. As the Facility and its windows are deliberately designed to finance these subprojects
                         that would deliver green results on the ground, they are expected to achieve higher GHG emissions reduction, resource
                         efficiency, and manage or minimnize environmental footprint compared to other similar subprojects. Moreover, TDB
                         has experience in E&S risk management for subprojects across sectors including housing sector. It already has an ESMS
                         in place, implementation of which has been assessed by the WB during the course of RIFF. The ESMS and its
                         implemenetation has been found to be adequate for kinds of subprojects supported by TDB previously. During project
                         preparation, the exisiting ESMS and the Guidance note that is under preparation will be reviewed to determine its
                         relevance to the kinds of subprojects to be supported under the Project, identify any gaps and address the identified
                         gaps in the updated ESMS to be finalized by appraisal, considering high E&S risks and complexity of the Project.

                         TDB will require the PFIs to undertake an E&S due diligence of the green housing solution subprojects against the E&S
                         requirements which include the exclusion list, WB eligibility criteria, participating country’s regulations and WB PS. TDB
                         and the PFIs will ensure that the sub project activities efficiently use resources, particularly water and energy and
                         prevent or mitigate the pollution or degradation of natural resources that include soil and water arising from their
                         operations. TDB will ensure that the PFIs have the capacity in their ESMS and staff to identify, assess and manage risks.



                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                    Page 21 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         To support the PFIs in E&S risks management, TDB will develop a template ESMS by appraisal which will include tools
                         and guidance for screening subprojects against the requirements of PS3.

                         PS 4 Community, Health, Safety, and Security
                         Overview of the relevance of PS4
                         All the subprojects and PFIs will not be known until implementation, however given that the project will support
                         relatively large-scale housing development and infrastructure, a broad range of community health and safety (H&S)
                         issues are expected to be involved. Community H&S risks that are typical of projects involving construction in TDB’s
                         geographic areas are expected. These include influx of labor (in-migration) and the related issues of gender-based
                         violence (GBV), sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), child labor and exploitation. In-migration and construction
                         activities can also lead to increased risk of disease transmission such as sexually transmitted infections (STIs) including
                         HIV/AIDS, Covid-19 and other communicable diseases as well as the potential for conflict / tensions between the labor
                         force and local community. Other risks are related to housing safety because of man-made (fire, explosions, etc.) and
                         natural (storms, floods, etc) events. Individual subprojects are likely to be rated as substantial or lower especially if
                         appropriate restrictions are put in place to exclude higher risk activities. For instance, under the list of restricted
                         activities, an exclusion could be considered for subprojects having direct adverse impact on ecosystem services that
                         may result in adverse health and safety risks to affected communities. TDB has procedures in its ESMS for the
                         management of these social risks, and to require its borrowers to have plans for the prevention and management of
                         such risks. This requirement is part of the financing agreements and are submitted to TDB by the borrower prior to
                         start of construction work. TDB will ensure that the PFIs, through which the subproject will be supported under the
                         Facility, follow the same E&S procedures that TDB follows for such projects if financed directly by them.




For Official Use Only
                         The requirements for assessing and monitoring compliance with this PS will be cascaded down to PFIs to ensure that
                         the subprojects supported under this facility identify, address and mitigate community health and safety risks. The
                         ESMS template will include guidance and tools related to PS4 to ensure effective screening of subprojects by the PFIs.

                         TDB’s GBV risk management capacity was enhanced under the RIFF project. To this end, TDB accessed the services of
                         an International GBV consultant through the grant made available by the World Bank, as part of the RIFF LOC, to assist
                         them with the development of a specific guidance note that supports risk analysis, prevention and response measures
                         related to sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual harassment (SH) in all TDB-financed activities, and to train
                         the TDB staff on GBV risk management activities throughout the RIFF implementation period. The guidance note
                         defines the role and responsibilities of TDB’s borrowers and includes a code of conduct as well. The note will be
                         reviewed during project preparation to identify any gaps against the backdrop of this Facility.

                         PS 5 Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement
                         Overview of the relevance of PS5
                         Since the project’s potential focus is on providing financing to medium to large scale infrastructure and housing
                         development in relation to green housing solutions, subprojects are expected to require land acquisition, restrictions
                         on land use and/or involuntary resettlement that may involve physical and/or economic displacement with potential
                         adverse impacts on people’s livelihoods. At concept stage, the approach to be applied in acquiring land and
                         responsibility for land acquisition is unclear, but this will be established prior to appraisal. Also, TDB’s practical
                         experience in the implementation of its ESMS in relation to involuntary resettlement (whether small or large), is still
                         limited even under the Bank supported RIFF project. To date TDB’s experience in implementing involuntary
                         resettlement subprojects has been limited to working as a part of a syndication where the lead implementer was IFC,
                         AfDB or some other development bank. The World Bank and TDB will work closely under GHFF to enable TDB to build

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                  Page 22 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         its E&S capacity for the management of subprojects to be financed by PFIs that involve involuntary resettlement that
                         are likely to come up for financing under the GHFF.

                         Due to the twin concerns of unclear land acquisition approach and responsibility for the same at this stage, and the
                         limited experience of TDB in managing involuntary resettlement risks, subprojects with potentially large-scale
                         involuntary resettlement impacts (above 200 project affected persons (PAPs) for physical displacement, and 1000 PAPs
                         for economic displacement) will require prior review and clearance from the World Bank to be eligible for financing
                         under the GHFF (as is the case under RIFF). The same thresholds will apply to the technical assistance activities if
                         necessary. In addition, a gradual process will be agreed between the WB and TDB whereby, to ensure TDB’s capacity is
                         enhanced to be able to support the PFIs in the assessment of risks and impacts associated with involuntary
                         resettlement, TDB will be required to share with the WB for approval, the E&S instruments (ESIAs, RAPs, Livelihood
                         Restoration Plans etc.) of the first few subprojects funded under GHFF involving involuntary resettlement (regardless
                         of the threshold). After that, for subprojects that are above the threshold, TDB will seek approval from the World Bank
                         prior to committing financing under the GHFF. To this end, the World Bank and TDB will agree on actions in the ESAP
                         that are aimed at facilitating TDB to build its track record for the management of involuntary resettlement risks and
                         impacts.

                         In the event that there will be prior land acquisition, or in cases where land acquisition will be done under separate
                         financing, TDB will be required to carry out a completion audit of the land acquisition process to ensure it complies
                         with the requirements of PS5. In such cases, the World Bank will review and clear the initial series of audit reports as
                         well as any potential remedial plans, to ascertain their consistency with PS5 and TDBs ESMS. In this regard, when it is
                         affirmed that TDB’s ESMS is strong enough to guide the preparation of such audits and to recommend effective




For Official Use Only
                         remedial actions, then the World Bank’s clearance of individual audit reports will cease. Similarly, for land that may be
                         provided by the government, TDB, applying its ESMS, will need to assess whether the land acquired by government
                         entities was/is consistent with PS5. In this regard, TDB’s ESMS will be reviewed prior to appraisal to ensure it is able to
                         be effectively applied for such an assessment. The World Bank will agree with TDB prior to appraisal, on the best
                         approach for ensuring land undergoing change of use or land being provided by the government is acquired in line with
                         PS5. For example, it may be agreed that having the land acquired by government beforehand is a condition for
                         financing, in which case an audit and potential remedial action plan is prepared by TDB/PFI in accordance with PS5,
                         and cleared by the World Bank, or, the financing could be limited to projects where governments have not acquired
                         the land yet, in which case, an RPF would need to be prepared to guide the land acquisition process during
                         implementation. Finally, where users (formal or informal) of land being provided by the government are present,
                         consultations will be held with such users and with all interested parties, the consultation process clearly documented.
                         In addition, TDB will require its PFIs to prepare grievance redress mechanisms that can be effectively applied to address
                         potential grievances that may arise from the land acquisition process.
                         The proposed approaches to land acquisition will be agreed upon with TDB prior to appraisal and included in the ESAP
                         as appropriate.

                         On their part, the PFIs will be expected to have procedures in their ESMS to identify and assess the risks associated
                         with land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. TDB, as part of their due diligence, will ensure that the procedures
                         are comprehensive and fit for purpose. The ESMS template for PFIs will provide tools and guidance related to screening
                         of subprojects against PS5 requirements.

                         For any land undergoing change of use or being provided by the government, a resettlement action plan in accordance
                         with ESS5 will be needed if users (formal or informal) are present, and consultations with interested parties will have
                         to be documented. If assessed to be necessary during implementation, an overarching resettlement policy framework

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                  Page 23 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         (RPF) setting out the resettlement objectives and principles, organizational arrangements for any resettlement, that
                         may be necessary, will need to be developed in line with the requirements of ESS5. The RPF will provide guidance on
                         the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans of individual subprojects. The RPF will also define acceptable protocol for
                         purchase of land on willing-buyer and willing-seller basis.

                         PS 6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                         Overview of the relevance of PS6
                         The exact subprojects and PFIs will not be known until implementation, however, given that the project may support
                         relatively large-scale infrastructure and housing projects, biodiversity issues are expected to arise in many, albeit not
                         all, supported subprojects. In general, PS6 standard is relevant for the project. Some subprojects might (i) be in
                         modified or natural habitats; (ii) potentially affect or be dependent on ecosystem services; and (iii) potentially lead to
                         conversion of biodiversity areas on account of raw material sourcing and location of subprojects. To limit the level of
                         environmental risk exposure in the subprojects, the list of restricted activities will exclude subprojects having adverse
                         impact on critical habitats and/or legally protected and internationally recognized areas of high biodiversity value and
                         subprojects where a biodiversity offset is proposed as the mitigation measure.

                         The ESMS of TDB is designed to identify and assess these risks in subprojects directly financed by TDB. However, TDB’s
                         ESMS will be reviewed before appraisal and where gaps exist with respect to this PS, TDB and the World Bank will agree
                         on an action plan to address the gap before appraisal as part of the updated ESMS.

                         The ESMS of PFIs will provide tools to facilitate PS6 screening of subprojects. The tools will enable the PFIs to identify




For Official Use Only
                         PS6 relevant risks and impacts, consider direct and indirect subproject-related impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem
                         services, and identify any significant residual impacts. The process will consider relevant threats to biodiversity and
                         ecosystem services, especially focusing on habitat loss, degradation and fragmentation, invasive alien species,
                         overexploitation, hydrological changes, nutrient loading, and pollution. It will also consider the differing values
                         attached to biodiversity and ecosystem services by Affected Communities and other stakeholders as appropriate.
                         Where natural habitats might be impacted, the relevant PS6 alignments will be applied, including consideration of
                         subproject-related impacts across the potentially affected landscape or seascape.

                         TDB, through its ongoing monitoring and supervision, will ensure that proposed exclusions, restrictions, and
                         requirements are well applied by the PFIs.

                         PS 7 Indigenous Peoples
                         Overview of the relevance of PS7
                         Indigenous Peoples as defined by PS7 may be present in the countries in which TDB and the PFIs are expected to finance
                         subprojects under the Facility. Countries to be covered under the first project in the SOP have groups who are classified
                         as Indigenous Peoples. In Uganda Indigenous People are referred to as vulnerable and include the Batwa in the West,
                         IK, Tepet in the Karamoja Region and Benet in the Elgon Region. In Kenya, indigenous peoples are referred to as
                         Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups and include hunter-gatherers such as the Ogiek as well as pastoralists including
                         the Turkana and Maasai. The pastoralists mainly occupy the arid and semi-arid lands of northern Kenya and towards
                         the border between Kenya and Tanzania in the south.

                         The scope and complexity of potential impacts, the context and the capacity of the sub-borrowers who will
                         be responsible for managing risks to IPs will greatly affect the social risk assessment of the proposed

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                 Page 24 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         subprojects. TDB has a policy on Indigenous Peoples. However, their practical experience on the application
                         of this policy is yet to be affirmed even under the RIFF project. TDB is, however, committed to prohibit
                         financing of any subproject, infrastructure that would impinge on the lands owned, or claimed under
                         adjudication, by Indigenous Peoples, without full documented consent of such people as per the current
                         exclusion list in the TDB ESMS policy document. In line with the current TDB ESMS (exclusion list) which
                         requires TDB to only implement activities that may adversely impact lands that are owned or claimed by IPs
                         after securing the full documented consent of the concerned IPs, and as part of the TDB capacity building in the
                         implementation PS7 requirements, TDB will be required to undertake free, prior and informed consent (FPIC)
                         consultations with IPs if a subproject under the GHFF is to be implemented in IP areas. Such consultations
                         would include conversations with IPs on whether or not they would wish to be excluded from, or to be
                         included in the subproject activities, based on full disclosure to them of the potential project impacts; and
                         whether or not they would be open to considering the subproject’s potential adverse impacts, including the
                         potential for physical and/or economic displacement. Should the IPs wish to be included, then TDB/PFI would
                         require and document their (IPs) full consent. Such an approach is necessary as IPs may not wish to be prior
                         excluded from the project’s benefits.

                         TDB will be required to cascade their PS7 requirements down to the PFIs and to ensure that the PFIs have the capacity
                         in their ESMS and staff to identify, assess and manage subproject risks as per PS 7 requirements. Towards this, TDB and
                         PFIs will be required to develop, as part of their ESMS, a framework for facilitating inclusion of IPs through supporting
                         subprojects that are located in IPs (known in Kenya as VMGs) populated areas and considering piloting ethno-




For Official Use Only
                         engineered green housing solutions that are designed and implemented in a participatory and culturally appropriate
                         manner with and for IPs/VMGs.

                         PS 8 Cultural Heritage

                         Overview of the relevance of PS8
                         TDB-financed subprojects may have direct, indirect, and possibly cumulative risks or impacts on cultural heritage.
                         TDB’s ESMS prohibits financing of any subproject, infrastructure or trade finance activity impacting upon World
                         Heritage sites and other protected areas. TDB has experience with projects that have impacted cultural aspects of
                         some of the affected communities, e.g., on matters of handling graves. Any gaps in TDB’s own ESMS will be
                         identified prior to appraisal and supplemented by requirements of PS8.

                         Given that the funds will be provided to subprojects via PFIs, TDB will cascade down the E&S requirements to the
                         PFIs. TDB will ensure that the PFIs have the capacity in their ESMS and staff to identify, assess and manage risks as
                         per PS 8. Towards this, the guidance note for PFIs will include specific guidance on assessment of PS 8 related
                         impacts and development of chance find procedure.

                         B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered:

                         Under Window 1 of sub-component 1.1, TDB will provide funds to project activities via PFIs. Under Windows 2 & 3 of
                         component 1, TDB and the PFIs will provide project funds to private sector entities to build and operate green housing
                         infrastructure and construct green-certified homes. For housing infrastructure, at this stage, it is envisaged that the
                         government agency will bid out housing infrastructure projects using its government-led and funded bidding processes.
                         The public entity may provide land free from all encumbrances to the private entity. Also, the government may provide
                         land for affordable housing development to private home developers. For all such projects where the government

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                 Page 25 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                         provides land, the land acquisition will have to meet the requirements of ESS 5, and the required instruments will be
                         prepared. Consistent with the ESF, the participating countries will develop RPF, SEP, and U-ESMF.

                        TA activities will be anchored and implemented by TDF Foundation, a TDB subsidiary. However, government agencies may
                        be involved in implementation of some TA outcomes. Relevant ESSs will be applied to all such TA activities. During
                        preparation, the Bank will screen the proposed TA activities to establish if these activities would potentially have direct or
                        indirect adverse downstream E&S impacts. All the TA activitied will have Terms of Reference prepared that meet the
                        requirement of Performance Standards, including Performance Standard 2. The Umbrella-ESMF will define the E&S
                        assessment requirements and mitigation measures for all TA activities.

                        TDB’s upgraded ESMS will define the E&S procedures and processes including sample terms of reference for TDB
                        supported TA activities.


                         C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                         OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                           No
                         OP 7.60 ProRejects in Disputed Areas                                                                  No


                         IV. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE




For Official Use Only
                         A. Other Relevant Project Risks

                         B. Is a common approach being considered?                                                             No
                         The Facility involves financing from other financing institutions including IFC. Regardless, a formal common approach
                         has not being considered for this Project.
                         The team will submit the TDB’s updated ESMS and guidance documents for the PFIs (including tools and templates) to
                         the RSA for review and clearance before appraisal.


                         C. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                         Actions to be completed prior to Project Appraisal
                              •   Agreement on final approach and Project List of Restricted Activities
                              •   Preparation of the ESAP for TDB. Guidance Note for lending through PFIs
                              •   Upgrade of ESMS if required
                              •   Development of ESMS templates and tools for supporting the PFIs
                              •   Any E&S requirements emanating from the scope and nature of activities to be implemented under the
                                  project
                              •   Requirement for E&S capacity enhancement, if found to be inadequate during capacity assessment prior to
                                  appraisal
                              •   Definition of procedures for integration of E&S aspects in TA activities and ensure that TDF
                                  implements E&S procedures for TA activities
                              •   Capacity building plans for PFIs, including strategies for streamlining reporting processes

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                                   Page 26 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                              •   Defined actions that would enable TDB to build its track record for the management of involuntary
                                  resettlement risks and impacts, including agreements on approaches to land acquistion
                              •   The U-ESMF


                         D. Possible issues to be addressed in the ESAP

                         Client Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP)
                         Capacity building on activities associated with PS5 and PS7

                         E. Timing
                         Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                  16 August 2023


                         V. WORLD BANK E&S OVERSIGHT

                         Corporate advice/oversight will be provided by an Environmental and Social                                Yes
                         Standards Adviser (ESSA) during project preparation


                         VI. CONTACT POINTS (WB)




For Official Use Only
                        Task Team Leader: Hadija Kamayo
                        Email: hkamayo@worldbank.org
                         Implementing Agency(ies)
                         The Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (TDB)
                         Tel. +254 732192000 | M: +254780823734
                         197 Lenana Place, Lenana Road
                         Nairobi, Kenya


                         VII. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                         The World Bank
                         1818 H Street, NW
                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                         Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                         Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                        VIII. APPROVAL
                        Task Team Leader(s): Hadija Kamayo
                        Environmental and Social Standards Advisor (ESSA): Julia Bucknall

                        Practice Manager: Alwaleed Fareed Alatabani

                        January 15, 2023                                                                                     Page 27 of 28
                                  The World Bank
                                  Africa Green Housing Finance Facility (P178986)



                        Regional Director: Boutheina Guermazi




For Official Use Only




                        January 15, 2023                                            Page 28 of 28
