Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 04/08/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04174




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 29, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P181251                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      West Africa Fin             2025

                     Operation Name            Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Western and Central       Western and Central Africa                                          Finance, Competitiveness
                     Africa                                                                                        and Innovation

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     West African              West African Development Bank/         24-Feb-2025                  21-May-2025
                     Development Bank/         Banque Ouest Africaine de
                     Banque Ouest              Développement (BOAD)
                     Africaine de
                     Développement



Public Disclosure
                     (BOAD)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     17-Dec-2024               395,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To increase financial inclusion for households and MSMEs in the WAEMU region


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This project is expected to support a total of 12,375 people and businesses with access to finance, leveraging US $190
                     million of private capital mobilization. The achievement of the PDO will contribute to the World Bank Scorecard
                     Corporate Results Indicators “People and businesses using financial services, including the number of women” and
                     “Private Capital Mobilization”. The PDO will be monitored and reported through the following standard Scorecard sub-

                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                                                  Page 2 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     indicators and custom indicators : • Number of businesses using debt financing (i.e., Number of MSMEs provided with a
                     loan from the BOAD Line of Credit) • Number of women-led businesses using debt financing (i.e., Number of women-led
                     MSMEs provided with a loan) • Number of businesses using debt financing for green investments • Number of people
                     using debt financing (i.e., Number of eligible households provided with a mortgage loan refinanced by the CRRH-
                     UEMOA) • Number of women using debt financing (i.e., Number of women as sole or joint borrower provided with a
                     mortgage loan) • Private Capital Mobilized (i.e., co-financing amounts by Participating Financial Institutions, and bond
                     issuance through capital markets) This project will ensure private capital is mobilized to achieve its development
                     objectives. Private capital mobilization (PCM) is critical in helping this project to achieve its ambitious PDO targets and
                     the PCM has been incorporated in the project design and tagged as Performance Based Conditions (PBC) in the Results
                     Framework. The housing finance component of this project is expected to mobilize between US$ 120 million of private
                     capital, coming from private investment into bonds issued by the CRRH-UEMOA over the next 5 years. The MSME
                     securitization component is expected to mobilize US$70 million in Participating Financing Institutions contribution to
                     MSME loans. Project Components Component 1L Line of credit (LoC) to be on lent by the BOAD to PFIs to extend long-
                     term loans to viable MSMEs including for green investments (US$140 million) : The World Bank will finance a Line of
                     Credit to the BOAD which will on lend to eligible PFIs operating in WAEMU countries, which will in turn finance viable
                     MSMEs, to fund their diverse financing needs, primarily for investment and working capital. The World Bank financing
                     will allow for longer term loans with maturities of up to 10 years. 30 percent of the LoC will be allocated to MFIs and 70
                     percent to banks. a. 25 percent of the LoC will be allocated to MSMEs operating in green sectors and/or investments by
                     MSMEs for climate adaptation and mitigation purposes. To that end, the project will adopt IFC’s Climate Assessment for
                     Financial Institutions (CAFI) tool , which is a digital, web-based platform that helps banks and other financial institutions
                     to assess the climate eligibility and measure development impact, including adaptation investments across sectors, and




Public Disclosure
                     sectors including but not limited to: o Renewable Energy: Solar Power, Wind and Hydro Power and Biomass and
                     Bioenergy. o Sustainable Agriculture and Agroforestry: Climate-Smart Agriculture (this includes practices that improve
                     agricultural productivity while reducing greenhouse gas emissions, increasing resilience to climate change, and
                     enhancing carbon sequestration), Agroforestry and organic farming. o Water and Waste Management: Water Efficiency
                     (water conservation, efficient irrigation systems, and sustainable water management, etc.) and Waste-to-Energy:
                     Turning waste into energy (e.g., through biogas or waste incineration) can help reduce landfill use, generate energy, and
                     manage waste more sustainably. o Sustainable Forestry and Land Use: Reforestation, afforestation and sustainable
                     forest management. o Green Transport: Developing electric transport systems (electric vehicles, buses, and shared
                     electric mobility). o Green Construction and Buildings: The construction of energy-efficient buildings (e.g., through the
                     use of sustainable materials, smart energy systems, and passive design). o Eco-Tourism: Focuses on conservation, low-
                     impact travel and aligns with local community development and environmental preservation. b. 30 percent of the LoC
                     will be allocated to Women-led MSMEs. The BOAD defines a woman-led firm a firm, either led by women, or owned at
                     more than 50 percent by women, where women represent at least 30 percent of the workforce, or where women
                     represent more than 50 percent of the beneficiaries. The green and gender allocations are not mutually exclusive. As
                     such a loan to a green investment in a women owned SME will count towards both the green and the gender targets. c.
                     An additional US$ 70 million will be mobilized in private capital from PFIs. One feature of the LoC requires that for each
                     extended MSME loan, PFIs draw up to 80 percent from the LoC and contribute 20 percent from their balance sheets.
                     This co-financing feature, which will mobilize an additional US$ 50 million in private capital, will (i) ensure an alignment
                     of interest with PFIs; and (ii) increase the amount of funding to MSMEs, further increasing the impact and additionality
                     of the project. The additional funds from PFIs balance sheet will be on the respective PFIs own terms. The eligibility
                     criteria for beneficiary PFIs and MSMEs will be reflected in the project operational manual. These will include
                     compliance by PFIs with governance standards, prudential norms and profitability benchmarks. For MSMEs, while there


                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     is no harmonized definition in the WAEMU, for the needs of this project MSMEs will be defined as those enterprises
                     with annual turnover not to exceed 3 billion FCFA (approx. US$5 million) and with up to two hundred employees. Annex
                     II provided additional information about the LoC process and procedures. Component 2. Housing Finance (US$60
                     million) This component will support the provision of affordable housing finance through refinancing long term housing
                     loans and support to the regional housing guarantee product, through the following two sub-components: Line of credit
                     to increase the capacity of the West African mortgage liquidity facility (CRRH-UEMOA) to finance banks and MFIs to
                     offer long term affordable housing loans (US$ 40 million). This sub-component will support the CRRH-UEMOA mortgage
                     refinancing window offering banks and microfinance institutions in WAEMU countries long term financing for mortgages
                     to low- and middle-income eligible households. The component will support the development of the green and resilient
                     housing finance market in the WAEMU countries by strengthening the capacity of CRRH members to finance this sector,
                     as well as the capacity of CRRH-WAEMU to refinance them. Building on national efforts to increase the supply of
                     resilient housing in the region, as well as green and resilient housing certification programs (such as the IFC's EDGE
                     certification), CRRH-WAEMU, with the support of the World Bank Group, will enhance the understanding and capacity
                     of its members to finance green and resilient housing for low- and middle-income households, with the goal that by the
                     end of the project at least 25% of its members will be able to meet the demand for green and resilient housing finance.
                     This will also include support for strengthening the capacity of its members to identify and regularly report on green
                     housing loans. This will be measured through two studies conducted as part of the project, the first after 3 years and the
                     second during the 5th and final year of the project, which will aim to analyze the activity in this sector by CRRH-WAEMU
                     members, the capacity-building actions taken, and any additional needs to be covered based on national activities by
                     governments as well as any financing provided by financial institutions and refinancing carried out, subject to the
                     demonstration through analysis of the presence of a real and eligible supply of green and resilient housing in the




Public Disclosure
                     WAEMU market . This sub-component will also support CRRH-UEMOA to issue its first social bond on the regional
                     capital market. The proceeds of this issue will be blended with the World Bank financing, allowing CRRH-UEMOA to
                     offer attractive rates for the refinancing of affordable housing. It is expected that this financing will help CRRH to raise
                     additional bonds in the value of US$120 million in the regional capital markets. CRRH-UEMOA plans to work with up to
                     60 financial institutions under the project. This sub-component will be implemented by CRRH-UEMOA Sub-component
                     2.2 Support the Regional Housing Guarantee Product (US$ 20 million): A regional housing guarantee product was
                     launched in May 2024. It has been developed by the CRRH-UEMOA and is being co-managed by the Fond de Solidarite
                     Africain. This sub-component will support the goal to further reach low-income households by providing a subsidy that
                     will cover part or total of the guarantee fees for mortgages underwritten (by both commercial banks and SFDs) to low-
                     income households and households with an irregular income. This will allow banks to be more comfortable providing
                     long term loans to underserved households, at no additional cost for the eligible households, while also allowing banks
                     to have a lower (0 to 20%, as opposed to currently 50%) cash to reserve ratio therefore significantly increasing financial
                     institution lending capacity. This will be achieved by providing subordinated debt to CRRH who will then invest this
                     money and use the interests to subsidize the guarantee fees, ensuring long term sustainability of the subsidy scheme.
                     Currently the guarantee fee is 1% of the mortgage amount. Component 3: Project Implementation support (US$5
                     million) This component will be managed by the BOAD and will provide training and consulting services to enable the
                     BOAD to effectively implement the project and perform the environmental, social and fiduciary (procurement, financial
                     management) bank requirements. The project will finance and build capacity at the BOAD to establish a project
                     monitoring and evaluation system, consistent with the agreed components and the project results framework. In
                     parallel, the World Bank will endeavor to identify and secure donor funding for parallel TA to PFIs for MSME finance and
                     to PFIs and the CRRH and its member PFIs for housing finance.



                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project finances two Lines of Credit (LoC): The West-African Development Bank (BOAD) will manage a LoC for Micro,
                     Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) under the component 1. The Caisse Regionale de Refinancement Hypothecaires
                     (CRRH) will manage another LoC designed to refinancing of housing mortgages for an average of USD33,000 through
                     under component 2.1. Beneficiaries will be households, MSMEs and Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) located in the
                     eight (8) countries that are members of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), which include
                     Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte D'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo.

                     In spite of recent efforts to increase financial inclusion and develop the banking sector, access to credit and mortgage
                     financing in WAEMU countries remains limited due to several structural, regulatory, market-related challenges, and an
                     overall poor financial literacy which limits awareness and understanding of credit products and mortgages. Moreover,
                     there remains important gender gaps in female-led business and bank account ownership, as well as in demand for
                     housing mortgage credit. Women face higher hurdles in accessing financing, given their limited collateral (such as land
                     or property), which is often required for obtain a loan. The limited access to bank accounts or formal financial
                     institutions reduces their ability to secure capital for business ventures or housing. The project’s objective to proactively
                     promote female access to credit is an important attempt to reach out to this vulnerable population.

                     With regards to environmental considerations in the financial sector in the WAEMU region, while the region is highly
                     exposed to climate risks, most of its financial system has not yet incorporated climate and environmental related risks in
                     its governance and risk-management procedures, nor has it been actively promoting green finance opportunities.




Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     BOAD adopted its Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF) in December 2022. BOAD’s ESF includes an
                     Environmental and Social Policy, the requirement to rate E&S risks of projects, as well as 9 environmental and social
                     standards that are similar to the WB ESS, and also cover the Financial Intermediary (FI) category. Information on
                     screening and requirements is outlined in BOAD’s E&S procedures. While BOAD’s ESF meet the requirements of the
                     Bank, its capacity to implement its own framework remains limited. This has been evidenced during the implementation
                     of the Regional Off-Grid Electricity Access Project (P160708) that is financed by the Bank under its former E&S
                     operational policies. While a specific Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) has been designed for the
                     project, the E&S performance of BOAD has been Moderately Satisfactory (MS), given the limited information on the E&S
                     due diligence on Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) at the beginning of the project. This was due to limited
                     BOAD E&S staff and delays in the recruitment of E&S consultants who are now onboard and have improved this
                     situation. It will be important to ensure E&S expertise to support BOAD’s capacity to monitor implementation and
                     ensure they are on board prior to the start of the LoC activity.

                     CRRH: CRRH-UEMOA adopted its Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures in 2017, which is broadly in line with
                     the objectives of ESS9. The E&S Policy has an exclusion list, which excludes financing mortgages on properties that
                     involve resettlement impacts during construction. The Bank-financed Housing Finance Project (P161658), implemented
                     by CRRH, demonstrated a Satisfactory E&S performance from 2022 to 2024. CRRH maintained the same officer in charge
                     of the E&S policy implementation throughout project implementation, ensuring continuity in reporting, as well as a E&S
                     consultants to support the supervision and capacity-building of PFIs. Overall, out of the 49 refinanced PFI that


                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     benefitted from the project, 27 had an ESMS in place by completion. The remaining 21 PFIs received training and
                     technical assistance in June 2024 to establish an ESMS. It is important to note that more information on these systems’
                     performance would help draw lessons for future projects to be implemented by CHHR.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Moderate
                     The project's key environmental risks are expected from Component 1 and 2, which will finance two Lines of Credit to
                     the BOAD which will on lend to eligible PFIs operating in WAEMU countries, which will in turn finance viable MSME, to
                     fund their diverse financing needs, primarily for investment and working capital and support the development of the
                     green housing market in the region by providing mortgage loans for access to green and resilient affordable housing
                     to underserved households. This will be achieved by providing long term concessional financing to CRRH-UEMOA to
                     support the refinancing of green mortgages. At this stage, the eligibility criteria for Participating Financial Institutions
                     (PFIs) and MSMEs, and the list of eligible activities have not yet been defined. The eligibility criteria for beneficiary
                     PFIs and MSMEs will be reflected in the project operational manual. These will include compliance by PFIs with
                     governance standards, prudential norms and profitability benchmarks. For MSMEs, while there is no harmonized
                     definition in the WAEMU, for the needs of this project MSMEs will be defined as those enterprises with annual
                     turnover not to exceed 3 billion FCFA (approx. US$5 million) and with up to two hundred employees. Therefore, the



Public Disclosure
                     environmental risk assessment is based on the activities of the most common MSMEs in the UEMOA zone, mainly in
                     the agricultural, agro-industrial and construction sectors. Environmental risk is classified as moderate as risks and
                     impacts likely to be generated by these types of SMEs are expected to be site-specific, non-significant, and can be
                     mitigated with easily identifiable measures. Their activities could have potential risks and impacts on ecosystems and
                     natural resources. The development of agricultural production will require more land, water, and energy resources,
                     putting pressure on the area's already limited resources and bringing with it issues relating to agrochemicals and food
                     safety, which will need to be properly managed. Once the eligibility criteria for SMEs and the credit size to be loaned
                     by BOAD is defined during project preparation, the risk rating may be reviewed.
                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risks and impacts are rated as Moderate, as they are expected to be limited in scope, localized, and potentially
                     reversible. Risks associated with financing MSMEs through BOAD’s Line of Credit may involve occupational and
                     community health and safety impacts when financing minor civil works. Additionally, there is a potential risk of
                     financing MSMEs that may involve child or forced labor. For the affordable housing component to be implemented by
                     CRRH-UEMOA (Component 2.1), social risks are minimal, as the LoC will not finance private housing developments
                     but will focus on refinancing long-term housing mortgages for low and middle income households, therefore limiting
                     the scale of civil works. Potential risks include community health and safety concerns for residents, stemming from
                     improper construction practices (such as the use of hazardous materials, inadequate life and fire safety, or insufficient
                     structural integrity) or unfavorable locations (such as flood-prone or seismic areas). Generic risks associated with
                     minor civil works may also arise in the case of new construction projects. The project is not expected to lead to land




                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     acquisition or resettlement impacts as any activity involving that risk will be part of the exclusion lists for the two
                     LoCs.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant to the extent that the project will use the Borrower Framework for CRRH and BOAD for the
                      management of E&S risks and impacts. E&S expertise will be hired to ensure PFIs meet their requirements and
                      receive capacity-building as needed. This will be reflected in BOAD and CRRH's consolidated Environmental and Social
                      Commitment Plans (ESCP).

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant

                      BOAD's environmental and social framework is available on its website, and CRRH's E&S policy will also be disclosed
                      before project approval. Additionally, the project will require that all PFIs disclose a summary of their ESMS on their
                      websites. With regards to grievance management, both BOAD and CRRH already have grievance mechanisms in place,
                      and they will require each PFI to establish and implement one of their own as part of their ESMS. These commitments
                      are detailed for each agency in the consolidated ESCP.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant to the project. Key project workers will include direct workers (BOAD/CRRH staff working on the
                      project), as well as contracted workers, who are the individual consultants and employees of the consulting firms and
                      service providers who will be recruited by BOAD and CRRH to provide E&S supervision and capacity-building support,
                      advisory and other services. Employees of primary suppliers and community workers are not envisaged under the
                      project. The project does not anticipate any major risks to these workers, as the work will be mostly office-based.
                      Child and forced labor are highly unlikely. Key ESS2 measures for BOAD and CRRH staff and contracted workers,
                      including the application of Codes of conduct that prohibit sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment
                      (SEA/SH), will be outlined in each institution's Manual of Operations (MOP) that will be prepared after project
                      approval. This has been reflected in the consolidated ESCP.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS4 are related to the LoC activities, they will be managed through ESS 9 in
                      the ESMS to be implemented by BOAD, CRRH and the respective PFIs.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS4 are related to the LoC activities, they will be managed through ESS 9 in
                      the ESMS to be implemented by BOAD, CRRH and the respective PFIs.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                      Not Currently Relevant


                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS5 are related to the LoC activities, they will be managed through ESS 9 in
                      the ESMS to be implemented by BOAD, CRRH and the respective PFIs. Any activities leading to physical resettlement,
                      loss of income due to land acquisition or restriction of access to land will be excluded from project financing and
                      reflected in the Exclusion list.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                    Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS6 are related to the LoC activities, they will be managed through ESS 9 in
                      the ESMS to be implemented by BOAD, CRRH and the respective PFIs.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not considered relevant as there are no groups and communities in the project meeting the criteria.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS8 are related to the line of credit, they will be managed through ESS 9 in
                      the ESMS to be implemented by BOAD, CRRH and the respective PFIs.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                 Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      The project will apply the requirements of ESS9 given that components 1 and 2.1 involve financing two LoCs, via
                      BOAD and CRRH, respectively. Activities to be financed by the PFIs will range from the acquisition of material,
                      services, and small civil works to be undertaken by the MSMEs who will benefit from the LoC, as well as the
                      refinancing of mortgages to private households. Both BOAD and CRRH have an Environmental and Social Policies and
                      procedures that meet the ESS9 requirements. The Lines of Credit will include BOAD's and CRRH's respective exclusion
                      lists. In addition, the LoCs' exclusion list will include any activities that may lead to physical relocation and loss of
                      income due to land acquisition or loss of access to land, subprojects that could be rated "High" or "Substantial", as
                      well as subprojects that may impact international waterways. The PFIs will need to have in place or adopt and
                      implement their own ESMS in line with the requirements of ESS9. They will also have to apply the exclusion list,
                      disclose a summary of their ESMS and put in place/maintain a grievance mechanism. BOAD and CHHR will outline
                      these requirements in the financial agreements with the PFIs.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Whole



                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                       The project will use BOAD's Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF) as well as CRRH-UEMOA's
                       Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures in 2017, adopted by each institution in 2022 and 2017, respectively.
                       BOAD’s ESSF includes an Environmental and Social Policy, the requirement to rate E&S risks of projects, as well as 9
                       environmental and social standards, which also cover the Financial Intermediary (FI) category, and that are similar to
                       those of the World Bank. As for CRRH-UEMOA its objectives are broadly materially consistent with ESS9.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       The project will not use a common approach.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     * Consolidated BOAD/CRRH ESCP that includes LMP and SEP requirements (by appraisal)
                     * BOAD ESMS already in place for the LoC as part of its ESF (already established)
                     *CRRH ESMS already in place (already established)
                     * List of subproject activities to be excluded from the LoC (will be part of the PoM)
                     * PFIs ESMS (prior to using LoC or CRRH funds)


                     III. CONTACT POINT



Public Disclosure
                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Mazen Bouri                             Title:          Lead Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                 mbouri@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Safia Hachicha Ep Ben Abdallah          Job Title:      Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                 shachicha@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                               Mazen Bouri, Safia Hachicha Ep Ben Abdallah

                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     V. APPROVAL

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                   Sophie Lo Diop

                     ADM Social Specialist:                          Eloise Sophie Fluet




Public Disclosure




                    Apr 29, 2025                                                                     Page 10 of 10
