Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 04/03/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04226




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P181251                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       West Africa Fin              2025

                     Operation Name            Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Western and Central       Western and Central Africa                                            Finance, Competitiveness
                     Africa                                                                                          and Innovation

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     West African              West African Development Bank/           25-Feb-2025                  25-Apr-2025
                     Development Bank/         Banque Ouest Africaine de
                     Banque Ouest              Développement (BOAD)
                     Africaine de
                     Développement



Public Disclosure
                     (BOAD)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     26-Mar-2024               550,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To increase financial inclusion for households and MSMEs in the WAEMU region


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project activities will target the 8 WAEMU countries. The project will primarily benefit MSMEs and households by
                     contributing to their improved financial inclusion. The project will also benefit the financial intermediaries, BOAD, CRRH-
                     UEMOA and Participating Financial Institutions as they will receive project proceeds to on-lend to SMEs and households
                     as well as benefit from capacity building in terms of SME, gender and climate finance. The project will directly benefit

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     SMEs. SMEs will be the primary beneficiaries of the project. There will be a targeted focus on MSMEs investing in
                     climate friendly sectors and activities as well as women-led SMEs. With an estimated average loan size of US$ 80,000,
                     the project funded MSME beneficiaries will reach 3,560 MSMEs, 30 percent of which will be women-led. The BOAD and
                     PFIs under the Line of Credit will benefit from the project. As recipients of project proceeds to be ultimately lent to
                     MSMEs, the BOAD and PFIs will derive economic benefits from the on lending of loans. They will also benefit from the
                     technical assistance provided by the project to build capacity in terms of SME, gender, E&S, and green investments.
                     CRRH-UEMOA and PFIs under the Housing Refinancing line will also benefit from the project. Capacity building and TA
                     will be provided to the CRRH-UEMOA in terms of long-term loans, green housing, gender, and E&S. Underserved
                     households living in WAEMU countries will be the primary beneficiaries of the project by being able to access long term
                     finance and move into decent affordable, green and resilient housing. It is expected that at least 6000 households,
                     around 36000 people, will directly benefit from it, with 30% of which will be women headed households. Project
                     Components Component 1: Access to finance by MSMEs (US$120 million) This component will be implemented by the
                     BOAD with which the World Bank already has extensive experience through the regional US$155 million affordable
                     Housing Finance Project (P161658) and the US$ 225 million Regional Off-Grid Electricity Access Project (P160708). In
                     December 2023, the World Bank signed an MOU with the BOAD to expand cooperation between the two institutions
                     and both MIGA and IFC are exploring additional engagement with the BOAD. The project will support access to finance
                     by MSMEs through the following two sub-components: Component 1.1: Line of credit to be on lent by the BOAD to PFIs
                     to extend long-term loans to viable MSMEs notably for green investments (US$100 million) : The World Bank will
                     finance a Line of Credit to the BOAD which will on lend to eligible PFIs operating in WAEMU countries, which will in turn
                     finance viable MSME, to fund their diverse financing needs, primarily for investment and working capital. The World
                     Bank financing will allow for longer term loans with maturities of up to 10 years. a. 30 percent of the LoC will be




Public Disclosure
                     allocated to MSMEs operating in green sectors and/or investments by MSMEs for climate adaptation and mitigation
                     purposes. To that end, the project will adopt IFC’s Climate Assessment for Financial Institutions (CAFI) tool , which is a
                     digital, web-based platform that helps banks and other financial institutions to assess the climate eligibility and measure
                     development impact, including adaptation investments across sectors, and sectors including but not limited to:
                     Renewable Energy: Solar Power, Wind and Hydro Power and Biomass and Bioenergy Sustainable Agriculture and
                     Agroforestry: Climate-Smart Agriculture (this includes practices that improve agricultural productivity while reducing
                     greenhouse gas emissions, increasing resilience to climate change, and enhancing carbon sequestration), Agroforestry
                     and organic farming. Water and Waste Management: Water Efficiency (water conservation, efficient irrigation systems,
                     and sustainable water management etc) and Waste-to-Energy: Turning waste into energy (e.g., through biogas or waste
                     incineration) can help reduce landfill use, generate energy, and manage waste more sustainably. Sustainable Forestry
                     and Land Use: Reforestation, afforestation and sustainable forest management. Green Transport: Developing electric
                     transport systems (electric vehicles, buses, and shared electric mobility) Green Construction and Buildings: The
                     construction of energy-efficient buildings (e.g., through the use of sustainable materials, smart energy systems, and
                     passive design). Eco-Tourism: Focuses on conservation, low-impact travel and aligns with local community development
                     and environmental preservation. b. 30 percent of the LoC will be allocated to Women-led MSMEs. The BOAD defines a
                     woman-led firm a firm, either led by women, or owned at more than 50 percent by women, where women represent at
                     least 30 percent of the workforce, or where women represent more than 50 percent of the beneficiaries. The green and
                     gender allocations are not mutually exclusive. As such a loan to a green investment in a women owned SME will count
                     towards both the green and the gender targets. c. An additional US$ 25 million will be mobilized in private capital from
                     PFIs. One feature of the LoC requires that for each extended MSME loan, PFIs draw up 80 percent from the LoC and
                     contribute 20 percent from their balance sheets. This co-financing feature, which will mobilize an additional US$ 25
                     million in private capital, will (i) ensure an alignment of interest with PFIs; and (ii) increase the amount of funding to


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     MSMEs, further increasing the impact and additionality of the project. The additional funds from PFIs balance sheet will
                     be on the respective PFIs own terms. 32. The eligibility criteria for beneficiary PFIs and MSMEs will be reflected in the
                     project operational manual. These will include compliance by PFIs with governance standards, prudential norms and
                     profitability benchmarks. For MSMEs, while there is no harmonized definition in the WAEMU, for the needs of this
                     project MSMEs will be defined as those enterprises with annual turnover not to exceed 3 billion FCFA (approx. US$5
                     million) and with up to two hundred employees. Annex II provided additional information about the LoC process and
                     procedures. Component 1.2: Securitization of MSME portfolios (US$ 20 million): This sub-component would support the
                     planned Securitization of MSME portfolios in the WAEMU. The BOAD has already been active in Securitization and had
                     issued in 2023 the largest non-sovereign securitization transaction in the WAEMU region valued at 150 billion FCFA
                     (US$240 million). This involved converting sovereign loans that the BOAD granted its member States into negotiable
                     securities on the regional capital market to raise funds to finance part of its 2021-2025 Djoliba strategic plan.
                     Securitization brings with it several advantages including enhancing creditworthiness through transferring risk to
                     investors, transforming illiquid assets on bank balance sheets into tradable securities thereby increasing financing
                     available, scaling up investments by pooling “like” assets into larger liquid securities, and finally deepening capital
                     markets by boosting volume and diversity of regional issuances. Under the ongoing World Bank Group WAEMU JCAP
                     (Joint Capital Markets) Program, technical assistance (TA) is being provided to update the WAEMU Securitization Legal
                     and Regulatory Framework to bring it in line with international practice and broaden the types of assets that can be
                     securitized. The BOAD is currently working with the IFC on the development of an MSME securitization platform to
                     provide i) PFIs with a turnkey solution to securitize one or several portfolios of MSME loans and ii) institutional investors
                     with a proven and lasting framework to deploy capital in the region. This new platform will offer a long-term funding
                     infrastructure that Banks and MFIs may access on a revolving basis to offload their MSME loans and diversify their




Public Disclosure
                     sources of funding. BOAD will act as Arranger and SPV Manager of a regulated Fonds Commun de Titrisation de
                     Creances (FCTC) that will ensure asset segregation while sharing structuring, issuance, SPV management, and reporting
                     costs on a pro rata basis. BOAD would also act as anchor investor alongside IFC which would subscribe up to 50% of the
                     senior tranches of each issuance to mobilize the remaining balance from the private sector, mainly institutional
                     investors, and other Development Finance Institutions. The first milestone of the transaction involves the issuance of 3
                     securitized bonds for an aggregate amount totaling approximately XOF 100 billion (US$ 168 million) in 2 phases over the
                     next 12 months. The underlying pool of assets for this first milestone is constituted of MSME and retail loans originated
                     by the three identified PFIs. Gender and Climate targets will be included in the use of proceeds for each issuance. Up to
                     four regional PFIs will benefit from this platform. The World Bank project support to BOAD would consist of either i) a
                     credit enhancement via a guarantee or a cash collateral to derisk their investment in the mezzanine tranches of the
                     vehicle or ii) to use the IDA SUW financing to lower the pricing of the mezzanine tranche. It would incentivize local and
                     regional investors to invest in these issuances, particularly for portfolios that may be viewed as risky by the market. The
                     World Bank and IFC task teams from FCI, FIG, and Treasury will work with the BOAD on the design and characteristics of
                     the proposed project support. With regards to promoting climate finance and ensuring Paris Alignment of project
                     interventions, the BOAD is well suited to play this role and has already been paying significant attention to climate and
                     sustainability. Specifically, the BOAD has an Environment and Climate Finance Department, and has developed an
                     Environmental and Climate Strategy as well as a Sustainability Bond Framework. BOAD had been accredited by the
                     Green Climate Fund in 2016 and is reporting green financing under IDFC19. Currently, BOAD is developing procedures
                     and methodologies for identifying climate financing, as well as systematic assessment t of climate-related risks and
                     vulnerabilities. Consistent with its Sustainability Bond Framework, BOAD issued in January 2021 the first highly
                     successful African sustainability bond (Euro 750 million), to finance projects with high positive environmental and social
                     impact. This Sustainability Bond Framework will pave the way for future bond issuances in various formats: Green


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     Bonds, Social Bonds and Sustainability Bonds . During project preparation, the Bank team will work with BOAD and key
                     stakeholders to define a common green taxonomy for the project that would determine a list of eligible activities to
                     maximize climate mitigation and adaptation investments. This would be to ensure that there is no financing of activities
                     in the universally not-aligned list as defined in the Joint-MDB Methodological Principals for Assessment of Paris
                     Alignment. Component 2. Housing Finance (US$80 million) Component 2. Line of credit to increase the capacity of the
                     West African mortgage liquidity facility (CRRH-UEMOA) to finance banks and MFIs to offer long term affordable green
                     housing loans. This component will support the CRRH-UEMOA concessional mortgage refinancing window offering
                     banks and microfinance institutions in WAEMU countries long term financing for mortgages under FCFA 25 million (USD
                     42,540) to low- and middle-income eligible households. Through the significant TA and capacity building programmed
                     under component 3.2, support CRRH-UEMOA members financial institutions to go further down market than they
                     currently do and improve women access to affordable housing finance. The component will also support the
                     development of the green housing market in the region by providing mortgage loans for access to green and resilient
                     affordable housing to underserved households. This will be achieved by allocating up to 30% of the CRRH-UEMOA
                     concessional long term financing window to support the refinancing of green mortgages. Mortgages for homes that
                     have received a green certification, such as the IFC EDGE certification or any other national or international green
                     certification program, will be considered green mortgages. A portion of the TA to be provided, in collaboration with IFC
                     EDGE team, will aim increase the availability of green certification. The component will also support the CRRH-UEMOA
                     to issue its first green bond on the regional capital market. The proceeds of this issue will be blended with the World
                     Bank concessional financing, allowing CRRH-UEMOA to offer attractive rates for the refinancing of affordable green and
                     sustainable housing. This aims to offset some of the additional cost, or ‘greenium’ associated with using low carbon
                     building materials and techniques. It is expected that this financing will help the CRRH raise additional bonds in value of




Public Disclosure
                     US$120 million in the regional capital markets. The CRRH-UEMOA plans to work with up to 60 financial institutions
                     under the project. This component will be implemented by CRRH-UEMOA, which is a regional financial institution
                     licensed by the WAEMU banking commission since 2011, and which was the implementing agency under the World
                     Bank WAEMU Affordable Housing Finance (mortgage refinancing lines components. Component 3: Project
                     Implementation support, Capacity Building, and M&E (US$20 million) • Component 3.1.1: Support to BOAD Project
                     Implementation Unit (BOAD-PIU)- (US$4 million) Training and consulting services to enable the BOAD to effectively
                     implement the project and perform the environmental, social and fiduciary bank requirements. Notably, support BOAD
                     on objective setting, data collection and monitoring and evaluation in terms of gender and climate policy. a. This
                     includes support for expansion of data collection on sex-disaggregated data and the design of suptech (i.e. digital
                     technology for use by supervisors) instruments to accommodate this. b. Support for the development of reporting tools
                     including data portals and publications Technical Assistance & Capacity building to support the implementation of
                     BOAD’s Gender Strategy. a. In line with BOAD’s Gender Strategy’s identified and prioritized action plan, conduct
                     assessments of member country legal and regulatory frameworks affecting WSMEs and develop a prioritized reform
                     agenda in line with these findings b. Conduct study on challenges to formalization for WSMEs in the region, also
                     identified as a prioritized action within the BOAD Gender Strategy The project will finance and build capacity at the
                     BOAD to establish a project monitoring and evaluation system, consistent with the agreed components and the project
                     results framework. • Component 3.1.2: For both components 1.1 and 1.2, technical assistance will be provided to
                     participating financial institutions (US$4 million). 39. The technical assistance will be designed to: i) strengthen the
                     MSME risk assessment capabilities of PFIs and support them to adapt their offerings to MSME needs taking into
                     consideration factors such as turnover seasonality, specific investment requirements, and the characteristics of niche
                     sectors where MSMEs operate; (ii) raise awareness and build capacity among all beneficiaries on gender equality,
                     incorporating gender finance into their institutions, as well as climate transition and green finance; (iii) support


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     WMSMEs to engage in climate resistant agriculture and to transition to agricultural value chains better adapted to
                     climate change; and iv ) provide technical assistance to PFIs in setting up their Environmental and Social Management
                     Systems (ESMS). Component 3.2 This component will support the CRRH-UEMOA and its members (banks and MFIs)
                     technical assistance needs Increase access to green and sustainable housing finance by (US$4 million): 1) supporting the
                     CRRH-UEMOA in issuing its first green and sustainable bond on the regional market; 2) Build CRRH-UEMOA in-house
                     capacities and knowledge on green housing finance (including risk management); 3) Build the knowledge of CRRH-
                     UEMOA members on underwriting green housing finance loans; 4) Increase access to EDGE certification for affordable
                     homes in the region; and 5) Build the capacity of CRRH-UEMOA members in adopting and implementing Environmental
                     and Social Management Systems (ESMS) adapted for the housing sector, building on the efforts of the previous Bank-
                     supported project. Increase women’s financial inclusion by (US$3 million): Providing targeted training to CRRH-UEMOA
                     members institutions on best practices to increase women’s access to housing finance, including but not limited to
                     advocacy campaigns aiming at increasing joint spouse’s borrowing of housing loans to include both husband and wife on
                     the house ownership. Increase access to finance for households with an irregular income and low-income households
                     (US$2 million)by providing a series of tailored trainings to key staff of CRRH-UEMOA members to train them on how to
                     better assess the repayment capacity of households with an irregular income, as well as introduce them to new
                     technologies that facilitate risk assessment and credit decision/ Increase CRRH-UEMOA internal capacities and project
                     implementation support (US$3 million). Build CRRH-UEMOA internal risk management capacities, IT risk and
                     digitalization of their activities. This will also support CRRH-UEMOA data collection activities and development of impact
                     assessment tools.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview



Public Disclosure
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will take place in the eight (8) countries that are members of the West African Economic and Monetary
                     Union (WAEMU), which include Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte D'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo. The
                     project finances IPF activities through component 1 and financial intermediary (FI) activities through component 2. In
                     the WAEMU zone, landscapes are varied, ranging from forest to Sahel. Major environmental challenges include climate
                     change, deforestation, land degradation, air, water and soil pollution, and waste management. Economic activity is still
                     dominated by the primary sector, particularly agricultural production in terms of employment. The industrial sector has
                     so far been dominated by agro-industry and construction and civil engineering.

                     With regards to environmental considerations in the financial sector in the WAEMU region, while the region is highly
                     exposed to climate risks, most of its financial system has not yet incorporated climate and environmental related risks in
                     its governance and risk-management procedures, nor has it been actively promoting green finance opportunities. With
                     regards to social considerations, access to finances has played an important role for poverty reduction and social
                     inclusiveness. However, there remains gender gaps in account ownership in the region, ranging from 27% in Cote
                     d'Ivoire to 5% in Mali, as well as in using digital payments (32% of women compared to 44% of men in 2021). Similarly,
                     there are age-based gaps, with adults less than 24 years old less likely than older adults to own any account.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     BOAD has adopted in December 2022 its Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) which includes an Environmental
                     and Social Policy, the requirement to rate E&S risks of projects, as well as 9 environmental and social standards that are
                     to a large extent very similar to the WB ESS. The Framework also has an FI category but provides little information on
                     their associated E&S risks should be managed. Moreover, the team has not yet been able to assess BOAD’s capacity to

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     implement its own framework. The Bank currently has a project with BOAD (Regional Off-Grid Electricity Access Project
                     P160708) for which a specific Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) has been designed. The E&S
                     performance of BOAD has been moderately satisfactory, with important delays in recruiting E&S specialists to conduct
                     the due diligence on Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs).

                     WAEMU: At this stage, the task team does not have information on whether WAEMU has an E&S policy. Currently, the
                     Bank has two projects with WAEMU: WAEMU Affordable Housing Finance (P161658) and Harmonizing and Improving
                     Statistics in West and Central Africa (P178497).

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                              Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                       Moderate
                     The project's key environmental risks are expected from Component 2, which will finance small and medium
                     enterprises (SMEs). At this stage, the eligibility criteria for Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) and SMEs, and the
                     list of eligible activities have not yet been defined. Therefore, the environmental risk assessment is based on the
                     activities of the most common SMEs in the UEMOA zone, mainly in the agricultural, agro-industrial and construction
                     sectors. Environmental risk is classified as moderate as risks and impacts likely to be generated by these types of
                     SMEs are expected to be site-specific, non-significant, and can be mitigated with easily identifiable measures. Their
                     activities could have potential risks and impacts on ecosystems and natural resources. The development of



Public Disclosure
                     agricultural production will require more land, water, and energy resources, putting pressure on the area's already
                     limited resources and bringing with it issues relating to agrochemicals and food safety, which will need to be properly
                     managed. Once the eligibility criteria for SMEs and the credit size to be loaned by BOAD is defined during project
                     preparation, the risk rating may be reviewed.
                                                                                                                                         Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The potential negative social risks associated with activities to be financed under Component 1 include the risks for
                     elite capture, complaints, and potential exclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable individuals from project benefits
                     should selection criteria be poorly defined and not well disseminated. Expanding the use of mobile money services
                     introduces risks to end-users and consumers, such as the risks of fraud, personal data misuse, lack of transparency
                     and inadequate redress mechanisms. These risks tend to particularly affect the elderly, as they may not be as well
                     versed in the use of technology. With regards to Component 2, the SME activities financed by the Line of Credit (LoC)
                     may lead to risks and impacts associated to occupational and community health and safety impacts, child or forced
                     labor, or resettlement. The project will establish an E&S due diligence process, and the requirement to include clauses
                     excluding child and forced labor as well as activities with resettlement impacts. Based on the above the social risk is
                     rated moderate as its impact are likely to be minor, localized, reversible, and easily mitigated with the application of
                     E&S screening and mitigation measures. However, the risk rating may be reviewed during project preparation
                     depending on the exclusion list, SME eligibility criteria, and the credit size to be loaned by BOAD.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                          Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      Component 1 involves the establishment of a regional fund managed by WAEMU as well as technical assistance. The
                      regional fund will provide grants to retail merchants and public institutions for the purchase of equipment, software,
                      and training, and will not involve civil works or infrastructure development. This could lead to exposure of
                      beneficiaries to fraud, data misuse and elite capture. The project will develop clear eligibility criteria and selection
                      process to ensure the process is fair and transparent, as well as simple E&S procedures to manage the risks
                      associated with regional fund financing. These will be outlined in WAEMU's Manual of Operations (MOP) that will be
                      prepared after project approval. The risks associated with component 2 will largerly be addressed through ESS9. With
                      regards to the SME securitization sub-component, the WB and IFC E&S Teams will work to ensure that the
                      institutional applicable policies are reflected.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      Key project stakeholders will be limited to WAEMU countries, and include households and public institutions that will
                      be using digital payment services, SMEs, Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs), BOAD and WAEMU. BOAD and
                      WAEMU will each prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) prior to project approval that will detail the
                      engagement methods for key stakeholder groups, the information disclosure requirements of the PFIs participating in
                      the LoC, as well as BOAD's and WAEMU's grievance mechanism.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      ESS2 is relevant to the project. Key project workers will include staff and consultants working for the project in BOAD
                      and WAEMU, as well as the workers from consulting firms and service providers who will be recruited by the two
                      organizations to provide technical assistance, advisory and other services. The project does not anticipate any major
                      risks to these workers. Key ESS2 measures for WAEMU and BOAD staff and consultants will be outlined in each
                      institution's MOP for the project to be prepared after project approval. This will be reflected in the ESCP.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                               Not Currently Relevant

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS3 are related to the line of credit (Component 2), they will be managed
                      through ESS 9 in the ESMS prepared by BOAD and the respective PFIs.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                               Not Currently Relevant

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS4 are related to the line of credit (Component 2), they will be managed
                      through ESS 9 in the ESMS prepared by BOAD and the respective PFIs.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                   Not Currently Relevant

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS5 are related to the line of credit (Component 2), they will be managed
                      through ESS 9 in the ESMS prepared by BOAD and the respective PFIs.




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                        Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS6 are related to the line of credit (Component 2), they will be managed
                      through ESS 9 in the ESMS prepared by BOAD and the respective PFIs.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                   Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not considered relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                      Underserved Traditional Local Communities currently identified in the project area. Should the presence of
                      indigenous communities be confirmed through further screening during preparation or implementation, the
                      necessary assessments, consultations, and instruments will be undertaken per the requirements of this standard.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                             Not Currently Relevant

                      As the risks and impacts associated with ESS8 are related to the line of credit (Component 2), they will be managed
                      through ESS 9 in the ESMS prepared by BOAD and the respective PFIs.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                     Relevant

                      The project will apply the requirements of ESS9 as component 2 will finance a Line of Credit (LoC) via BOAD that will
                      subsequently involve on-lending to PFIs across WAEMU countries. These subprojects may involve the



Public Disclosure
                      renovations/expansions of existing facilities, and other activities that may lead to risks and impacts associated with
                      occupational and community health and safety, poor working conditions, waste generation, pollution and involuntary
                      resettlement. At this stage, the list of activities to be excluded (“negative list”) and the eligibility criteria of the SMEs
                      and PFI have not been defined yet. BOAD will prepare an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
                      before project effectiveness. The ESMS will include : (a) an exclusion list that excludes subprojects that would be
                      rated “High” or “Substantial”; (b) an E&S policy; (c) clearly defined E&S procedures and capacity to screen SMEs for
                      E&S risk exposure; and (d) E&S clauses in the financial agreements with PFIs.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                              No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                       No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                  No
                       The use of the Borrower framework is not envisaged as the project is being implemented by two regional
                       organizations.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                   TBD


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                          Page 9 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Financial Inclusion For Households And Msmes In The Waemu (P181251)



                       The task team will explore relying on IFC's due diligence for component 2.3 (partial guarantee to BOAD for a
                       Sustinability Bond Framework).

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     * ESCP and an SEP for each regional organization (by appraisal)
                     * BOAD ESMS for the LoC (prior to effectiveness)
                     * E&S procedures/checklist to manage risks associated with regional fund in WAEMU's MOP
                     * PFIs ESMS (prior to using LoC funds)


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Mazen Bouri                            Title:          Lead Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  mbouri@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Safia Hachicha Ep Ben Abdallah         Job Title:      Senior Financial Sector Specialist




Public Disclosure
                      Email:                  shachicha@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                              Mazen Bouri, Safia Hachicha Ep Ben Abdallah

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                     Sophie Lo Diop

                     ADM Social Specialist:                            Eloise Sophie Fluet




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 10 of 10
