Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Feb-2025 | Report No: PIDIA00822




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID              Operation Name
                                                                                    Financial Inclusion for
Western and Central Africa                                P181251                   Households and MSMEs in
                                                                                    the WAEMU
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date   Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project                                                                  Finance, Competitiveness
                               24-Feb-2025                18-Apr-2025
Financing (IPF)                                                                     and Innovation
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
West African Development       West African Development
Bank/ Banque Ouest             Bank/ Banque Ouest
Africaine de                   Africaine de
Développement (BOAD)           Développement (BOAD)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To increase financial inclusion for households and MSMEs in the WAEMU region

Components
Component 1: Access to Finance by MSMEs
Component 2: Housing Finance
Component 3: Technical Assistance

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                550.00

  Total Financing                                                                                     550.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                        220.00



                                                                                                          Page 1
      The World Bank
      Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)



   Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 220.00
       IDA Credit                                                                                                220.00
   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Commercial Financing                                                                                        330.00
       Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                         330.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Moderate


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




Other Decision (as needed)

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

   1. Achieving the vision of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in West and Central Africa is
      predicated on greater financial inclusion, that is ensuring that individuals and businesses have access to useful
      and affordable financial products and services that meet their needs delivered in a responsible and sustainable
      way. By providing access to financial services, individuals and businesses in the region can improve their income-
      generating activities, manage risks, and reduce their vulnerability to shocks, thereby helping to alleviate poverty.
      Access to financial services empowers individuals, particularly women and marginalized groups, by giving them
      the tools to manage their finances, invest in education and health, and improve their overall quality of life. For
      small and young firms, access to finance enables innovation, job creation, and growth; and this is particularly
      important for firms facing greater constraints. Additionally, by providing access to affordable housing finance, the
      region can improve access to affordable housing which is vital for reducing inequality, preventing overcrowding
      and informal settlements, and fostering sustainable urban growth. Affordable housing development can stimulate
      economies through creating jobs in contribution and related industries, and as part of integrated housing

                                                                                                                      Page 2
          The World Bank
          Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)


           development, can reduce strains on urban infrastructure and promote more sustainable water, sanitation and
           transport services.

       2. The proposed US$ 220 million WAEMU Financial Inclusion for MSMEs and Households Project is an innovative
          World Bank engagement with the West Africa Development Bank (BOAD) to address the very low levels of
          financial inclusion—for both households and micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs)—in the WAEMU
          region, home to 140 million people in eight countries. It will promote access to finance for MSMEs, and to long
          term housing finance for lower income households in the subregion. This proposed World Bank engagement will
          work in synergy with MIGA’s recently approved guarantee for private loans to BOAD, and IFC’s ongoing and future
          cooperation with BOAD. The Project is expected to generate approximately US$330 million in private capital
          mobilization (PCM), and to directly benefit approximately 16,000 households through affordable housing
          (estimated 80,000 household members) and 11,400 businesses and create 68,300 direct jobs. This does not
          include the indirect impact on jobs creation (such as through the MSME suppliers) as well as the impacts in terms
          of added liquidity for housing and MSME loans. The Project will support firm resilience in the face of climate
          change, promote green transition, and support household resilience by prioritizing green investments for MSMEs
          lending and green building standards for housing finance. The project will help close the gender gap in access to
          finance for MSMEs and housing loans. The Project will promote regional integration through further developing
          the single WAEMU capital market, making longer term capital available for private investments, working with
          commercial pan-African banks present in multiple WAEMU countries, and promoting intra-regional learning and
          demonstration through sharing and dissemination of successful models.
       3. The WAEMU (West Africa Economic and Monetary Union) is a customs union and a currency union, consisting
          of eight member countries, which aims to promote economic integration beyond the existing monetary
          integration1. WAEMU countries implement independent fiscal policies but have a common Central Bank (the
          BCEAO- Banque Centrale des Etats de l’Afrique de l’Ouest) and a single monetary policy, which makes a strong
          argument for fiscal-monetary policy coordination. Recent geopolitical events, rising inflation, alongside tightening
          monetary policy and continued large public financing needs, have accentuated the macro- stability risks. Inflation
          had historically been low across the region due to the currency peg to the euro, but since 2021, it has increased
          steadily and has been above the upper limit of the Central Bank’s target range of 3%. Fiscal deficits have been
          constantly above the targeted levels, due to a combination of external shocks and increasing security concerns in
          some countries.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context
WAEMU Financial System Overview
       4. The WAEMU financial system is dominated by banks, which had total assets of FCFA 64 trillion (about US$ 100
          billion)—or 58 percent of regional GDP—at end-2022. The banking sector accounts for around 72 percent of the
          financial system (based on 2020 data), while other financial institutions (microfinance, insurance, and pension
          funds, as well as securities custodians) account for around 28 percent of the financial system’s assets. Of the 155
          credit institutions operating in the WAEMU at end-2022, 132 were banks. Their assets’ geographic concentration
          is broadly in line with that of economic activity, with over half held by credit institutions in the WAEMU two largest
          economies, Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal (34 percent and 19 percent, respectively). Regional banking groups (34)
          have emerged as key players, holding nearly 85 percent of banking sector assets. The other players are smaller

1
    The WAEMU Member Countries are Benin, Burkina Faso Cote d’Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo.

                                                                                                                            Page 3
         The World Bank
         Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)


          unaffiliated domestic private and public banks, accounting for four-fifths and one-fifth of banks’ capital
          respectively. The 13 banks which are majority publicly owned (with public ownership over 50 percent of total
          capital), hold 10 percent of banking assets and 13 percent of banking capital in the WAEMU.
Access to Finance for MSMEs
      5. Access to financing continues to be a significant hurdle for private sector development in WAEMU, with the
         financial sector failing to adequately support businesses, in particular micro, small and medium enterprises
         (MSMEs) which represent between 80 percent and 95 percent of companies identified in the region. Bank credit
         growth to the private sector was robust in recent years but slowed to 10.3 percent in 2023, down from 14.2
         percent in 2022. This lending growth outpaced economic growth, reflecting a need for financial deepening.
         However, the rapid increase in lending poses potential credit risks due to weak economic diversification,
         information asymmetries regarding borrowers, and structural challenges in the business environment. Only 24.4
         percent of companies in the region have a loan or a line of credit, with formal borrowing rates notably low across
         countries, ranging from 10 percent in Burkina Faso to 2.8 percent in Côte d'Ivoire. Although banks are the principal
         source of finance for MSMEs, only 16 percent of bank lending goes to small enterprises, compared to 35 percent
         in Morocco for instance. This situation is compounded by high rates of informal borrowing, underscoring a reliance
         on informal financial networks that is higher than in the East African and non-WAEMU West African region.
      6. Financial inclusion in the WAEMU has made significant strides yet still falls short of the Sub-Saharan African
         average and could be accelerated with the expansion of digital financial services. Currently, 43% of adults have
         access to a transaction account, up from just 8% a decade ago, though this remains below the regional average of
         55%. Key improvements have been seen in countries like Benin, Senegal, and Togo, driven by efforts from the
         BCEAO to support nonbank financial services, including mobile money and microfinance institutions. Since the
         2015 mobile-money reform, the use of digital financial services has grown, with 33% of the adult population now
         engaged in electronic transactions. The establishment of a strong regulatory framework for electronic money has
         fostered the growth of e-money accounts and retail adoption of digital payments, particularly in countries like
         Senegal, Mali, and Côte d'Ivoire. However, the full potential of digital payments is hindered by challenges such as
         lack of regional interoperability, limited instant payment options, high transaction costs, and inadequate digital
         skills. To truly accelerate financial inclusion, expanding digital financial services, improving payment systems, and
         addressing these barriers are essential.
      7. In the WAEMU region, the loan market is heavily skewed toward short-term lending, with businesses, including
         SMEs, facing limited access to longer-term financing. In 2022, the average loan maturity in the region was
         estimated at just 2 years and 9 months, a decline from 3 years in 2021. The breakdown of loan maturities in 2022
         was as follows: 75.2% of loans were short-term (less than 2 years), 10.2% were medium-term (between 2 and 10
         years), and only 14.6% were long-term (over 10 years)2. This structure reflects a market where the majority of
         lending is concentrated in shorter-term products, leaving a gap in the availability of financing for long-term
         investments to sustain economic growth. Many businesses, especially SMEs, require longer loan terms to finance
         capital-intensive projects such as infrastructure, equipment, and expansion plans, but the supply of such financing
         remains limited. The dominance of short-term loans can be attributed to several factors, including high perceived
         risk by lenders, limited access to long-term funding sources, and a lack of well-developed capital markets. As a
         result, businesses are often forced to rely on frequent refinancing, which can be costly and restrictive for long-
         term growth. Addressing this mismatch between loan maturity and business needs is crucial to fostering economic
         development in the region and unlocking the potential for sustained economic growth.
Affordable Housing

2
    BCEAO – Report on Deposit and Lending Rates in WAEMU - 2022

                                                                                                                         Page 4
         The World Bank
         Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)


      8. The housing deficit in the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) region is a significant
         challenge, exacerbated by rapid urbanization and population growth. The region faces a shortage of
         approximately 3.5 million housing units. To address this deficit, an estimated 800,000 new housing units need to
         be constructed annually just to cover the current needs. However, the current supply falls drastically short, with
         WAEMU banks issuing only about 15,000 new mortgages each year. This shortfall is particularly acute for low- and
         middle-income households, which struggle to access affordable housing due to high costs and limited financing
         options. The situation is further complicated by the high growth rates of urbanization, which exceed 3.5%
         annually, leading to increased land prices and the proliferation of informal settlements.

      9. The housing finance market in the WAEMU has seen gradual development over recent years, driven by efforts
         to expand access to affordable housing and long-term financing availability for banks and microfinance
         institutions, thanks to the Caisse Régionale de Refinancement Hypothécaire de l'UEMOA (CRRH-UEMOA), the
         regional mortgage refinancing company, which has eased liquidity constraints faced previously by local banks,
         allowing them to offer cheaper and longer housing loans. The number of commercial banks across the region
         exceeds 100, with most of them offering mortgage products. Mortgage interest rates in WAEMU typically range
         from 6 percent to 9 percent and have remained fairly stable in the past 2 years despite the rise in inflation.
         Additionally, urbanization and growing low and middle-class demands are prompting many governments in
         WAEMU to tackle the severe housing deficit and explore ways to boost housing availability and affordability.
         However, the market is still underdeveloped, with a mortgage to GDP ratio of only 1%, compared to an average
         of 20% in the rest of the world.

    C. Proposed Development Objective


    Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
    To increase financial inclusion for households and MSMEs in the WAEMU region


    Key Results
     10. This project is expected to help a total of 27,400 people and businesses with access to finance, leveraging US $330
         million of private capital mobilization. The achievement of the PDO will contribute to the World Bank Scorecard
         Corporate Results Indicators “People and businesses using financial services, including the number of women”
         and “Private Capital Mobilization”. In addition, as the project supports the Participating Financial Institutions to
         leverage digital technology to increase their outreach to lower-income and financially excluded groups, it also
         contributes to one more World Bank Scorecard Outcome Indicator “People using digitally enabled services”3. The
         PDO will be monitored and reported through the following standard Scorecard sub-indicators and custom
         indicators4:



3
  Relevant digitally enabled PDO Indicators will be tagged to Digital Services Outcome in Operations Workspace, hence no other specific PDO-level
indicators are required for measuring Digital Services. This project is also aligned with the World Bank Global Challenge Program “Accelerating
Digitalization” launched in October 2024.
4
  The new WB Scorecard was launched in June 2024 to enable development outcomes to be monitored more effectively as the WBG works toward
its goal of eliminating poverty on a livable planet. The Scorecard Indicator “People and businesses using financial services, including the number of
women” aims to measure the results of operations in a standardized way across various types of financial inclusion interventions by the WBG. In
this project, the “usage of financial services” refers to the use of loans by beneficiary MSMEs for their business growth, and climate actions; and the
use of loans by households for housing ownership.

                                                                                                                                                  Page 5
      The World Bank
      Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)


               •   Number of businesses using debt financing (i.e., Number of MSMEs provided with a loan from the
                   BOAD Line of Credit)
                       • Number of women-led businesses using debt financing (i.e., Number of women-led MSMEs
                            provided with a loan)
                       • Number of businesses using debt financing for green investments
               •   Number of people using debt financing (i.e., Number of eligible households provided with a mortgage
                   loan refinanced by the CRRH-UEMOA)
                       • Number of people using debt financing for green home ownership
                       • Number of women using debt financing (i.e., Number of women as sole or joint borrower
                            provided with a mortgage loan)
               •   Private Capital Mobilized (i.e., co-financing amounts by Participating Financial Institutions, and bond
                   issuance through capital markets)

D. Project Description

Component 1: Access to finance by MSMEs
   11. This component will be implemented by the BOAD with which the World Bank already has extensive experience
       through the regional US$155 million affordable Housing Finance Project (P161658) and the US$ 225 million
       Regional Off-Grid Electricity Access Project (P160708). The project will support access to finance by MSMEs
       through the following two sub-components:

   12. Component 1.1: Line of credit (LoC) to be on lent by the BOAD to PFIs to extend long-term loans to viable
       MSMEs including for green investments: The World Bank will finance a Line of Credit to the BOAD which will on
       lend to eligible PFIs operating in WAEMU countries, which will in turn finance viable MSMEs, to fund their diverse
       financing needs, primarily for investment and working capital. The World Bank financing will allow for longer term
       loans with maturities of up to 10 years.

   13. Component 1.2: Securitization of MSME portfolios: This sub-component would support the planned
       Securitization of MSME portfolios in the WAEMU. The BOAD has already been active in Securitization and had
       issued in 2023 the largest non-sovereign securitization transaction in the WAEMU region valued at 150 billion
       FCFA (US$240 million).

Component 2. Housing Finance

This component will support the provision of affordable housing finance through refinancing long term housing loans,
support to the regional housing guarantee product, and incremental housing support through the following sub-
components:

       Sub-Component 2.1 Line of credit to increase the capacity of the West African mortgage liquidity facility (CRRH-
       UEMOA) to finance banks and MFIs to offer long term affordable green housing loans. This sub-component will
       support the CRRH-UEMOA mortgage refinancing window offering banks and microfinance institutions in WAEMU
       countries long term financing for mortgages under FCFA 25 million (US$ 40000) to low- and middle-income eligible
       households.
   14. Sub-component 2.2 Support the Regional Housing Guarantee Product: This sub-component will support the
       regional housing guarantee product developed by the CRRH-UEMOA and co-managed with the FSA (Fond de


                                                                                                                     Page 6
       The World Bank
       Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)


       Solidarite Africain) to further reach low income households by providing a subsidy that will cover part or total of
       the guarantee fees for mortgages under XOF 25 million (~US$ 40,000) underwritten (by both commercial banks
       and SFDs) to low-income households and households with an irregular income.
   15. Sub-component 2.3 Support through the BOAD for Incremental Housing Finance: This sub-component will
       consist of a Line of Credit to the West African Development Bank (BOAD) to provide incremental financing to SFDs
       to help them provide better and more affordable incremental housing finance to low income households and
       households with irregular income.
Component 3: Project Implementation support and TA for Greater Impacts
This component will support the following activities under Component 3.1 related to MSME finance for the BOAD and
PFIs:
   •   Component 3.1.1: Support to BOAD
   16. Training and consulting services to enable the BOAD to effectively implement the project and perform the
       environmental, social and fiduciary bank requirements. Notably, support BOAD on objective setting, data
       collection and monitoring and evaluation in terms of gender and climate policy.
         a. This includes support for expansion of data collection on gender-disaggregated data and the design of
             suptech (i.e. digital technology for use by supervisors) instruments to accommodate this.
         b. Support for the development of reporting tools including data portals and publications
   17. Technical Assistance & Capacity building to support the implementation of BOAD’s Gender Strategy.
         c. In line with BOAD’s Gender Strategy’s identified and prioritized action plan, conduct assessments of member
             country legal and regulatory frameworks affecting WSMEs and develop a prioritized reform agenda in line
             with these findings
         d. Conduct study on challenges to formalization for WSMEs in the region, also identified as a prioritized action
             within the BOAD Gender Strategy
   18. The project will finance and build capacity at the BOAD to establish a project monitoring and evaluation system,
       consistent with the agreed components and the project results framework.
   •   Component 3.1.2: For components 1.1, 1.2, and 2.3 technical assistance will be provided to participating
       financial institutions on MSME Finance
   19. The technical assistance will be designed to: i) strengthen the MSME risk assessment capabilities of PFIs and
       support them to adapt their offerings to MSME needs taking into consideration factors such as turnover
       seasonality, specific investment requirements, and the characteristics of niche sectors where MSMEs operate; (ii)
       raise awareness and build capacity among all beneficiaries on gender equality, incorporating gender finance into
       their institutions, as well as climate transition and green finance; (iii) support WMSMEs to engage in climate
       resistant activities and to transition to value chains better adapted to climate change; iv ) provide technical
       assistance to PFIs in setting up and applying their Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS), v) raise
       awareness and build capacity among PFIs on usage of alternative digital credit scoring models and of APIs to access
       transaction data and vi) studies on the standardization of APIs for Open Finance and a review of data protection
       and consent management framework at a national and regional level in order to further enable the development
       of Digital Financial Services as a strong driver of financial inclusion; (vii) support to SFDs on incremental housing
       loans development and monitoring.
   •   Component 3.2. This component will support the CRRH-UEMOA and BOAD and its members (banks and MFIs)
       technical assistance needs for housing finance.


                                                                                                                       Page 7
      The World Bank
      Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

   20. The risks associated with financing micro, small and medium (MSME) activities through BOAD’s Line of Credit (LoC)
       (Component 1.1), have the potential to lead to occupational and community health and safety impacts in the case
       of the financing of minor civil works. The LoC may also potentially finance MSME that use child or forced labor. It
       is expected that thirty percent (30%) of the LoC will be allocated to MSMEs operating in green sectors, which are
       yet to be defined, and/or for investments in climate change adaptation and mitigation measures, both of which
       should limit environmental impacts. Moreover, 30 percent of the LOC will benefit women-owned enterprises,
       which is an important step in narrowing economic gender equality gaps. With regards to the securities component,
       this activity is being prepared in coordination with IFC, which has undertaken its E&S due diligence. The risks
       associated with the LoC will be mitigated through the application of BOAD’s Environmental and Social Safeguard
       Framework (ESSF). updated in 2022, which is in line with the Bank’s, and requires each Participating Financing
       Institutions (PFIs) to set up and implement their own Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS).
       While BOAD has competent E&S staff, they remain few in number to adequately oversee their entire FI portfolio.
       As for the affordable housing financing LoC (Component 2.1) to be implemented by CRRH-UEMOA, E&S risks are
       limited given that they do not finance private housing developers, but are limited to refinancing long-term housing
       mortgages for low and middle households, thus limiting the scale of potential civil works. Risks may include
       community health and safety risks to residents because of improper techniques during construction (e.g. use of
       hazardous materials, inadequate life and fire safety, weak structural integrity etc.) or inadequate location (e.g.
       flood or seismic areas, etc…), as well as generic risks associated to minor civil works in the of new constructions.
       CRRH-UEMOA adopted its Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures in 2017, which is broadly in line with
       the objectives of ESS9. The E&S Policy has an exclusion list, which excludes financing land acquisition that involved
       resettlement impacts. The implementation of the Bank-financed WAEMU Affordable Housing Finance project
       shows mixed results in CRRH-UEMOA implementation of its policy, with limited reporting and several commercial
       banks not implementing E&S procedures. Each LoC will develop an exclusion list that includes activities to be
       excluded under BOAD's ESSF or CRRH's E&S Policy, in addition to any subprojects leading to physical relocation,
       economic loss as a result of land acquisition or restriction of access to land as well as any activity rated High or
       Substantial for E&S risks. The project's technical assistance component will include the recruitment of E&S
       expertise to support each institution in conducting the E&S due diligence, supervise the PFIs' ESMS performance
       and build the capacity of PFIs to manage E&S risks.




                                                                                                                       Page 8
     The World Bank
     Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)


E. Implementation

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
  21. The Implementing Partners would be the BOAD for Component 1, Sub-Component 2.3 and Sub-Component 3.1
      and CRRH for Sub- Component 2.1, 2.2 , Sub-Component 3.2. BOAD is the development finance institution of
      the member states of WAEMU. BOAD’s primary objective is to promote balanced development of its member
      states and to foster economic integration within West Africa by financing priority development projects. The
      World Bank will directly lend funds to BOAD for Component 1. BOAD will provide a line of credit facility to eligible
      PFIs operating in eight WAEMU countries. The PFIs will on lend funds to MSMEs and Households based on
      eligibility criteria to be agreed upon. The project components managed by the BOAD will have to comply with the
      World Bank’s Guidelines for Financial Intermediary Financing. The CRRH will be responsible for implementing
      Sub-Components 2.1 and 2.2 for the housing finance lines and the housing guarantee fund to PFIs. The CRRH has
      extensive experience in refinancing housing loans and has been a successful partner in implementing the recently
      concluded WAEMU Housing Project.
  22. Both the BOAD and the CRRH will provide project implementation support. As much as possible, the goal is to
      work with the existing FM, Procurement, E&S units at the BOAD and the CRRH. Nonetheless, it is expected that
      additional support would be provided in specialized areas to ensure adequate capacity to meet the project
      financed reporting and fiduciary requirements.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Mazen Bouri
 Lead Financial Sector Specialist

 Safia Hachicha Ep Ben Abdallah
 Senior Financial Sector Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 West African Development Bank/ Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)
 Corell KPOMALEGNI
 Manager, Institutional Relations – Americas and the Far East, Institutional Relations Department
 ckpomalegni@Boad.org

Implementing Agencies
 West African Development Bank/ Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)
 Corell KPOMALEGNI
 Manager ,International Relations
 ckpomalegni@Boad.org

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                                                                                                                      Page 9
     The World Bank
     Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the WAEMU (P181251)



The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                  Mazen Bouri, Safia Hachicha Ep Ben Abdallah

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:             Douglas Pearce                        18-Dec-2024

Country Director:                     Mohammed Dalil Essakali               18-Feb-2025




                                                                                          Page 10
