Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Financial Inclusion and SME Finance in the WAEMU(P181251)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2024 | Report No: PID209




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Financial Inclusion and SME Finance in the WAEMU(P181251)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            P181251                     Financial Inclusion for Households and MSMEs in the
AFRICA                                                     WAEMU
Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date     Practice Area (Lead)
15-Oct-2024                    12-Dec-2024                 Finance, Competitiveness
                                                           and Innovation
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Banque Centrale des Etats    Banque Centrale des Etats
Financing (IPF)                de l’Afrique d’Ouest        de l’Afrique d’Ouest
                               (BCEAO) , West African      (BCEAO), West African
                               Development Bank/           Development Bank/
                               Banque Ouest Africaine de   Banque Ouest Africaine de
                               Développement (BOAD)        Développement (BOAD)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To increase financial inclusion for households and MSMEs in the WAEMU region, including for green investments


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                     300.00

  Total Financing                                                                                          300.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             300.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                  Page 1
           The World Bank
           Financial Inclusion and SME Finance in the WAEMU(P181251)


         International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                  300.00
           IDA Credit                                                                                                                 300.00

    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                     Concept Review Decision
Moderate                                                                         The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

The WAEMU financial system is dominated by banks, which had total assets of CFAF 64 trillion—or 58 percent of
regional GDP—at end-2022. The banking sector accounts for around 72 percent of the financial system (based on 2020
data), while other financial institutions (microfinance, insurance, and pension funds, as well as securities custodians)
account for around 28 percent of the financial system’s assets. Of the 155 credit institutions operating in the WAEMU at
end-2022, 132 were banks. Their assets’ geographic concentration is broadly in line with that of economic activity, with
over half held by credit institutions in the WAEMU two largest economies, Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal (34 percent and 19
percent, respectively). Regional banking groups (34) have emerged as key players, holding nearly 85 percent of banking
sector assets. The other players are smaller unaffiliated domestic private and public banks, accounting for four-fifths and
one-fifth of banks’ capital respectively. The 13 banks which are majority publicly owned (with public ownership over 50
percent of total capital), hold 10 percent of banking assets and 13 percent of banking capital in the WAEMU.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

Over the past several years, the WAEMU region has established a solid basis for its regional payment system, which has
contributed to the increase in electronic payments and financial account ownership in the region. These efforts have
been underpinned by the Regional Financial Inclusion Strategy developed by the BCEAO and the national Financial Inclusion
Strategies adopted in all eight WAEMU member countries1. The BCEAO is in the process of developing a regional platform
for the interoperability of e-money transactions and the implementation of fast payments. The BCEAO has also developed
a solid regulatory framework for the issuance of electronic money, which enabled marked progress in access to and usage
of e-money wallets. The recent update to the banking law also enabled the regulation of new payments services providers.
This was followed by a new instruction issued in January 2024 on payment services which covers the payment services
providers and sets out allowed activities, capital requirements, and reporting and governance standards. The WAEMU
region now boasts 40 e-money initiatives, including 13 e-money licenses to the private sector and 27 partnerships between
banks and telecommunications operators or technical providers. The BCEAO created a Fintech Knowledge and Monitoring



1
    Annex IV presents the Regional Financial Inclusion Strategy Pillars, Progress, Donor Support, and Status of National Strategies

                                                                                                                                         Page 2
         The World Bank
         Financial Inclusion and SME Finance in the WAEMU(P181251)


Office for the exchange of information between the BCEAO and Fintechs and is working on operationalizing the recently
established Financial Innovation Lab to promote the development of innovative products and services.

Account Ownership

According to Findex, between 2017 and 2021, account ownership in the WAEMU region increased by 4% to reach 41%
of adults, a modest increase ,though the account ownership had stood at 19% in 2014. This is still less than the SSA
average and peers and with still untapped potential for further increase2. While financial inclusion in WAEMU has
improved (largely through mobile money) it remains below the Sub-Saharan average, which is at 55%. East Africa boasts
an even higher rate of 57.75 % of adults with account ownership. Across the WAEMU region, 26 million unbanked adults
have a mobile phone, meaning that they already have one of the necessary components of mobile money account
ownership.


While account ownership across the WAEMU region has been increasing since 2014, gender and youth gaps in account
ownership have persisted, and in some cases, increased. Between 2014 and 2021, the account ownership gap between
men and women in the WAEMU region increased from 8% in 2014 to 13% in 2021. This divide is largely driven by unequal
increases in mobile money account ownership. The gender gap at financial institutions has remained at about 5% between
2014 and 2021 but the mobile money account ownership gap has tripled from 4% to 12% in 2021. Despite these gender
gaps, there has been progress in female account ownership, with overall account ownership increasing from 15% in 2014
to 35% in 2021 and mobile money account ownership increasing from 7% to 24% in the same time period.

Account usage

Digital payments have been increasing since 2014 with 37% of adults in the WAEMU region making or receiving digital
payments in 2021. Like with account ownership, there are usage gaps between men and women and younger and older
adults. In 2021, 32% of women made or received a digital payment compared with 44% of men. The age gap is slightly
smaller than the gender gap, with 32% of younger adults making or receiving a digital payment compared with 40% of
older adults.

Access to Finance for SMEs

Access to financing continues to be a significant hurdle for private sector development in WAEMU, with the financial
sector failing to adequately support businesses, in particular micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) which
represent between 80 percent and 95 percent of companies identified in the region. Only 24.4 percent of companies in
the region have a loan or a line of credit, with formal borrowing rates notably low across countries, ranging from 10 percent
in Burkina Faso to 2.8 percent in Côte d'Ivoire. Although banks are the principal source of finance for MSMEs, only 16
percent of bank lending goes to small enterprises, compared to 35 percent in Morocco for instance. This situation is
compounded by high rates of informal borrowing, underscoring a reliance on informal financial networks that is higher
than in the East African and non-WAEMU West African region. According to the MSME Finance Gap Report3, the MSME
finance gap in WAEMU countries and its proportion to GDP stands as follows; Benin (US$0.689 billion, 8% of GDP) , Burkina
Faso (US$1. 6 billion, 15% of GDP), Cote D’Ivoire (US$2.35 billion, 7% of GDP), Guinea Bissau (US$0.13 billion, 12%), Mali


2
 The financial inclusion landscape analysis draws from the Findex 2021-2022 Data, unless otherwise referred to. The Findex data does not cover
Guinea Bissau.
3
    https://www.smefinanceforum.org/data-sites/msme-finance-gap

                                                                                                                                            Page 3
       The World Bank
       Financial Inclusion and SME Finance in the WAEMU(P181251)


(US$0.37 billion, 3% of GDP), Niger (US$3.12 billion, 44% of GDP), Senegal (US$0.92 billion, 7% of GDP), Togo (US$0.39
billion , 10% of GDP ).


  Relationship to CPF
The project is aligned with the WB Africa Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY21–FY23) and will
directly support the objectives of the Pillar II (Trade and Market Development). In particular the project will support the
financial market integration theme of this pillar given the project focus on digital financial services and payments,
promoting financial inclusion at scale, and development of long-term financial markets for SMEs. The project will also
contribute to Pillar V (Resilience), through its support to building firm resilience and adaptation through promoting climate
finance for SMEs. It will further contribute to Pillar I (Building Regional Connectivity), which aims at advancing sustainable
business growth and job creation, through promoting access to finance for SMEs. The project will also contribute to the
AFW West and Central African Strategy (2021-2025) goals for creating more and better jobs, empower women , and ramp
up climate resilience. The project also supports the World Bank Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020-2025).

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To increase financial inclusion for households and MSMEs in the WAEMU region, including for green investments.

  Key Results (From PCN)

The progress towards achieving the PDO would be monitored through the following proposed indicators:

    • Increased number of accounts, with gender specific targets
    • Increased usage of digital financial services, with gender specific targets*
    • Decrease of the percentage of DFS users who faced risks
    • Number of MSMEs accessing financing for the first time, with gender and climate specific targets
    • Amount of green financing lent to MSMEs
Amount of private capital mobilized by beneficiary MSMEs, including for climate adaptation and mitigation financing
 D. Concept Description

The project development objective is to promote financial inclusion of households and SMEs in WAEMU region by
facilitating access to credit and developing digital financial services. To that end, the project’s intervention support three
components, the first of which would be with BCEAO, the second with BOAD, and the third would be for project
implementation support. The first component would comprise funding through BCEAO for an Electronic Payment
Acceptance (EPA) regional fund and support for regional initiatives such as the BCEAO Innovation Lab, and a regional DFS
Hackathon (to promote innovative technology to enable financial inclusion while reinforcing consumer protection). The
second component would finance a Line of Credit (LoC) through BOAD for longer-term loans, to be complemented (subject
to a demand gap analysis ) with Partial Portfolio Credit Guarantee (PPCG), and Support for SME Portfolio Securitization to
facilitate access to finance to SMEs.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate


                                                                                                                         Page 4
      The World Bank
      Financial Inclusion and SME Finance in the WAEMU(P181251)


Legal Operational Policies
                                                                               Triggered?
                                                          Last approved                              Current
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                   No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                             No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
  Mazen Bouri
  Lead Financial Sector Specialist

  Safia Hachicha Ep Ben Abdallah
  Senior Financial Sector Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Banque Centrale des Etats de l’Afrique d’Ouest (BCEAO)
  Yaye Aminata SECK MBOW
  Direction Générale de la Stabilite Financière et du Financement des Economies
  yasmbow@bceao.int

  West African Development Bank/ Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)
  Corell KPOMALEGNI
  Manager, Institutional Relations – Americas and the Far East, Institutional Relations Department
  ckpomalegni@Boad.org

 Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                               Page 5
     The World Bank
     Financial Inclusion and SME Finance in the WAEMU(P181251)


 Banque Centrale des Etats de l’Afrique d’Ouest (BCEAO)
 Yaye Aminata SECK MBOW
 MBOW Direction Générale de la Stabilite Financière et du Financement des Economies
 yasmbow@bceao.int

 West African Development Bank/ Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)
 Corell KPOMALEGNI
 Manager ,International Relations
 ckpomalegni@Boad.org

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Mazen Bouri, Safia Hachicha Ep Ben Abdallah

Approved By

                                       Roselyne CH Massanvi Akibode
Practice Manager/Manager:                                                     22-Apr-2024
                                       Mabudu
Country Director:                      Boutheina Guermazi                     23-Apr-2024




                                                                                            Page 6
