Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 05/30/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03534




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 07, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P500611                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         REMP 2                       2025

                     Operation Name            Second Real Estate Management Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Serbia                    Serbia                                    EUROPE AND CENTRAL            Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                         ASIA                          Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Serbia        Republic Geodetic Authority               15-Apr-2024                   29-Jul-2024


                     Total Project Cost




Public Disclosure
                     32,500,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve the transparency, accessibility, and reliability of Serbia’s real property management systems.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Second Real Estate Management Project will build upon activities completed under the ongoing Real Estate
                     Management Project (P147050) and its Additional Financing. REMP 2 would be implemented by the Republic Geodetic
                     Authority (RGA), and components envisioned under the proposed project include: Component A: Implementation of the
                     Property Mass Valuation System. This component will support (i) the rollout of mass valuation models for residential
                     properties for the bulk of Serbia's population; (ii) the development of an information system for mass property
                     valuation; (iii) the creation of a residential property price index that includes all types of residential property; (iv) the
                     development of a Building Register module as part of the Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster (ISREC); (v) the
                     supply of very high-resolution satellite imagery and orthophoto creation; (vi) technical assistance for the development

                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     of a sustainable model for the long-term maintenance of both the Building Register and Mass Property Valuation
                     Information System; and (vii) the development of mass valuation models for non-residential properties in Serbia.
                     Component B: Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development. This component will support (i) the
                     further development and national implementation of ISREC; (ii) the establishment of an infrastructure cadaster; (iii)
                     implementation of a land consolidation system; (iv) cybersecurity improvements; (v) implementation of the Republic
                     Geodetic Authority's (RGA) NSDI Action Plan; and (vi) upgrades to RGA's digital archive system. Component C:
                     Institutional Development, RGA Sustainability, and Project Management. This component will support (i) updating of
                     strategic documents such as RGA's Business Plan and Transformation Strategy; (ii) implementation of RGA's Portfolio
                     Management Plan; (iii) further implementation of key land administration standards at RGA; and (iv) project
                     management functions of the Project Implementation Unit and its associated staff and consultants.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     This nationwide project aims to advance land administration reforms in Serbia, encompassing both urban and rural
                     areas. It focuses on digitalizing property management in Serbia including valuation and property taxation of residential
                     and commercial properties, but without making physical changes. In general, environmental risk management practices
                     in Serbia align closely with EU directives. Serbia is a pre-accession country and has been receiving support and guidance
                     from the EU to harmonize various sectors, such are environment, waste management, climate and sustainable
                     development. Ensuring strict compliance with national legislation provides a solid basis for effectively managing
                     environmental risks that might arise during the project’s implementation. From 2004 to 2012, under the World Bank-
                     financed Real Estate Cadaster and Registration Project (RECRP; P078311), Serbia established the Real Estate Cadaster



Public Disclosure
                     (REC), a single system for real property rights registration, which is under the authority of the Republic Geodetic
                     Authority (RGA). The project played a pivotal role in the development of land and real estate markets in Serbia. Further
                     technical assistance (TA) from the Bank advised the GoS on three critical areas of real estate reform: (i) planning and
                     permitting; (ii) valuation, taxation, and public land management; and (iii) security of property and property rights. TA
                     outputs included a Land Policy Note shared with the Government of Serbia ( GoS) that highlighted the benefits of real
                     estate reform on Serbia’s fiscal deficit and business climate. Since 2015, the ongoing Real Estate Management Project
                     (REMP; P147050) and its Additional Financing build on the proposals of the Land Policy Note, with support to valuation
                     and property taxation, e-governance for enabling access to real estate information, and RGA’s further institutional
                     development. Throughout implementation of the World Bank-financed projects, the GoS has enacted crucial legislative
                     reforms for the land sector. Key legal framework milestones during REMP’s implementation include (i) a new law
                     regulating (property) valuation professionals via the introduction of a new licensing system and national standards for
                     valuation in line with International and European standards; (ii) regulatory improvements in the areas of planning and
                     construction through the implementation of a one-stop-shop (OSS) system for issuing construction permits; (iii) a new
                     law on cadastral procedures linking the databases of cadaster, notaries, the tax administration, and the courts that
                     enables online submission of applications for registration of property transactions and property tax declarations
                     through notaries, substantially improving the reliability of the property rights registration system; and (iv) adoption of
                     the Law on National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) and establishment of the GeoSrbija National Geoportal, which
                     enables interoperability and data sharing among various agencies, as well as harmonization with the EU’s Infrastructure
                     for Spatial Information in Europe (INSPIRE) Directive. Moreover, the creation of Serbia’s Sale Price Register during REMP
                     has had a major impact on the transparency and efficiency of the residential property market by providing valuers and
                     banks with reliable information about transaction prices.


                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     Based on above mentioned reforms and since the start of first Real Estate Management Project REMP1, Serbia’s real
                     estate market has experienced significant efficiency gains, as evidenced by the drop from 48 days to 3.89 days in the
                     average time required to complete the recordation of a land or property transaction at RGA. Moreover, RGA’s service
                     provision continues to experience high customer satisfaction, with a current rate of 91 percent (up from 66 percent at
                     the start of REMP). To achieve these gains, REMP has invested heavily in the development of RGA’s Integrated System
                     for Real Estate Cadaster (ISREC), which provides digital maps covering approximately 67,000 km2 (approximately 86
                     percent) of the national territory and integrates Serbia’s land registry and cadaster within a single database. The
                     cadastral data provided by ISREC directly feeds into GeoSrbija, which also benefits from data provision from an
                     additional 128 Serbian institutions. RGA is also actively working to sign Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with
                     other GoS institutions for data sharing in order to further improve service provision that requires accurate geospatial
                     information and has signed 44 MoUs to-date.Mass valuation has the potential to address inequalities in the current
                     property taxation system, including tax evasion rates and disparities in tax burdens among properties of equal value.
                     Adopting mass valuation models could lead to a fairer and more equitable taxation system, potentially allowing for
                     lower tax rates while generating similar revenue levels, especially by integrating tax evaders into the tax system.
                     International standards for mass property valuation, primarily developed by the International Association of Assessing
                     Officers (IAAO), have played a crucial role in pilot studies under previous projects and will remain central to the
                     proposed project. These standards emphasize fairness and equity in mass valuation results. Serbia has adopted
                     International Valuation Standards (IVS) by the International Valuation Standards Council and European Valuation
                     Standards (EVS) by The European Group of Valuers' Associations. These standards are encompassing ethical
                     requirement and professional codes of practice and are binding for all valuers in the project. RGA has an obligation to
                     conduct periodic aerial surveys of the territory of the Republic of Serbia at least once every five years, or within a period




Public Disclosure
                     of three years. Reference: Law on State Survey and Cadasters, the Law on the Procedure of Registration in the Real
                     Estate and Utility Cadaster, the Law on the National Spatial Data Infrastructure, and the Law on Agriculture and Rural
                     Development.
                     The modernization of real estate services through digitalization is not new for Serbia. However further regulatory
                     compliance and addressing the digital divide pose challenges for digitalizing Serbia's land registration service.
                     The E- Gov Law addresses various aspects of e-government, including the development of e-services for citizens and
                     businesses, electronic transactions between public administration bodies. In addition Serbia has Law on Electronic
                     Document, Electronic Identification, and Trust Services and Law on Telecommunications. However, regulatory
                     framework to tackle digital divide has not been developed yet. Furthermore, no survey on use of E-Gov services has
                     been conducted yet. The survey from 2021, conducted by the Statistical Office showed that 76.7% of households in the
                     Republic of Serbia have a computer. The digital divide is evident when analyzing geographic areas and the availability of
                     internet connections in urban and rural areas. The percentage of computers in households varies depending on the
                     territory: in Belgrade, it amounts to 94.7%, in Vojvodina 72.2%, in Šumadija and Western Serbia 69.1% and in Southern
                     and Eastern Serbia 70.9%. The internet is mostly used for phone conversation (99.9% students and 57.8% pensioners).
                     Digitization and development of electronic administration is a priority of the Government of Serbia, though it involves
                     extreme complexity and high sensitivity.




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Republic Geodetic Authority (RGA) will continue as the proposed project’s implementing agency as it was for the
                     original Real Estate Management Project (REMP). RGA has built significant implementation capacities for land


                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     administration projects over the past 20 years, and this will remain an important asset throughout project
                     implementation. The agency’s PIU will continue its role under the new project and has competencies and experience
                     with World Bank protocols and procedures for project implementation, including fiduciary aspects, safeguards (but not
                     the WB Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), and M&E, the latter of which is fully overseen by RGA, with the PIU
                     consolidating data for reporting to the World Bank. The PIU performed satisfactorily in applying E&S policy, and in
                     particular social risk management under safeguards. To ensure the project align with requirements under the ESF, the
                     PIU will designate two part time environmental and social specialists from the existing team. The Information and
                     Communication Technology (ICT) capacities of RGA are already considered very advanced, particularly with the rollout
                     of Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster (ISREC). This capacity will be further enhanced as technical staff are
                     become trained on geospatial information management. However digitalization generally pose multiple challenges
                     especially regarding proper management of social risks. The working team will engage in discussions with RGZ regarding
                     the necessary capacity building programs related to REMP 2 activities, including its preparation and execution phase.




                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                        Low
                     The project is not expected to have significant adverse environmental impacts, as it will mostly support desk based



Public Disclosure
                     work, i.e. software development (e.g., development of mass valuation system for residential properties; digital
                     transformation of the Republic Geodetic Authority (RGA); improvement of cybersecurity, data and systems protection
                     and recovery, etc.).. It was confirmed that the initially planned activity related to drone purchase and usage has been
                     dropped. The only potential indirect adverse environmental risk and impacts might arise from IT infrastructure
                     upgrades (including the supply of hardware, servers, block storage, etc.). These issues can be effectively mitigated by
                     aligning with the national regulatory framework and incorporating provisions under the ESCP for: (i) energy efficiency
                     (EE) standards for hardware appliances and (ii) the management of electrical and electronic equipment waste (e-
                     waste). Although not confirmed, there may be a possibility for a small-scale retrofitting works (e.g., for the server
                     room) that could be linked to the hardware installation. Any identified environmental risks and impacts (e.g., dust,
                     noise, waste, OHS) and mitigation measures will be addressed in the ESMPs checklist to be prepared prior to the
                     commencement of works. On the other hand, the project will bring some positive environmental and climate change
                     impacts as the activities under Component B (Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development)
                     will track urbanization and urban sprawl trends, which strain infrastructure and deplete carbon sinks. Public agencies
                     will utilize information from the advanced GeoSrbija National Geoportal (which enables interoperability and data
                     sharing among various agencies) for disaster simulations, land use planning, and climate-smart decision-making.
                     Overall, the adverse environmental risks and impacts associated with this project are anticipated to be minimal or
                     negligible in scope. Consequently, the environmental risk rating is assessed as low.
                                                                                                                                    Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Social risk is moderate as the Project involves moderate magnitude, yet large spatial extent impacts. However, it
                     doesn't involve significant, unpredictable, or irreversible risks. o . Continuous monitoring and adaptation may be


                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     necessary to address emerging challenges. On the potential risks with regard to the relationship between -Mass
                     Valuation and Tax System Fairness: The intention of the mass valuation (MV) is to create a fairer tax system. However,
                     a key concern is how the project will ensure fairness in the MV process, particularly for vulnerable groups. To address
                     this aspect RGA will follow international best practices and standards, such are those established by the International
                     Association of Assessing Officers and will adhere to International Valuation Standards and EU Valuation Standards.
                     These standards, adopted by Serbia, include ethical guidelines and professional codes of conduct that are binding for
                     all evaluators involved in mass valuation and will guide system development. Another risk relates to transparency and
                     accuracy in the MV system.: The project could unintentionally lead to downstream risks associated with land disputes
                     due to insufficient transparency and accuracy in the MV system. To prevent this, the project will establish clear
                     processes to ensure that all parties understand the steps involved and the basis for valuation decisions, namely
                     accurate data collection, stakeholder engagement, and a functioning grievance mechanism. The RGA will not carry
                     out formal registration of informal properties but will record them in their system, thus allowing for a better
                     understanding of irregularities and illegalities without formalizing ownership -- which could escalate disputes.
                     However, in doing so, the RGA will consider the broader legal framework governing land tenure and property rights to
                     ensure that the recording of informal properties is consistent with national laws and policies. This will help the GoS
                     understand irregularities and illegalities. In addition to measures prescribed in the SEP, the RGA will collaborate with
                     local governments and NGO's, to ensure that the recording of informal properties is conducted in a manner that is
                     respectful of the rights and needs of the occupants. To prevent any potential misunderstandings of the local
                     population the project will use transparent and standardized valuation methodologies that are clearly documented
                     and widely understood. Information about the valuation process will be accessible to the public, and mechanisms for
                     addressing grievances will be established. The SEP includes measures for stakeholder engagement and citizen




Public Disclosure
                     engagement, with a focus on reaching vulnerable groups through tailored strategies. A social specialist will be
                     appointed to oversee and report on the SEP and grievance redress mechanism (GRM) implementation. To address
                     potential digital divide in accessing digital services, the Project will draw upon international guidelines and successful
                     practices from previous REMP in providing support and adapting the system to accommodate the needs of diverse
                     vulnerable groups. Recognized risks can be mitigated through the implementation of standard measures based on
                     existing legal frameworks, international guidelines for mass valuation, and the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
                     The SEP will serve as the primary instrument for guiding the client in addressing potential risks related to equal access
                     to services, ensuring transparency of all project activities, and fostering meaningful engagement with project-affected
                     parties and other interested stakeholders.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The Project will not support activities with a physical footprint, so there are no identified direct environmental
                      impacts. The only potential indirect adverse environmental risk and impacts might arise from IT infrastructure
                      upgrades (including the supply of hardware, servers, block storage, etc.). These issues can be effectively mitigated by
                      aligning with the national regulatory framework and incorporated provisions under the ESCP for: (i) energy efficiency
                      (EE) standards for hardware appliances and (ii) the management of electrical and electronic equipment waste (e-
                      waste). The risks associated with the property valuation process, procurement of hardware and drones can be to a


                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                      certain extent mitigated by aligning with the national regulatory framework. Nonetheless, considering the potential
                      shortcomings in the implementation and adherence to national regulations, the ESCP has been prepared and
                      incorporate relevant requirements on energy efficiency, permitting, property valuation process and its transparency,
                      GRM and stakeholder engagement and labor conditions. The SEP has been prepared by Borrower to accommodate
                      the needs and circumstances of different stakeholders, paying special attention to identified disadvantaged or
                      vulnerable individuals or groups. Information pertaining to the valuation process will be easily accessible to the
                      public, potentially through official websites, including details such as valuation criteria and assessment results.
                      Mechanisms for addressing grievances and resolving misinformation during mass valuation will be established, with
                      all procedures outlined in SEP. Dedicated social specialist from existing staff will be assigned to oversee and report on
                      SEP and GRM implementation. To prevent any potential risks associated with further digitalization of property
                      information, the Project will leverage on, SEP, GIIP and best practices from the previous REMP. This includes
                      collecting data on digital access and usage, supporting diverse age groups, and ensuring accessibility for individuals
                      with disabilities.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant because transparent information disclosure and stakeholder engagement are crucial to prevent and
                      manage potential risks, particularly in the context of mass property valuation and the digital modernization of
                      Cadaster services. The lack of information can be considered a social risk, leading to misunderstandings, mistrust, and
                      inadequate engagement among affected parties, potentially resulting in disputes or conflicts. The draft SEP has been
                      prepared by the Borrower. This instrument offers guidelines to ensure that information regarding the valuation
                      process is transparent, clearly documented, and easily accessible to the public through various communication



Public Disclosure
                      channels. It will include details such as valuation criteria and assessment results. Additionally, mechanisms for
                      addressing grievances and resolving misinformation during mass valuation have been outlined in the SEP. Due to the
                      potential risk of insufficient inclusion of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups in project activities, the SEP prioritizes
                      reaching out to these groups and developing tailored strategies to effectively address their unique needs and
                      challenges within this context. The project will cover the entire territory of Serbia, and key stakeholders will include
                      local governments, land authorities, and civil society organizations representing various demographic groups such as
                      women, single parents, ethnic minorities (including Roma), the elderly, persons with disabilities, migrants, and
                      LGBTQ+ population. Affected parties include also those with limited access to digital technologies living in
                      economically disadvantaged circumstances and any others individuals or groups whose privacy or property rights may
                      be affected by the project services. The project SEP considers any potential digital divide and establishes clear
                      communication channels and strategies to ensure that all property owners have the insight into valuation process,
                      access to Cadaster services and GRM. The feedback loop will be ensured through project GRM but also through
                      regular satisfaction surveys to be organized by RGA.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The Project will not cause digital technology driven job displacement. Project workers will include direct workers (PIU
                      staff), civil servants and consultants who will be hired following the Bank’s procurement guidelines. Government civil
                      servants working in connection with the project, whether full time or part time, will remain subject to the terms and
                      conditions of their existing public sector employment agreement or arrangement, unless there has been an effective
                      legal transfer of their employment or engagement to the project. National labor law is overall consistent with and
                      meets the requirement of the ESS2 relevant to the project. The labor issues be addressed through the Recipient’s


                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                      commitment to the ESCP as follows: The Project will be carried out in accordance with the applicable requirements of
                      ESS2, in a manner acceptable to the WB, including through, inter alia, implementing adequate occupational health
                      and safety measures (including emergency preparedness and response measures), ensuring appropriate working
                      condition; and setting out grievance arrangements for the Project workers, and incorporating labor requirements in
                      the procurement documents and contracts with TA contractors. The Recipient will prohibit child labor (any person
                      under the age of 18), forced labor and trafficked persons. The ESS2 monitoring obligations will be reflected in ESCP.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                           Relevant

                      Risks related to the procurement of some hardware components will be addressed and provisions are included into
                      the ESCP, and will form part of the POM, to ensure full compliance with national regulations, notably with provisions
                      of EE measures and e-waste, and with the World Bank Group (WBG) Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS)
                      Guideline (including relevant GIIPs stated in the document), as applicable.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                             Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not currently relevant. Financing of drones have been excluded from the project. The site surveys are
                      not expected to pose any health and safety risks for nearby communities. SEA/SH related risks are assessed as low
                      and measures to address these are covered in the ESCP. The platform's design will guarantee transparency, and
                      accurate property valuations to avoid conflicts, legal issues, or financial losses for property owners, and this
                      requirement will be further elaborated in POM.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                 Not Currently Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      This standard is not relevant.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                  Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is not relevant.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional             Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not currently relevant

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                       Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply


                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No
                       The Borrower Framework will not be used.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       The use common approach has not been envisaged.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     By Appraisal the borrower will prepare, SEP, and ESCP. Measures related to improved transparency, energy efficiency,
                     e-waste, as well as project GRM and main provisions on labor conditions will be outlined in the ESCP. To enhance
                     existing PIU capacity the ESCP will also outline the requirement to assign from the existing staff one part time social and
                     one part time environmental specialist.




Public Disclosure
                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:     Olivera Jordanovic                       Title:          Senior Land Administration Specialist

                      Email:                ojordanovic@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:          Caleb Travis Johnson                     Job Title:      Land Administration Specialist

                      Email:                cjohnson10@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                             Olivera Jordanovic, Caleb Travis Johnson

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                    Ivana Novakovic

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Olivera Kovacevic




Public Disclosure




                    Jan 07, 2025                                                                                 Page 10 of 10
