Public Disclosure Authorized




                                              Republic of Serbia




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         Republic Geodetic Authority

                                    Second Real Estate Management Project
                                                  (P500611)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                                              for
                               Real Estate Management Project – 2




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                             December 2023




                                                                            1
Table of Contents
List of Tables: ........................................................................................................................ 3
List of Abbreviations .............................................................................................................. 3
1.      Introduction ................................................................................................................... 4
     1.1.       Project Description ............................................................................................................4
     1.2.       National Legislation and ESS Requirements ........................................................................6
        1.2.1 National Legislation for Stakeholder Engagement ......................................................................................6
        1.2.2. International Legislation for Stakeholder Engagement Human rights .......................................................7
        1.2.3. World Bank Requirements .........................................................................................................................7

2.      Objective/Description of SEP .......................................................................................... 8
3.      Stakeholder engagement process ................................................................................... 8
     3.1. Stakeholder identification and analysis ....................................................................................8
     3.2.       Methodology .....................................................................................................................9
     3.3.       Affected parties and other interested parties .....................................................................9
     3.4.       Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups .............................................................. 10
4.      Stakeholder Engagement Program ............................................................................... 10
     4.1.       Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation ............................ 10
     4.2.  Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools, and techniques for stakeholder
     engagement................................................................................................................................. 11
     4.3.       Reporting back to stakeholders ........................................................................................ 17
5.      Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities .... 17
     5.1.       Resources ........................................................................................................................ 17
     5.2.       Management functions and responsibilities...................................................................... 18
6.      Grievance Mechanism .................................................................................................. 18
     6.1.       GRM on Project Level ....................................................................................................... 19
     6.2.       GRM on RGA Level ........................................................................................................... 19
     6.3.       World Bank Grievance Redress System ............................................................................. 20
     6.4.       Description of GM on Project Level ................................................................................... 20
     6.5.       Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) ............................................ 22
7.      Monitoring and Reporting ............................................................................................ 22
     7.1.       Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported ............................. 22
     7.2.       Reporting back to stakeholder groups .............................................................................. 23
        Endnotes ............................................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.




                                                                                                                                                               2
List of Tables:

Table 1 - Level of interest and impact for the stakeholder Groups for Project ......................... 11
Table 2 - An Overview of Stakeholder Programme .................................................................... 16
Table 3 – SEP budget breakdown ................................................................................................ 17
Table 4 – Grievance Mechanism Processes ................................................................................. 20



List of Abbreviations

E&S          Environmental and Social
ESCP         The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF          Environmental and Social Framework
ESF          World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework
ESSs         Environmental and Social Standards
GM           Grievance (redress) Mechanism
GRS          Grievance Redress Service
ISREC        RGA Cadastral information system
MASPRO       Information system for property mass valuation
M&E          Monitoring and evaluation
NALED        National Alliance for Local Development
NGO          Non-Governmental Organization
NSDI         National Geospatial Infrastructure
OIP          Other Involved Parties
PAPs         Project-affected persons
PIU          Project Implementation Unit
REMP         Real Estate Management Project
REMP2 Real Estate Management Project 2
REMPAF       Real Estate Management Project Additional Financing
RGA          Republic Geodetic Authority
SKGO         Standing Conference of Towns and Municipalities
WB           The World Bank




                                                                                                                                3
   1. Introduction
   1.1. Project Description
The Real Estate Management Project – 2 aims to improve the efficiency, transparency,
accessibility and reliability of Serbia’s real property management systems.

The Real Estate Management Project – (REMP 2) is continuation of already ongoing REMP 1
which has been implemented under WB safeguard policy. The REMP 2 comprises the following
components:
Component A: Implementation of the Property Mass Valuation System. This component will
finance the rollout of mass valuation models for residential properties for the majority of Serbia’s
population. The models will improve the efficiency and transparency of the property market by
providing guidance to market participants, valuers, and banks on the prices likely to be achieved
when properties are offered for sale. They will also be made available for municipalities to use
should they decide to adopt them for levying the annual property tax. Additionally, Component
A will finance the development of an information system for mass valuation that will be
interoperable with other key information systems maintained by RGA (i.e., the Building Register
and other systems as described in Component B), as well as the creation of a residential property
index that includes all types of residential property. Furthermore, a Building Register module will
be developed for integration with ISREC through the use of very high-resolution satellite imagery.
Support will also be provided for quality assurance and quality control for all data produced under
Component A.
Component B: Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development. This
component will finance the further digital transformation of RGA and the advancement of
Serbia’s NSDI in line with national and international best practice and standards. The component
will support (i) ISREC’s upgrade and the completion of national implementation; (ii) the
establishment of an infrastructure cadaster; (iii) the upgrade and further development of the
Digital Archive System; (iv) the implementation of a system for land consolidation; (v) a study for
the development of a 3D cadaster; (vi) further development of Serbia’s Risk Register; (vii)
development of mobile applications; (viii) improvement of data quality and completeness; (ix)
expansion of GeoSrbija via the development of additional data layers; and (x) integration of all
services under one distribution platform. The component’s NSDI activities will be implemented
based on the Action Plan and Business Models produced during REMP in line with the UN-
endorsed Integrated Geospatial Information Framework (IGIF). The development of new
applications and e-services to increase the usability and the benefits of Serbia’s NSDI will also
leverage new technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), as well as the supply of hardware
and other equipment and the hiring of consultants.
Component C: Institutional Improvement, RGA Sustainability, and Project Management. This
component will support continued policy dialogue at RGA concerning its adoption of, and
transition to, a self-financing institutional model to ensure the long-term sustainability of project
investments, particularly for those concerning the development and national implementation of
ISREC. Under REMP, several business models were developed for RGA’s consideration, and the

                                                                                                   4
component will provide technical advice to RGA as it considers the implications of a sustainable
transformation model for the existing legal framework overseeing RGA’s current operational
model, and whether any amendments to the legal framework would need to be made. Support
to the development of a roadmap for RGA’s institutional transition will also be provided as well
as its implementation. This includes the implementation of a Portfolio Management Plan
developed in 2024 in cooperation with the Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency (Sida) and the further implementation of several International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) standards to ensure RGA’s full compliance with international standards for
land administration and associated IT systems. The component will also support Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) operations and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) activities. It will also
finance capacity building programs and the implementation of public awareness campaigns and
customer satisfaction surveys. The PIU for REMP will be maintained for the implementation of
REMP 2, with adjustments to staffing as needed. Specialized training will also be organized under
this component for RGA management and technical staff, as well as other NSDI stakeholders
including government institutions, local authorities, and other relevant entities. Similarly, the
capacity building programs will be designed and implemented for real estate registration and
valuation institutions, including RGA, municipal authorities and Serbia’s Tax Administration.

The environmental risk of the project is assessed as low, while the social risk is moderate.
Moderate risk rate for social aspect of the project is primarily driven by potential privacy and
data security concerns and digital divide arising from the introduction of E-Gov to real estate
information.
The platform for property valuation will manage sensitive data pertaining to properties and their
owners, thereby raising concerns regarding privacy and cybersecurity. However, robust data
privacy and security measures will be incorporated into the project design in compliance with
national regulations and industry best practices.

To prevent potential didgital divide concerns , the project will adopt best practices from the
previous REMP. This includes; i) implementing comprehensive data collection on digital access
and use, ii) providing support adapted to different age groups and iii) ensuring accessibility for
people with disabilities. In this context, the SEP will serve as an instrument for ongoing
communication and engagement of all interested or affected parties, thus preventing potential
concerns. The SEP will be conducted throughout the duration of the project to ensure
transparency and encourage active stakeholder engagement.

The Real Estate Management Project – 2is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment
and Social Framework (ESF). Per Environmental and Social Standard ESS10 on Stakeholder
Engagement and Information Disclosure, the implementing agencies should provide
stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible information, and consult with
them in a culturally appropriate manner, which is free of manipulation, interference, coercion,
discrimination, or intimidation.




                                                                                                 5
   1.2. National Legislation and ESS Requirements

The national legislation and World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) requirements that
apply to stakeholder engagement shall be reviewed in this section.

       1.2.1 National Legislation for Stakeholder Engagement
The commitments and requirements of the of Serbia to citizen engagement are not residing under a single
self-standing law or regulation. However, the recognition of importance of citizen engagement is infused
in the legal system and clearly recognized by mandatory procedures provided under individual laws.

Some of the key laws governing the stakeholder and citizen engagement activities include but are not
limited to:
   •   The Constitution of the Republic of Serbia (2006) proclaims the rule of law and social
       justice, principles of civil democracy, human and minority rights and freedoms, and
       commitment to European principles and values. The Article 74 proclaims the right to
       healthy environment and grants the right to timely and comprehensive information on
       the state of the environment.
   •   The Law on free access to information of public interest (2004) states that governmental
       agencies, social associations and officials are required to provide each person with the
       possibility of receiving and becoming acquainted with documents of public interest,
       except in cases anticipated by law. The Law shall govern the rights of access to
       information of public importance held by public authorities, with a view to exercising and
       protecting the public interest to know and attaining a free democratic order and an open
       society. By virtue of this Law access to information shall be granted to all stakeholders,
       including every natural person or legal entity upon written request unless otherwise
       regulated by the Law. Within 15 days of receipt of a request at the latest, the authority
       shall inform the applicant whether the requested information is held, and grant him/her
       access to the document containing the requested information or issue or send to the
       applicant a copy of the document, as the case may be.
   •   Law on Public Information and Media (2014) stipulates that public information is free and
       is not subject to censorship, that the public has the right and the interest to be informed
       on issues of public interest, that monopoly in the media is not allowed, that information
       on the media is public.
   •   The Law on Environmental Impact Assessment (2004 as amended in 2009) provides
       categorization of industries and projects and identifies types of environmental
       assessment required against respective categories of industries or projects and provides
       procedures for disclosure, presentation and consultation requirements, and sets these as
       mandatory with a disclosure of a minimum of 20 days.
   •   The Republic of Serbia ratified the Aarhus Convention on Access to information, public
       participation in decision making and access to justice in environmental matters and it links
       environmental and human rights and is based on the belief that it is a basic right of
       present and future generations to live in an environment adequate to health and
       wellbeing. The convention is focused on achieving this through the implementation of


                                                                                                      6
        three pillars: rights of access to information, access to decision-making, and access to
        justice.
    •   Planning and Building Act (2009 as amended in 2020) proclaims two types of engagement
        and disclosure instruments for all spatial and urban plans. Early public insight and Public
        Insight are mechanisms through which interested stakeholders may acquire information
        on the basic concept and the proposition of the planning document. Documents are made
        available to the public during a disclosure window of 15-30 days followed by public
        consultations.

        1.2.2. International Legislation for Stakeholder Engagement Human rights

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a declaration that defines and guarantees the fundamental
rights and freedoms of women, men, and children. The Declaration also provides general definitions of
economic, social, and cultural rights, as well as civil and political rights. Article 1 of the Declaration states
that "All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and
conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood." and all articles address the
fundamental, cultural, economic, political, and social rights of people all over the world. The Declaration,
together with the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols, constitute International Human Rights
Law.

        1.2.3. World Bank Requirements

Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) 10 of the WB's Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)
recognizes 'the importance of open and transparent engagement between the borrower and project
stakeholders as an essential element of good international practice'. The general requirements set by the
ESS are summarized below:

    •   "Borrowers shall engage with stakeholders throughout the project life cycle by initiating
        engagement as early as possible in the project development process and within a timeframe that
        allows for meaningful consultation with stakeholders on project design. The nature, scope and
        frequency of stakeholder engagement shall be proportionate to the nature and scale of the
        project and its potential risks and impacts."
    •   "The borrowers shall engage in meaningful consultations with all stakeholders. The Borrowers
        shall provide stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable and accessible information and
        consult with them in a culturally appropriate manner, free from manipulation, interference,
        coercion, discrimination and intimidation."
    •   "The stakeholder engagement process shall, as set out in more detail in this ESS, include the
        following: (i) stakeholder identification and analysis; (ii) planning how engagement with
        stakeholders shall take place; (iii) disclosure of information; (iv) consultation with stakeholders;
        (v) handling and responding to grievances; and (vi) reporting to stakeholders."
    •   "As part of the environmental and social assessment, the borrower shall maintain and disclose a
        documented record of stakeholder engagement, including a description of stakeholders
        consulted, a summary of feedback received, and a brief explanation of how the feedback was
        taken into account or why it was not (World Bank, 2017: 98)".



                                                                                                               7
According to ESS10, the Borrower should propose and implement a grievance redress mechanism (GRM)
to receive and resolve in a timely manner the concerns and grievances of project affected parties
regarding the environmental and social performance of the project. The scope, scale and type of the GRM
shall be proportionate to the nature and scale of the potential risks and impacts of the project.


   2. Objective/Description of SEP

The main goal of this Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is to establish a structured approach
for involving stakeholders in the project. This involves sharing information with the public,
seeking their input, and ensuring their concerns are addressed. The SEP lays out how the project
team will communicate with stakeholders and provides a platform for them to express their
opinions, give feedback, or voice any complaints related to the project. By creating this plan as
part of the World Bank Environment and Social Framework commitments, the project aims to
engage relevant stakeholders effectively throughout the project lifecycle, ensuring their
feedback, suggestions, and priorities are considered in decision-making and project activities. In
particular SEP willcontribute to the achievement of the following objectives:
(i) Establishing a structured approach to stakeholder engagement,
(ii) Assessing stakeholder interest, impact, and support for the project, and ensuring that
stakeholder perspectives are integrated into project design and environmental and social
performance considerations.
(iii) Facilitating timely dissemination of technically and culturally appropriate project information
regarding environmental and social risks in a comprehensible and accessible format.
(iv) Coordinating tailored communication, outreach, and engagement initiatives to identify
disadvantaged and vulnerable individuals or groups, thereby ensuring their involvement in the
project.
(v) Establishing an accessible and inclusive mechanism for the communication of suggestions and
grievances to project-affected persons (PAPs) and enabling implementing agencies to promptly
address and manage them.

   3. Stakeholder engagement process

   3.1. Stakeholder identification and analysis


The process of stakeholder identification is crucial in effectively managing stakeholder
engagement in a project, aiming to prevent any single stakeholder group from dominating the
consultation process. It should commence early in the project life cycle, considering the dynamics
between stakeholders and the associated risks and opportunities. In ESS 10, stakeholders are
categorized into three groups:
    • Project Affected Parties: These are individuals or groups directly impacted or likely to be
       impacted by the project, encompassing factors such as physical surroundings, health,
       safety, cultural practices, well-being, or income sources.
    • Other Relevant Parties (ORP): This group includes individuals or groups associated with
       the project due to public interest or factors such as location, characteristics, and impacts.
                                                                                                     8
        Examples include legislators, government officials, private sector entities, scientific
        community, academics, trade unions, women's organizations, NGOs, and cultural groups.
    • Vulnerable/Disadvantaged Persons/Groups: This category consists of individuals or
        groups facing special circumstances that increase their susceptibility to adverse project
        impacts or limit their ability to benefit from the project. They may require special
        measures or assistance for inclusion in the consultation process.
The frequency and engagement methods for each stakeholder group are determined based on
the extent of the project's impact on them, their impact on the project, and culturally acceptable
participation methods. Generally, deeper engagement is warranted for stakeholder groups with
greater impact or interest in the project.
Furthermore, citizens currently utilizing unregistered buildings or residences within the project
scope are not directly or indirectly affected by the project initially. However, they may be
influenced by actions taken by central and local governments based on project outputs.

   3.2. Methodology
In order to meet best practice approaches, the project will apply the following principles for
stakeholder engagement:
• Openness and life-cycle approach:Public consultations for the project(s) will be arranged during
  the whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference,
  coercion, or intimidation.
• Informed participation and feedback:Information will be provided to and widely distributed
  among all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for
  communicating stakeholder feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and
  concerns
• Inclusiveness and sensitivity:Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
  communications and build effective relationships. The participation process for the projects is
  inclusive. All stakeholders at all times are encouraged to be involved in the consultation
  process. Equal access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to stakeholders’
  needs is the key principle underlying the selection of engagement methods. Special attention
  is given to vulnerable groups that may be at risk of being left out of project benefits, particularly
  women, the elderly, persons with disabilities, displaced persons, and migrant workers and
  communities, and the cultural sensitivities of diverse ethnic groups.

   3.3. Affected parties and other interested parties1
Affected parties include local communities, community members, and other parties that may be
subject to direct impacts from the Project. Specifically, the following individuals and groups fall
within this category:
    • Real estate owners-Citizens,
    • Real estate owners- Public and Private Institutions and Organizations,
    • Financial Institutions (Banks, Insurance companies and their associations),
    • Real estate agencies
    • Licensed Surveying and Cadastral Engineers
    • Courts, Notaries and Lawyers owing to project outputs,
                                                                                                     9
   •   Administration of Cities and Municipalities
   •   Communal companies
   •   Government of Republic of Serbia (Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Construction, Ministry
       of Labor, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Environment, and other ministries to the lesser
       extent)

The projects’ stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected communities, who
may be interested in project outcome including:
   • NGOs that are supporting local development (SKGO and NALED)
   • NGOs that are protecting economic and legal interest of the population and economy in
       the area related to immovable property ownership.
   • Public Institutions and Organizations that are involved in NSDI,
   • Investors and Investment brokers
   • Architecture offices and urban planners
   • UN agencies (UNDP, WFO, UN Women)
   • Coordination body for Gender Equality
   • Office for information technologies and eGovernment

   3.4. Disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals or groups2
Of particular importance is to understand whether adverse project impacts may
disproportionately fall on disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups, or they are likely to
be excluded/unable to access Project benefits. Although the project mainly focuses on increase
of efficiency and support to professional users of the information vulnerable individuals or groups
could indirectly receive benefits if project outputs are designed to promote adequate response
of direct beneficiaries. Stakeholders that represent indirect beneficiaries e.g. vulnerable groups
and individuals include:
    • People with disabilities
    • People receiving (or in need but not receiving) social support;
    • People that live in remote technologically and economically deprived areas;
    • Nonintegrated Roma people;
    • Women living in extreme patriarchal environment;
    • Single-headed households;
    • Displaced people occupying others property (migrants, squatters, other displaced people)
    • People digitally excluded or at risk from digital exclusion (mostly elderly people);

   4. Stakeholder Engagement Program

       4.1. Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation


During project preparation, meetings with World Bank staff and consultants were made in order
to establish relevance of the project to population and national economy. During the same period
separate meetings with purpose to better define project activities and their impact were held

                                                                                                10
with banks, insurance companies, Office for information technologies and eGovernment, Real
estate agencies.

        4.2. Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools, and techniques for
             stakeholder engagement

Engagement will be directly proportional to the level of interest and impact, and the greater the
scope of a project's impact on a stakeholder group, or the greater the scope of a particular
stakeholder's impact on a project increment, the greater the need to engage with that
stakeholder group. Engagement with such stakeholder groups should be deepened in terms of
the frequency and intensity of the engagement method used. In the table below key project
activities are scrutinised for the level of interest and expected impact on the stakeholder
groupsidentified in the chapter 3 of this document.

Table 1 - Level of interest and impact for the stakeholder Groups for Project

                                                                                       Level of   Level of
Components               Stakeholder Category       Stakeholders
                                                                                       Interest   Impact
                                                   Real estate owners-Citizens,
                                                   Real estate owners- Public and
                                                   Private Institutions and
                                                   Organizations, Financial Institutions
                                                   (Banks, Insurance companies and
                          Project-Affected Parties their associations), Real estate      High     High
                                                   agencies
Component A:                                       Administration of Cities and
Implementation of the                              Municipalities Government of
Property Mass Valuation                            Republic of Serbia (Ministry of
System                                             Finance)
                                                   NGOs that are supporting local
Expected topics:                                   development (SKGO and NALED)
 -   Integration of                                NGOs that are protecting economic
     Business Register in                          and legal interest of the population
     the system, Creation                          and economy in the area related to
     of TAX related                                immovable property ownership.
     services and their   Other Involved Parties   Public Institutions and Organizations Moderate Low
     implementation                                that are involved in NSDI, Investors
 -   Creation of TAX                               and Investment brokers, Architecture
     related services                              offices and urban planners, UN
                                                   agencies (UNDP, WFO, UN Women),
                                                   NGOs that are supporting vulnerable
                                                   groups
                                                   People with disabilities, People
                                                   receiving social support, People that
                                                   live in remote technologically and
                          Vulnerable/Disadvantaged
                                                   economically deprived areas; Non- Moderate High
                          Persons/Groups
                                                   integrated Roma people; People
                                                   digitally excluded or at risk from
                                                   digital exclusion, single-household

                                                                                                         11
                                                      owners, migrants, squatters and
                                                      other displaced people, Women
                                                      living in extreme patriarchal
                                                      environment;
                                                      Real estate owners-Citizens,
                                                      Real estate owners- Public and
                                                      Private Institutions and
                                                      Organizations, Financial Institutions
                                                      (Banks, Insurance companies and
                                                      their associations),
                                                      Real estate agencies, Licensed
                                                      Surveying and Cadastral Engineers
                                                      Courts, Notaries and Lawyers owing
                             Project-Affected Parties                                       Moderate Moderate
                                                      to project outputs,
                                                      Administration of Cities and
                                                      Municipalities, Communal companies
                                                      Government of Republic of Serbia
                                                      (Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
                                                      Construction, Ministry of Labour,
                                                      Ministry of Justice, Ministry of
                                                      Environment, and other ministries to
Component B: Integration                              the lesser extent)
of Information Systems
                                                      NGOs that are supporting local
and the NSDI Services
                                                      development (SKGO and NALED);
Development
                                                      NGOs that are protecting economic
                                                      and legal interest of the population
Expected topics:
                                                      and economy in the area related to
-    Accessibility to the e-
                                                      immovable property ownership;
     services
                             Other Involved Parties   Public Institutions and Organizations Moderate Moderate
-    Service relevance
                                                      that are involved in NSDI; Investors
                                                      and Investment brokers; Architecture
                                                      offices and urban planners; UN
                                                      agencies (UNDP, WFO, UN Women),
                                                      NGOs that are supporting vulnerable
                                                      groups)
                                                      People with disabilities, People
                                                      receiving social support, People that
                                                      live in remote technologically and
                                                      economically deprived areas; Non-
                                                      integrated Roma people; People
                             Vulnerable/Disadvantaged
                                                      digitally excluded or at risk from    Low      Moderate
                             Persons/Groups
                                                      digital exclusion, single-household
                                                      owners, migrants, squatters and
                                                      other displaced people, Women
                                                      living in extreme patriarchal
                                                      environment;
                                                      Real estate owners-Citizens,
Component B: Integration                              Real estate owners- Public and
                             Project-Affected Parties                                       Moderate Moderate
of Information Systems                                Private Institutions and
                                                      Organizations, Financial Institutions



                                                                                                          12
and the NSDI Services                                (Banks, Insurance companies and
Development                                          their associations),
                                                     Real estate agencies, Licensed
Expected topics:                                     Surveying and Cadastral Engineers
- Implementation of the                              Courts, Notaries and Lawyers owing
developed information                                to project outputs,
system (ISREC)                                       Administration of Cities and
- Impact of the land                                 Municipalities, Communal companies
consolidation system                                 Government of Republic of Serbia
improvements                                         (Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
                                                     Construction, Ministry of Labour,
                                                     Ministry of Justice, Ministry of
                                                     Environment, Ministry of Agriculture)
                                                     NGOs that are supporting local
                                                     development (SKGO and NALED)
                            Other Involved Parties   Public Institutions, Investors and    Moderate Moderate
                                                     Investment brokers, NGOs that are
                                                     supporting vulnerable groups
                                                     People with disabilities, People
                                                     receiving social support, People that
                                                     live in remote technologically and
                                                     economically deprived areas; Non-
                                                     integrated Roma people; People
                            Vulnerable/Disadvantaged
                                                     digitally excluded or at risk from    Moderate Moderate
                            Persons/Groups
                                                     digital exclusion, single-household
                                                     owners, migrants, squatters and
                                                     other displaced people, Women
                                                     living in extreme patriarchal
                                                     environment;
                                                     Real estate owners-Citizens,
                                                     Real estate owners- Public and
                                                     Private Institutions and
                                                     Organizations, Financial Institutions
Component C:                                         (Banks, Insurance companies and
                            Project-Affected Parties                                       High     High
Institutional                                        their associations),
Improvement, RGA                                     Real estate agencies, Administration
Sustainability, and Project                          of Cities and Municipalities,
Management                                           Government of Republic of Serbia
                                                     (Ministry of Finance)
Expected topics:                                     NGOs that are supporting local
- How RGA can improve                                development (SKGO and NALED)
service delivery to better                           NGOs that are protecting economic
serve professional users                             and legal interest of the population
and citizens (with                                   and economy in the area related to
emphasis on reducing        Other Involved Parties   immovable property ownership,         Moderate Moderate
inequality)                                          Public Institutions and Organizations
                                                     that are involved in NSDI, Investors
                                                     and Investment brokers, Architecture
                                                     offices and urban planners, UN
                                                     agencies (UNDP, WFO, UN Women),



                                                                                                         13
                                                NGOs that are supporting vulnerable
                                                groups)
                                                People with disabilities, People
                                                receiving social support, People that
                                                live in remote technologically and
                                                economically deprived areas; Non-
                                                integrated Roma people; People
                       Vulnerable/Disadvantaged
                                                digitally excluded or at risk from    Low   Low
                       Persons/Groups
                                                digital exclusion, single-household
                                                owners, migrants, squatters and
                                                other displaced people, Women
                                                living in extreme patriarchal
                                                environment;

Some of the stakeholder engagement methods to be used during the implementation phase of
the project, which aim to ensure that project stakeholders maintain their engagement with the
project and increase the positive social impact of the project, are described below.

Since situation regarding Covid-19, it became obvious that large scale face-to-face meetings
could be more efficiently organised via online meetings. During the online meetings, participants
shall be given the opportunity to share their opinions/problems and ask questions. Following the
meetings, presentations and any other material used during the meeting shall be shared on the
official website of the Project.

Depending on the PIU and RGA shall organize online meetings to engage and inform
stakeholders. If epidemiological situation allows a face-to-face meetings with stakeholders could
be organised especially if the important consultation meetings are needed.

• Official Meetings: Official meetings shall consist of internal meetings to be held within RGA and
meetings with different governmental institutions, relevant NGOs, and organizations that will
participate in the preparation and implementation phases of the project. Most of these meetings
shall be conducted through digital platforms.

• Opening and Closing Meetings: Multi-stakeholder meetings shall be organized at both the
beginning and end of the project lifecycle to announce and disseminate project activities and
results. In order to engage more people and make meetings more efficient meetings could be
held on digital platforms.

• Disclosure Meetings: Disclosure meetings shall be organized to share with stakeholders the ESF
documents developed for the Project (SEP, Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
and other relevant implementation documents). Most of these meetings shall be conducted via
digital platforms. Announcements of these meetings shall be made via emails, official websites
of the relevant government authorities, social media, and newspapers. Feedback on shared
documents shall be collected through official correspondence, online feedback forms and email
to enhance the effectiveness of the digital meetings. RGA documents shall be prepared


                                                                                                  14
specifically for the project and updated accordingly if there are any changes in the project or sub-
projects.

• Consultation Meetings: Consultation meetings shall be organized to inform project
stakeholders about the scope and timeline of sub-project activities. These meetings shall be
organized in coordination with RGA. Consultation meetings with most affected stakeholders
should include representatives of Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs) for individuals with
disabilities or any other stakeholders identified for the duration of the Project. In addition, the
meetings shall be carried out to inform building residents, local population (including vulnerable
individuals), representatives of the local administration, etc. Minutes ofthe meeting and a list of
participants shall be recorded.

• Digital Communication Tools: RGAand Project website, social media accounts, national/local
television channels and radio stations shall be used to inform stakeholders about important
developments related to the Project. Press releases shall also be shared with the press.

• Grievance Redress Mechanism: According to the World Bank's ESS10 requirements, an
appropriate grievance redress mechanism (GM) shall be established and implemented for the
Project. Chapter 6 of this document describes the mechanism in detail. In order for this
mechanism to function properly and in a timely manner, a GM contact person shall be assigned
as part of the project team to manage the whole process. This contact person shall also be
responsible for reporting on the grievance redressing process of the project for monitoring
purposes. He/she shall also be responsible for coordinating the grievance mechanism, ensuring
its smooth functioning within the project and providing channels for project stakeholders to
provide feedback and/or raise concerns regarding project activities.

All information on the project shall be made available on the websites of the Project and WB and
through RGA social media accounts that will serve as a media tool/channel for communication
with stakeholders. Within the scope of the project, brochures, booklets and/or posters to inform
stakeholders about project activities shall be prepared.

The PIU shall be responsible for the sharing, delivery and announcement of project/sub-project
documents, communication materials, and GM.

Dynamics of the stakeholder engagement and utilisation of proposed tools is provided in the
table below.




                                                                                                 15
Table 2 - An Overview of Stakeholder Programme

               Subject of
                                 List of                                                                 Respo-
  Project     Consultation
                            information to        Method used         Target Stakeholder Frequency nsible
   stage      /Message to
                              be disclosed                                                                party
              be delivered
            • Informing
            stakeholders
            about the
            scope and the
            needs of the
                                           • Opening meeting
            project
                                           • Public announcements
            • Consulting
                                           • Non-technical project
            stakeholders
                                           abstracts/presentations • Project-Affected
            on the
                            • Project      • Electronic publications Parties
            following                                                                   Before the start
                            concept, E&S • Social media
            matters                                                                     of component
                            principles and • Printed media           • Other Involved
            • project                                                                   activities
                            obligations    • Consultation meetings Parties
Preparation design,                                                                                      • PIU
                                           (online/face-to-face)
            •                                                                           For the
                            • ESF           • Digital communication •
            environmental                                                               duration of the
                            documents      tools                     Disadvantaged/Vul
            and social                                                                  project
                            (ESCP, SEP)    • Grievance Redress       nerableGroups/
            risksand
                                           Mechanism                 Individuals
            impacts,
                                           • Posters, brochures,
            •
                                           leaflets, etc.
            recommended
                                           • SMS
            mitigation
            measures,
            • GRMs
            • Requesting
            feedback
                                           • Public announcements
            • Informing                    • Non-technical project
            stakeholders                   abstracts/presentations • Project-Affected
            on the scope of • SEPs         • Electronic publications Parties
            the project and                • Social media                               Before the
            ongoing         • GRM          • Printed media                              start of the
                                                                     • Other Involved
Implement activities        procedure      • Consultation meetings                      project
                                                                     Parties
ation &     • ESF                          (online/face-to-face) •                      implementation • PIU
Structure documents         •              Digital communication                        and as needed
            (ESMF, ESMPs, Regularupdates tools                       •                  for the duration • RGA
            SEPs, etc.)                    • Grievance    Redress    Disadvantaged/Vul of the project
                            on project
            • GRMs                                                   nerableGroups/
                            development Mechanism
            • Requesting                   • Posters, brochures,     Individuals
            feedback                       leaflets, etc.
                                           • SMS
                                           • Closing meeting
                            • Project      • Consultation meetings • Project-Affected After the
            • GRMs
                            outputs        • Informative meetings Parties               project
Operation • Receiving                                                                                    • PIU
                            •Grievance     • Digital Communication • Other Involved     activities are
            feedback
                            redressal      Tools/Social media •      Parties            completed
                                           Posters, brochures,

                                                                                                            16
                                         leaflets, etc.             •Disadvantaged/Vul
                                         • SMS                      nerableGroups/
                                                                    Individuals



        4.3. Reporting back to stakeholders
Stakeholders will be kept informed as the project develops, including reporting on project environmental
and social performance and implementation and possible revisions of the stakeholder engagement plan
and Grievance Mechanism, and on the project’s overall implementation progress.Flow of the information
in will be in accordance with the Chapter 7 Monitoring and reporting.

To close the feedback loop the Project has adopted and incorporated into the project activities perception
surveys. These will provide the Project with actionable information gap and will enhance the data
informed decision-making. The perceptions survey will be take a community-based protection approach
identifying challenges and solutions. To effectively manage stakeholder relationships and expected
outcomes of Project activities both positive and negative feedback will be taken into account.

Comments and feedback received from participants received in any form shall be taken into account
during the design and implementation of project activities. In the case that stakeholders made direct
influence on the project activities, special section will be created in the Project yearly report.


5. Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities

        5.1. Resources
The PIUwill be in charge of stakeholder engagement activities.

The budget for the SEP is 129,200€ and is included in component Cof the project.

Table 3 – SEP budget breakdown

                                                          Unit                 Total
Budget Category                         Quantity          Costs    Times       Costs          Remarks

1. Estimated staff salaries* and related expenses
                                                                                       Included into M&E
                                                                                        consultant salary.
1a. Portion of the M&E consultant       2 days per
                                                          180€    60 months 21,600€ + 2 part time employees
salary                                    month
                                                                                    from RGA – salaries not
                                                                                            included
2. Events
                                                                                           included into the
2a. organization of focus groups              1           1500€       3       4,500€
                                                                                         communication budget
3. Communication campaigns


                                                                                                        17
                                                                                 included into the
3a. posters, flyers                       1        500€      10      5,000€
                                                                               communication budget
                                          10
                                                                                 included into the
3b. social media campaign                Post      250€      10      2,500€
                                                                               communication budget
                                        boosts
4. Trainings
4a. training onsocial/environmental                                              included into the
                                          1        300€      2        600€
issues for PIU and RGA staff                                                   communication budget
5. Beneficiary surveys
5a. beginning perception survey           1       30,000€    1       30,000€
5b. mid-project perception survey         1       30,000€    1       30,000€
5c. end-of-project perception survey      1       30,000€    1       30,000€
6. Grievance Mechanism
                                                                                 included into the
6c. GM communication materials            1        500€      10      5,000€
                                                                               communication budget
TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:                                129,200€
Note:*Salary costs can be indicative.

        5.2. Management functions and responsibilities
The entities responsible for carrying out stakeholder engagement activities are PIU and RGA
Sector for Development and Innovation (Communication department). Stakeholder engagement
activities will be carried by the team organized for that purpose. For administrative and
organizational purposes PIU will delegate portion of the M&E consultant time. RGA will delegate
one member of the Communication department and the employee nominated by the RGA
Director for Gender equality issues.

The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented twice per year as a part of the project
Monitoring & Еvaluation reports. The stakeholder activities section report will be supported
trough: minutes of the meeting from relevant events, list of communication activities, list of
relevant trainings and when applicable findings from the focus groups and surveys as described
chapter 7 Monitoring & Reporting.

6. Grievance Mechanism

Grievance Mechanism (GM) is a mechanism that provides channels for stakeholders to provide
feedback and raise grievances about project activities and ensures that issues affecting the
project are identified and resolved. By increasing transparency and accountability, GM aims to
reduce the risk of project impact on citizens/beneficiaries and acts as an important feedback and
learning mechanism to improve project impact.



                                                                                              18
The project shall be managed by the PIU, like the Real estate Management Project Additional
Financing (REMPAF) currently financed by the World Bank. The Project shall use the same
communication channels and grievance mechanism as the REMPAF, ensuring transparency and
accountability and meeting the requirements of ESS-10 and WB ESF. GM shall also serve the
project staff, including the PIU.

       6.1. GRM on Project Level

REMPAF has a website where all relevant information for the Project is shared for consultation
and information. In addition, REMPAF is able to collect project-specific concerns and grievances
through this website and an e-mail address. Within the scope of the GM REMPAF grievance
submission form will be improved to allow anonymity.Following improvements. stakeholders
shall be provided with the right to make suggestions and share grievances anonymously in
accordance with the principle of confidentiality. Information on the communication channels of
the Project is given below:

Website:to be redesigned – address will be provided at the beginning of implementation

Mail address: address will be provided at the beginning of implementation.

Grievance form: to be redesigned – address will be provided at the beginning of implementation.

Tel: 0700 500 500

The GM shall be accessible to a wide range of project stakeholders who are likely to be directly
or indirectly affected by the project. The GM to be established in this project can be used to
communicate grievances, feedback, questions, suggestions or satisfaction with the overall
management and implementation of the project, as well as issues related to the sub- projects
funded and supported by the project.

       6.2. GRM on RGA Level

Republic Geodetic Authority (RGA) as a key implementing agency for the REMP2 and supervisor
of the PIU work, has its own communication center, which also addresses land registry and
cadastre activities. Applicants can submit their requests (suggestions, grievances, satisfaction,
information requests or notifications and questions related to environment, urban planning, land
registry, cadaster and housing). Communication channels are provided below.

Website: https://www.rgz.gov.rs/

Contact
form:https://www.rgz.gov.rs/%D0%BA%D0%BE%D0%BD%D1%82%D0%B0%D0%BA%D1%82

Mail address: info.centar@rgz.gov.rs

                                                                                              19
Tel: 0700 500 500

        6.3. World Bank Grievance Redress System

Communities and individuals who believe they have been adversely affected by a World Bank
(WB)-supported project can submit their grievances to existing project-level grievance
mechanisms or to the World Bank's Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that
grievances received are promptly reviewed to address concerns about the project. Project-
affected communities and persons may submit grievances to the independent Inspection Panel
of WB, which determines whether damage has occurred or may occur as a result of the WB's
failure to comply with its policies and procedures. Grievances may be submitted at any time after
concerns have been brought directly to the attention of the World Bank and Bank Management
has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit grievances to the
World Bank's institutional Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit
 (http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-
service).

Project-affected communities or individuals can also submit their grievances to the World Bank's
Independent Inspection Panel (IIP). This panel determines whether the individuals or
communities submitting the grievance have suffered damages as a result of violations of one or
more of the World Bank's performance criteria. The Panel can communicate its concerns about
the grievances received directly to the World Bank. At this stage, the World Bank shall have the
opportunity to respond to grievances.

        6.4. Description of GM on Project Level


Table 4 – Grievance Mechanism Processes

 Step                       Description of Process          TimeFrame         Responsibility
 GM                  GM structure is based on the central   Throughout      RGA Management
 implementation      electronic point of submitting and     the project
 structure           handling grievances.                     lifecycle
 Grievance uptake    Grievances can be submitted via the    Throughout    RGA Information Center
                     following channels:                    the project            PIU
                     • RGA Information center                 lifecycle
                     • PIU Greavance Form
                     • e-mail to PIU
                     • e-mail to RGA
                     • Complaint form to be lodged via
                          any of the above channels.




                                                                                               20
Step                    Description of Process           TimeFrame           Responsibility
Sorting,         Any complaint received is forwarded    Upon receipt              PIU
processing       toPIU,loggedon the Project server,     of complaint
                 and categorized according to the
                 following complaint types:
                      - Complaint on the service
                      - Complaint on the project
                         activity (with subfolders
                         based on the Project
                         Components)
                      - Complaint on the lack of
                         information
                      - Other Complaints
Acknowledgment   Receipt of the grievance is            Within 2 days    Local grievance focal
and follow-up    acknowledged to the complainant by     of receipt       points or,
                     - Written confirmation of the                       PIU or
                         receipt on the copy of the                      RGA Information Center
                         grievance form
                     - e-mail
Verification,    A proposed resolution is formulated Within 10           Complaint Committee
investigation,   byPIU and RGA Legal department and working days         composed of
action           communicated to the complainant by                      representatives from
                 mail or email.                                          the PIU, RGA Legal
                                                                         Department. Depending
                                                                         on the type of
                                                                         complaint the
                                                                         Complaint Committee
                                                                         can be enlarged with
                                                                         the representative of
                                                                         the other relevant RGA
                                                                         Department
Monitoring and   Data on complaints are collected        30 days after            PIU
evaluation       inby PIU and reported to RGA           the end of the
                 Management and WB every6 months           half year
                                                            period
Provision of     Feedback from complainants              15 days after            PIU
feedback         regarding their satisfaction with      the complaint
                 complaint resolution is collected by     resolution
                 PIU
Training         Training will be organised for the:    One month                 PIU
                     - RGA Information Center           after the
                     - Local grievance focal points     project start-
                                                        up


                                                                                              21
The GM will provide an appeal process if the complainant is not satisfied with the proposed
resolution of the complaint. Once all possible means to resolve the complaint have been
proposed and if the complainant is still not satisfied, then they should be advised of their right to
legal recourse.

       6.5. Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH)

While the risk from project activities and in the context of Serbia is low, the GM for workers shall
include addressing disclosures of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual harassment (SH).
A SEA/SH referral pathway shall be established and updated in line with the country's existing
procedures. The GM for project staff shall also be used to address SEA/SH related issues and shall
have mechanisms in place for safe and ethical documentation of SEA/SH issues and confidential
reporting. In addition, the GM shall have processes in place to promptly inform both the PIU and
the World Bank of any SEA/SH grievance with the consent of the aggrieved.

The World Bank and the RGA do not tolerate reprisals and retaliation against project stakeholders
who share their views about Bank-financed projects.

7. Monitoring and Reporting

       7.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported.


The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary in the course of project
implementation.

Stakeholder engagement activities shall be monitored periodically and reported on twice per
year within project Monitoring&Еvaluation reports. The documentation on stakeholder
participation activities shall be kept within Project archives. The monitoring report will consist of:

   1. Information on consultation activities shall be reported to the Bank within the scope of
      Project Progress Reports including the following elements:
      • Numbers, type of consultation,
      • Number of participants, type of participants
      • Critical issues on the agenda discussed during the meetings,
      • Number of grievances received (disaggregated data: gender, grievance category,
          status)
   2. summaries and internal reports on public grievances, enquiries, and related incidents,
      together with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventive actions




                                                                                                   22
          7.2.      Reporting back to stakeholder groups
Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project during the year will be
conveyed to the stakeholder’s trough the project website where SEP and/or revised SEP will be
published together with the semi-annual summaries and public reports on public grievances,
enquiries, and related incidents.

Exceptionally summaries and public reports on public grievances, enquiries, and related incidents
may be conveyed to the stakeholders directly in writing if particular stakeholder group is
influenced in any manner by the corrective/preventive actions carried by the Project.
1For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project(s) can be divided into the following

core categories:
• Affected Parties:Persons, groups, and other entities within the Project Area of Influence (PAI) that are directly influenced
   (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified as most susceptible to change associated with the project,
   and who need to be closely engaged in identifying impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-making on mitigation
   and management measures.
• Other Interested Parties:Individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct impacts from the Project but who consider
   or perceive their interests as being affected by the project and/or who could affect the project and the process of its
   implementation in some way.
• Vulnerable Groups: Persons who may be disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the project(s) compared
   with any other groups due to their vulnerable status, and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure their equal
   representation in the consultation and decision-making process associated with the project.
2It is particularly important to understand whether project impacts may disproportionately fall on disadvantaged or vulnerable

individuals or groups, who often do not have a voice to express their concerns or understand the impacts of a project, and to
ensure that awareness raising and stakeholder engagement be adapted to take into account such groups’ or individuals’ particular
sensitivities, concerns, and cultural sensitivities and to ensure a full understanding of project activities and benefits.Engagement
with vulnerable groups and individuals often requires the application of specific measures and assistance aimed at the facilitation
of their participation in the project-related decision making so that their awareness of and input into the overall process are
commensurate with those of other stakeholders.




                                                         ANNEX 1


                                 REPORT ON PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS




                                             The Republic Geodetic Authority
                                        Bulevar vojovde Mišića, 11000 Belgrade

                                                                                                                                23
As required by the World Bank (WB) Environmental and Social Standard 10 (ESS10) – Stakeholder
Engagement and Information disclosure, during the preparation of draft ESMF and SEP documents for the
Real Estate Management Project – 2 (REMP2) the Borrower carried out public consultations with relevant
stakeholders.
The Republic Geodetic Authority (RGA) disclosed the draft SEP document on their website on April 10 th
2024 and announced invitation for public consultations for the public, bodies and organizations interested
in the subject documents prepared for REMP2. The announcement was published in “Informer” daily,
newspaper with national coverage, on April 11th 2024. The public and all interested parties and
organizations were invited to participate in process of public consultation on draft SEP document.




Picture 1: Announcement was published in “Informer”, on April 11 th 2024

The invitation to the public consultations and draft documents in Serbian were also available on the RGA website:
https://www.rgz.gov.rs/%D0%BE%D0%B1%D0%B0%D0%B2%D0%B5%D1%88%D1%82%D0%B5%D1%9A%
D0%B0 and
https://www.rgz.gov.rs/%D0%B4%D0%BE%D0%BA%D1%83%D0%BC%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%82%D0%B0-
%D0%BE%D1%81%D1%82%D0%B0%D0%BB%D0%B0-
%D0%B4%D0%BE%D0%BA%D1%83%D0%BC%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%82%D0%B0 .
The documents in English were available on the: https://www.rgz.gov.rs/news
On April 24th 2024, at 1:00 PM (local time), public consultations and presentation of the draft SEP document were
organized at the premises of the RGA, Bulevar vojvode Mišića 39, Belgrade.
No one attended the meeting, no one requested to join online, and no written comments were received by the RGA
or Project Implementation Unit (PIU).
The meeting started according to schedule – at 1:00 PM and ended at 1:15 PM.
The attendees were:
Mr. Darko Vučetić, RGA Assistant Director for Development and Innovation
Mr. Dragan Pavlović, PIU Director
Mr. Saša Rikanović, PIU M&E expert



                                                                                                              24
Picture 2: Public consultation in Belgrade, April 24th 2024.

Two Power Point presentations are prepared to support discussion:


Comments, Questions and Answers during public presentation and consultations:
No comments and questions were raised during public presentation and consultations.
Opinions and remarks provided in written form:
Written opinions and remarks related to SEP documents were not received during the 15 days intended
for consultations with interested citizens and organizations.




                                                                                                      25
