Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                                                       Report No: PAD00241

                                                  INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

                                                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                               ON A
                                                                          PROPOSED LOAN

                                                                 IN THE AMOUNT OF EUR 30 MILLION
                                                                   (US$32.5 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                                 TO THE

                                                                          REPUBLIC OF SERBIA




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                 FOR A

                                                             SECOND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT PROJECT

                                                                              JULY 3, 2024



                                Urban, Resilience and Land
                                Europe and Central Asia




Public Disclosure Authorized


                               This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a presumed
                               outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be made
                               publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s policy on Access to Information.
                      CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

               (Exchange Rate Effective May 31, 2024)

                           Currency Unit = EUR
                              EUR 0.9217 = US$1
                                US$1.083 = EUR 1

                             FISCAL YEAR
                       January 1 - December 31




Regional Vice President: Antonella Bassani
     Regional Director: Charles J. Cormier
      Country Director: Xiaoqing Yu
     Practice Manager: Christoph Pusch
  Task Team Leader(s): Olivera Jordanovic, Caleb Travis Johnson
                                ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

     AI   Artificial Intelligence
   AM     Accountability Mechanism
 ASPEN    Advanced Security Processing Engine
    AV    Antivirus
   CPF    Country Partnership Framework
  CQS     Consultants’ Qualification Selection
    CS    Consulting Services
    DA    Designated Account
 DDoS     Denial-of-Service
  DFIL    Disbursement and Financial Information Letter
    DS    Direct Selection
  EDR     Endpoint Detection and Response
   EFA    Economic and Financial Analysis
   ERR    Economic Rate of Return
   E&S    Environmental and Social
  ESCP    Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
   ESF    Environment and Social Framework
    EU    European Union
  EUR     Euro
    FM    Financial Management
     G    Goods
  GDP     Gross Domestic Product
  GHG     Greenhouse Gas
  GIIP    Good International Industry Practice
   GoS    Government of Serbia
  GRM     Grievance Redress Mechanism
   GRS    Grievance Redress Service
     IC   International Consultant
   IGIF   Integrated Geospatial Information Framework
INSPIRE   INfrastructure for SPatial Information in Europe
   IOC    Initial Operating Capability
    IPF   Investment Project Financing
    IPS   Intrusion Prevention System
   ISO    International Organization for Standardization
 ISREC    Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster
     IT   Information Technology
  IUFR    Interim, Unaudited Financial Report
   LCO    Local Cadaster Office
   LCS    Least-Cost Selection
  M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
  MFA     Multi-Factor Authentication
 MFD-e    Maximizing Finance for Development Enabling
  MoU    Memorandum of Understanding
  NBS    National Bank of Serbia
  NPV    Net Present Value
  NSDI   National Spatial Data Infrastructure
   OSS   One-Stop-Shop
  PAM    Privileged Access Management
  PDO    Project Development Objective
   PIU   Project Implementation Unit
  POM    Project Operational Manual
 PPSD    Project Procurement Strategy for Development
   REC   Real Estate Cadaster
 RECRP   Real Estate Cadaster and Registration Project
 REMP    Real Estate Management Project
REMP 2   Second Real Estate Management Project
   RfB   Request for Bids
   RfP   Request for Proposals
   RfQ   Reqeust for Quotations
  RGA    Republic Geodetic Authority
  RSD    Serbian Dinar
  SAN    Storage Area Network
   SEP   Stakeholder Engagement Plan
  SIDC   Secure Identification Credentials
  SIEM   Security Information and Event Management
  SOC    Security Operational Center
   SSO   Single Sign-On
    TA   Technical Assistance
  TOR    Terms of Reference
UNFCCC   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
  US$    United States Dollar
  VPN    Virtual Private Network
   XSS   Cross-Site Scripting
The World Bank
Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET .......................................................................................................................... 1
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 6
      A. Country Context ...............................................................................................................................6
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................7
      C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ..............................................................................................9
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................ 11
      A. Project Development Objective .....................................................................................................11
      B. Project Components ......................................................................................................................11
      C. Project Beneficiaries ......................................................................................................................15
      D. Results Chain..................................................................................................................................15
      E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ...................................................................16
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................17
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ........................................................................... 18
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................18
      B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ........................................................................18
      C. Sustainability ..................................................................................................................................18
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 19
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................19
      B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................20
      C. Legal Operational Policies ..............................................................................................................22
      D. Environmental and Social ..............................................................................................................22
V.    GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES .................................................................................... 24
VI. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 24
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING .................................................................. 25
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan ................................................ 32
ANNEX 2: Detailed Project Components Description ........................................................... 42
ANNEX 3: Economic and Financial Analysis ......................................................................... 47
ANNEX 4: RGA Data Protection Products and Services ......................................................... 54
      The World Bank
      Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Serbia                   Second Real Estate Management Project
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project
P500611                                              Moderate
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                      [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                    [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                         [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                               [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                     [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                           [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                  [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
29-Jul-2024                            31-Jul-2029
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve the transparency, accessibility, and reliability of Serbia’s real property management systems.


Components
 Component Name                                                                                             Cost (US$)

                                                                                                            Page 1 of 56
      The World Bank
      Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


 Component A: Implementation of the Property Mass Valuation System                          8,017,525.00
 Component B: Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services
                                                                                           20,796,925.00
 Development
 Component C: Institutional Improvement, RGA Sustainability, and Project
                                                                                            3,604,300.00
 Management

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate
Organizations
Borrower:                        Republic of Serbia
Implementing Agency:             Republic Geodetic Authority

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                            32.50

  Total Financing                                                                                 32.50
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                    32.50

  Financing Gap                                                                                    0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                   32.50


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                   2025              2026            2027              2028    2029         2030

Annual                 0.25              3.60            6.40              10.00   12.00        0.25



                                                                                              Page 2 of 56
      The World Bank
      Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


Cumulative             0.25              3.85             10.25            20.25            32.25    32.50


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                          Contributing Practice Areas
Urban, Resilience and Land

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Moderate
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Moderate
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Moderate
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Moderate


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 56
      The World Bank
      Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                    Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                   Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                          Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                 Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                 Not Currently Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement     Not Currently Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                   Not Currently Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                   Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                           Not Currently Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                    Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
The Borrower, through RGA, shall by no later than one (1) month after the Effective Date, prepare and adopt a Project
operational manual (“Operational Manual” or “POM”) in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank (Section I. B. 1 of
Schedule 2 to the LA)
The Borrower shall maintain at all times during Project implementation the PIU under the RGA, with the necessary
resources and staff to carry out the Project, and with a composition and terms of reference satisfactory to the Bank
(Section I. A. 1 of Schedule 2 of the LA)



                                                                                                            Page 4 of 56
       The World Bank
       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


The Borrower shall establish not later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain during
Project implementation a Project Council and a Project Steering Committee with a composition, terms of reference, and
resources satisfactory to the Bank (Section I. A. 2 of Schedule 2 of the LA)
The Borrower shall appoint, not later than sixty (60) days after the Effective Date, of one part-time Environmental
Specialist, and one part time Social Specialist, as part of the existing PIU (Section 1.1. of the ESCP)
The Borrower, through RGA, shall: (a) prepare and furnish to the Bank not later than December 31st of each year during
the implementation of the Project, a proposed Annual Work Plan and Budget (Section 1. D(a) of Schedule 2 of the LA)
The Borrower, through RGA, shall furnish to the Bank each Project Report not later than forty-five (45) days after the
end of each reporting quarter, covering the calendar year (Section II of Schedule 2 of the LA)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                          Citation                      Description                   Financing Source




                                                                                                          Page 5 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

 A. Country Context

1.       Serbia is an upper middle-income country that has made substantial gains in building institutions since
emerging from the conflicts of the 1990s, but government effectiveness remains a challenge. The first democratic
governments elected in the early 2000s initiated the political and economic transition typical of other Eastern European
countries a decade earlier. Significant progress was made on achieving a stable macroeconomic framework and substantial
fiscal buffers, notably since 2015. However, historical trends in governance indicators show that Serbia’s improvement
has stalled in certain dimensions, holding back development progress in other areas.1 Thus, the current level of
government effectiveness is below those observed in new European Union (EU) member states five years prior to their
accession. Moreover, checks and balances are still below the average for other upper middle-income countries, and
significantly below EU levels. Since 2014, Serbia has been in negotiations with the EU regarding governance reforms to be
carried out prior to it joining the bloc.
2.       Serbia’s economy and the labor market were relatively resilient during the COVID-19 pandemic, driven by large-
scale fiscal stimulus in 2020 and 2021, but have faced challenges related to problems in Serbia’s domestic energy sector
as well as external shocks. Due to a significant increase in spending on pandemic-related goods and services, transfers to
households, and subsidies provided as part of a stimulus package to mitigate pandemic impacts, the fiscal deficit reached
8 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2020 and 4.1 percent in 2021. Public debt reached 57.1 percent of GDP by
December 2021 but eased to 55.6 percent by the end of 2022. In 2023, there was a further decrease of fiscal deficit, which
helped to bring the public debt further down to 52.9 percent of GDP (December 2023). The unemployment rate stabilized
around 9 percent over the past two years. Poverty (based on the upper-middle income line of US$6.85 per day in 2017
purchasing power parity) is estimated to have declined slightly from 7.9 percent in 2021 to 7.5 percent in 2022 and further
declined to 7.1 percent in 2023 despite relatively high inflation. Inflation at the end of 2023 was estimated at 7.6 percent
after peaking in March 2023 at 16.2 percent. The Current Account Deficit will decrease significantly in 2023 to reach 2.6
percent of GDP after a one-off increase in 2022 due to a high import of energy and food. Large-scale imports of power
started in early 2022 due to problems in Serbia’s power sector, and particularly in the production of lignite-based power.
Going forward, key challenges concern the performance of State-Owned Enterprises that could pose a significant fiscal
risk and lower the projected growth of the economy.
3.        Vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, especially higher-frequency and higher-intensity floods,
landslides, wildfires, droughts, and heatwaves, pose significant challenges to Serbia’s population and economy. The
number of people affected by flooding is assessed at about 200,000 on average per year, at an estimated cost of US$1
billion in GDP. For instance, massive floods across Southeast Europe in 2014 pushed 125,000 people in Serbia into poverty
and resulted in damages and losses of over EUR 1.5 billion (equivalent to 4.8 percent of then GDP). Simultaneously, mean
annual temperatures have risen by 0.3°C per decade. The increase in temperatures could lead to severe water shortages
and increased instances of heat waves. Significant additional risk comes from an increased frequency of droughts which,
according to government estimates, have caused damages of over EUR 3.5 billion since 2000. Most recently, drought has
reduced domestic agricultural output two years in a row at a time when international food prices were also rising sharply.
The drought of the summer of 2022 is the latest in a series of climate-related events with significant economic impacts,
including severe drought and floods in 2012 and 2014 that caused recessions. According to official statistics, extreme
weather events in recent years have cost the country more than EUR 5 billion, with droughts and extreme temperatures
accounting for 70 percent of the losses, and their severity and frequency is expected to grow due to climate change.2


1 As noted in the 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic Update for Serbia.
2 Information in this paragraph obtained from the World Bank Group CPF and the ThinkHazard profile for Serbia.



                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


4.      The Government of Serbia (GoS) has articulated its commitment to improve government effectiveness in the
comprehensive Serbia Action Plan, with emphasis on fiscal and environmental sustainability. The GoS has emphasized
the importance of key policy areas including economic strengthening and entrepreneurship, efficient and responsible
public institutions, environmental protection and green transformation, and human capacity building. Effective public
administration remains crucial to the achievement of these policy areas, and this includes continued strengthening of
Serbia’s land administration system, enhancement of land tenure security, and the diversification of the fiscal base
through the development of fair and equitable property taxation. The efforts of the GoS concerning the land sector are
foundational to unlocking economic growth and the further development of land records information that can be utilized
by other GoS institutions for decision-making, planning, private sector development, disaster risk management, and
climate change adaptation and mitigation.

 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

5.      Over the past 20 years, Serbia has made major progress in establishing effective and professional land
registration and cadaster services to facilitate land markets and provide tenure security. From 2004 to 2012, under the
World Bank-financed Real Estate Cadaster and Registration Project (RECRP; P078311), Serbia established the Real Estate
Cadaster (REC), a single system for real property rights registration, which is under the authority of the Republic Geodetic
Authority (RGA).3 As such, RECRP played a pivotal role in the development of land and real estate markets in Serbia. It was
supplemented by further technical assistance (TA) from the Bank to advise the GoS on three critical areas of real estate
reform: (i) planning and permitting; (ii) valuation, taxation, and public land management; and (iii) security of property and
property rights. TA outputs included a Land Policy Note shared with the GoS that highlighted the benefits of real estate
reform on Serbia’s fiscal deficit and business climate. Since 2015, the ongoing Real Estate Management Project (REMP;
P147050) and its Additional Financing build on the proposals of the Land Policy Note, with support to valuation and
property taxation, e-governance for enabling access to real estate information, and RGA’s further institutional
development.
6.      Throughout implementation of the World Bank-financed projects, the GoS has enacted crucial legislative
reforms for the land sector. Key legal framework milestones during REMP’s implementation include (i) a new law
regulating (property) valuation professionals via the introduction of a new licensing system and national standards for
valuation in line with International and European standards; (ii) regulatory improvements in the areas of planning and
construction through the implementation of a one-stop-shop (OSS) system for issuing construction permits; (iii) a new law
on cadastral procedures linking the databases of cadaster, notaries, the tax administration, and the courts that enables
online submission of applications for registration of property transactions and property tax declarations through notaries,
substantially improving the reliability of the property rights registration system; and (iv) adoption of the Law on National
Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) and establishment of the GeoSrbija National Geoportal, which enables interoperability
and data sharing among various agencies, as well as harmonization with the EU’s INfrastructure for SPatial Information in
Europe (INSPIRE) Directive. Moreover, the creation of Serbia’s Sale Price Register during REMP has had a major impact on
the transparency and efficiency of the residential property market by providing valuers and commercial banks with reliable
information about transaction prices.
7.      Building on the above-mentioned reforms, the results of REMP’s activities have provided wide ranging
economic benefits for citizens, businesses, and GoS authorities, particularly in terms of efficiency gains. Since the start
of REMP, Serbia’s real estate market has experienced significant efficiency gains, as evidenced by the drop from 48 days
to 3.89 days in the average time required to complete the recordation of a land or property transaction at RGA. Moreover,
RGA’s service provision continues to experience high customer satisfaction, with a current rate of 91 percent (up from 66

3 RGA manages Serbia’s REC and supervises 164 Local Cadaster Offices (LCOs) spread throughout the country. RGA reports to the Ministry of Construction, Transport

and Infrastructure.

                                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


percent at the start of REMP). To achieve these gains, REMP has invested heavily in the development of RGA’s Integrated
System for Real Estate Cadaster (ISREC), which provides digital maps covering approximately 67,000 km 2 (approximately
86 percent) of the national territory and integrates Serbia’s land registry and cadaster within a single database. The
cadastral data provided by ISREC directly feeds into GeoSrbija, which also benefits from data provision from an additional
128 Serbian institutions. Moreover, RGA is actively working to sign Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with other
GoS institutions for data sharing to further improve service provision that requires accurate geospatial information and
has signed 44 MoUs to-date. REMP also support the establishment of a Building Register that covers approximately 80
percent of the country and includes the above-referenced OSS system for construction permit issuance.4 A utility cadaster
module for ISREC is currently being developed via REMP, and both the Building Register and utility cadaster will provide
key data for informed and improved infrastructure planning and investments in Serbia. Additionally, a second instance
appeals backlog has been addressed through REMP with over 26,000 appeals resolved and with over 95 percent of appeals
being resolved in accordance with defined service standards.
8.       REMP’s support to real estate valuation also contributes to the future scale-up of a fairer and more equitable
property taxation based on market values, thereby contributing to investor confidence in the Serbian economy. Prior
to REMP, Serbia was characterized as having property tax rolls that omitted significant numbers of properties and a system
of taxation that did not reflect market values. As a result of REMP, major steps have been taken to address these issues.
The development of a Sales Price Register, RGA’s publication of regular reports on the state of the property market, the
creation of mass valuation models for residential properties using sales prices, building register development, and the
adoption of national valuation standards and licensing reform for valuers have had a major impact on improving the
efficiency of the residential property market, and help to lay the foundations for the adoption of a market value property
tax system for residential property. These efforts have helped to spur investor confidence in Serbia’s real estate markets
by helping to establish a more transparent sector with reliable data that reflects ground realities for informed investment
decision-making.
9.       Building on the achievements of real estate valuation under REMP, the GoS is keen to expand its mass valuation
models to cover non-residential properties. This has the potential to produce the same level of transparency and
efficiency in the non-residential sector as was achieved in the residential sector. Work remains to be done in Serbia on the
collection of non-residential property characteristics and the identification of all individual taxable units and their geo-
locations. While some of this data can be accessed through Serbia’s most recent population census, it may also be required
to identify other methods or sources for the collection of this data. Additionally, a system of distribution for mass valuation
results needs to be developed, which would assist different users (e.g., citizens, businesses, commercial banks,
government institutions, public entities, etc.) in line with their needs. The taxation of commercial and industrial properties
remains a challenge, as businesses tend to rent premises rather than buy them. These income transactions are not
normally captured through RGA’s land registration system. As such, it is important for alternative systems to be developed
for capturing income transactions such as rents and lease information for commercial and industrial properties from which
mass valuation models can be developed. The creation of such systems will contribute to significant improvements in the
transparency and efficiency of the non-residential property market, which will benefit private sector investment and
economic growth as well as tax revenues.
10.      The GoS also aims to develop additional services for the use of the land registry and cadaster information
maintained in ISREC. In line with Serbia’s vulnerability to natural disasters such as flooding and landslides, RGA is keen to
further develop its Risk Register that will utilize cadastral data to identify areas of the country that are in hazard zones as
part of improved climate change mitigation and adaptation risk planning and the potential economic impact of hazard
events. The expansion of the Risk Register would also complement current REMP investments such as the Building Register
and utility cadaster to add a further layer of data to provide a more accurate representation of ground realities for public

4 This registry has not yet been integrated with ISREC, although this is envisioned to be completed under the proposed Project.



                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


and private sector decision-makers to consider as part of business development and infrastructure planning in Serbia. This
information would also utilize mass valuation models, as associated climate hazards would contribute to more accurate
calculation of insurance premiums in the event of a disaster. Moreover, while ISREC has been developed, it has not yet
been implemented in all of RGA’s 164 Local Cadaster Offices (LCOs), and the GoS is keen to complete its implementation
to provide standard, streamlined services to all citizens throughout Serbia.
11.      Building informality is also a persistent challenge in Serbia. Around 4.8 million structures that have either not
been registered in the cadaster or are registered but with actual building characteristics not matching their respective
cadastral records.5 Illegal construction has been a prominent urban development phenomenon since the 1960s and has
intensified since 1990. Starting in the 2000s, the GoS has made efforts to legalize informal constructions via several laws
on legalization, the latest one in 2015. Local self-governments are also integrating informal settlements into urban
planning and zoning, and manage legalization processes in their respective territories. The process is slow, however, given
the volume of illegal developments. RGA supports these initiatives by providing information on all land parcels and
buildings via ISREC and the Building Register. Moreover, high-resolution satellite imagery obtained through REMP provides
information on all buildings in throughout Serbia, which supports informed decision-making at both central and local
government levels. However, ISREC and the Building Register are not yet fully integrated, which results in the absence of
a replica of ground realities to help identify specific formal (ISREC) and informal (Building Register) properties throughout
Serbia.
12.      With these initiatives in mind, the GoS approached the World Bank with a request to support further
advancement of the real estate management systems in the country via the Second Real Estate Management Project
(REMP 2). Originally, REMP 2 was envisioned as a second Additional Financing for REMP to scale up the current project
activities. However, due to Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) requirements, a new Investment Project Financing
(IPF) was suggested, as REMP falls under the pre-ESF Safeguards Policies. Nevertheless, REMP 2’s proposed activities build
directly on the investments under REMP and its Additional Financing by helping to scale-up e-service provision by RGA,
bolstering the long-term sustainability of REMP’s investments, and completing the national rollout of mass valuation and
implementation of ISREC. REMP 2 also aims to support data quality improvements at RGA and build on the achievements
of NSDI establishment to-date as part of efforts to expand accessibility and availability of geospatial information for
relevant users and key actors in Serbia’s land sector.

 C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives

13.      The proposed Project is closely aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
Serbia for FY22-FY26 (Report No. 166496-YF, discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on May 26, 2022). The CPF
sets out the overall objective of supporting Serbia’s robust recovery from the impacts of COVID-19 and fostering growth
that will be sustainable across generations. In particular, REMP 2 will contribute towards achieving CPF Objectives 1.1:
Stronger macro-fiscal framework and structural reforms for greener growth and 1.3: Improved business environment and
regional integration. Under Objective 1.1, REMP 2 will continue to contribute to increasing the competitiveness of the
Serbian economy by furthering its support to clarify valuation to stimulate credit markets that will help to increase access
to finance for businesses. Under Objective 1.3, enhanced geospatial information management and associated e-services
development and provision can help the private sector make informed decisions for investments, and more readily access
needed services and documentation for enhanced business development. Improvements in mass valuation methodologies
for non-residential properties and rental premises in Serbia would also partially contribute to CPF Objective 2.1:
Strengthened public financial management at the central and local levels, as these methodologies would help to provide



5 There are approximately 4.9 million properties registered in cadaster, which is almost equivalent to the number of properties that are either unregistered or are

registered but with their characteristics not matching their respective cadastral records (4.8 million).

                                                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


more transparency in the non-residential property market for the benefit of government revenue generation by
diversifying and improving the resilience of the tax system.
14.      The Project is also aligned with the outcome areas outlined in the new World Bank Group Corporate Scorecard,
specifically, Outcome Area 11 “Digital Services” that consolidates and reports the state of online e-Government service
provision. As part of its activities, REMP 2 will support the continued digital transformation of RGA and the advancement
of Serbia’s NSDI in line with national and international best practice and standards, and will include the corresponding
Corporate Scorecard indicator that measures the number of people using digitally enable services in the Results
Framework. The development of new applications and e-services to increase the usability of Serbia’s NSDI for the public
and businesses is also expected to leverage new technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI).
15.      REMP 2’s activities are also Maximizing Finance for Development enabling (MFD-e)6 and will set the stage for
unlocking further private sector investment and economic activity in Serbia. Investments in geospatial information and
associated e-services will allow private sector actors to have clear, up-to-date, and accurate spatial information available
for informed investments in Serbia. Moreover, the further development of mass valuation methodologies will remove
constraints in real estate markets by clarifying the values of land and property that restricted investor confidence in the
country’s land markets. REMP 2’s activities are instrumental for future private sector investments by helping to bridge the
information gap that continues to restrict investor appetite in Serbia’s real estate markets.
16.       The activities for the proposed Project are also fully aligned with multiple initiatives of the GoS related to
business development, spatial planning, and e-Government. Specifically, REMP 2’s mass valuation activities for non-
residential properties and rented premises by businesses will support the objective of Serbia’s Program for Combatting
the Grey Economy (2023-2025) and its Action Plan for the period 2023-24, particularly Goals 2 (Improving the procedure
of tax supervision and reporting) and 3 (Fiscal and administrative relief of legal businesses). Further investments in e-
service provision, NSDI, and national scale-up of ISREC implementation will also contribute to the GoS’s draft Spatial Plan
of the Republic of Serbia (2021-2035) as well as the Program for e-Government Development in the Republic of Serbia
(2023-2025) and Action Plan for its Implementation. Concerning the latter, the proposed Project would contribute to
Program Objective 1.4 – Public Administration (e-Government) by helping to further improve ISREC’s data quality and
utilization through additional e-services for users. Moreover, the investments in data managed by public administration
actors will contribute to having up-to-date, networked, competently collected, and processed data that will strengthen
the basis for effective government and evidence-based policymaking in Serbia.
17.     In terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation, REMP 2 will contribute to the achievement of Serbia’s
National Determined Contribution (NDC). Serbia is a part to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). It submitted its NDC to the UNFCCC in 2021, pledging to cut greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 33.3
percent by 2030 compared to 1990 levels. Serbia is also a part to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change as of 2017 but
struggles with large amounts of electricity consumption due to low levels of energy efficiency in the country, a challenge
that the GoS is trying to address as part of its NDC initiatives and alignment to EU climate change policies via its ongoing
accession dialogue. Most land administration activities, including REMP 2’s, can be considered universally aligned since
effective land administration has an important role in enhancing the climate resilience of communities, especially those
located in climate vulnerable areas. Furthermore, REMP 2’s activities related to geospatial information management and
property valuation are considered universally aligned with the Paris Agreement.




6 While REMP 2 will directly contribute to MFD-e as of project preparation, the task team will work with RGA during implementation to explore possible options to

better capture and determine potential private capital enabling aspects of the project activities.

                                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 56
           The World Bank
           Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 A. Project Development Objective

          PDO Statement
18.      The Project Development Objective is to improve the transparency, accessibility, and reliability of Serbia’s real
property management systems.
          PDO Level Indicators
19.        Achievement of the PDO will be measured via the following indicators:
      •    Enhanced data from multiple registries available via GeoSrbija (Text)
      •    Population with access to property services (Percentage)
      •    E-Services providing authoritative data for official use through GeoSrbija (Number)
      •    RGA’s institutional sustainability enhanced to ensure business continuity (Text)
20.    The Results Framework will also include an Intermediate Results indicator from the Corporate Scorecard related
to Outcome Area 11 “Digital Services”: People using digitally enabled services (Number).7

 B. Project Components

21.      The Project will include three components as described below.8 See Annex 2 for a detailed description of Project
activities.
22.      Component A: Implementation of the Property Mass Valuation System (EUR 7,400,000). This component will
finance the following activities in support of the advancement of mass valuation for all types of property in Serbia to
ensure the reliability of property data, along with their accessibility, transparency, and interoperability. Activities will be
financed via two Sub-Components. Sub-Component A.1: Support to Mass Valuation for Residential and Non-Residential
Properties will finance: (i) the development of mass valuation models for non-residential properties in Serbia; (ii) the
national rollout of mass valuation models already developed for residential properties for the majority of Serbia’s
population; (iii) the development of an information system for mass property valuation; and (iv) the creation of a
residential property index that includes all types of residential property, with sub-indexes for different types. Sub-
Component A.2: Building Register Advancement will finance (i) the development of a Building Register module as part of
ISREC; (ii) establishment of a central database; (iii) migration of data from the existing Building Register and from other
external data sources; (iv) integration of the Building Register with the information system for mass property valuation
and GeoSrbija; (v) the acquisition of very high-resolution satellite imagery and climate-related data; (vi) creation of a digital
orthophoto and processing of its data; (vii) updates to the Building Register’s Registry of Established Changes to
Constructions; and (viii) consulting services to assess the options for automating and obtaining of data from external
sources, quality assurance and quality control during software development and the development of a long-term
sustainable model for the maintenance of the Building Register and the information system for the mass property
valuation system.
23.    In terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation, the activities under Component A will help to inform the
GoS about which properties are considered more prone to GHG emissions and incentivize emissions reductions by seeking

7 The number of people or businesses who use new or enhanced digitally enable services through support by the World Bank Group. This includes new, digitally-

delivered services as well as enhancements to existing digitally-delivered services (i.e., those delivered through digital technologies such as internet, cloud computing,
AI, etc.), provided by the public or private sector.
8 The Project’s front-end fee of EUR 75,000 will be paid using the loan financing. As such, the component costs for REMP 2 add up to EUR 29,925,000.



                                                                                                                                                        Page 11 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


to factor into the valuation methodology for each of the property types’ household and business preferences for energy
efficiency. The connection between real estate valuation and reducing GHG emissions (e.g., incentives for improving the
energy efficiency of buildings) will be integrated as part of the capacity building activities to be financed via Component
C. Moreover, Component A activities will provide important market information for calculating the costs of climate
resilient reconstruction (e.g., flood proofing, adaptable during a heat wave) and determine insurance premiums in support
of crisis preparedness and disaster risk management efforts to address climate risks in Serbia that are led by government
entities such as the Ministry of Interior’s Sector for Emergency Management. The purchase and utilization of satellite
imagery will also help to enable more efficient updates of key registries in addition to the Building Register. The imagery
is a critical requirement for RGA’s Risk Register (see Component B) and will be directly relevant for the identification of
climate impacts such as floods, drought, and extreme temperature along with areas that are most vulnerable to these
impacts. These climate considerations will be integrated into spatial and disaster risk planning, and in targeting climate
disaster related evacuation activities for areas most vulnerable to these climate impacts.
24.      In terms of MFD-e, Component A’s activities will also improve investor confidence by clarifying the values of
additional real estate categories. The absence of reliable methodologies in the past created barriers for investors because
it was difficult to ensure that non-residential real estate transactions were in line with the actual value of the property. As
such, the activities under Component A will address this barrier to increased private sector investments in Serbia.
25.      Component B: Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development (EUR 19,200,000). This
component will finance activities related to the further digital transformation of RGA and the advancement of Serbia’s
NSDI (including the expansion of GeoSrbija and development of additional data layers) in line with national and
international best practice and standards. Activities will be financed via three Sub-Components. Sub-Component B.1:
Further Development and Rollout of the Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster will finance: (i) ISREC upgrades and
the completion of its national implementation to an additional 110 LCOs that do not yet have access to the system; (ii)
establishment of the infrastructure cadaster; (iii) development and implementation of an information system for land
consolidation; (iv) expansion of the Risk Register; (v) technical studies for the advancement and use of cadastral data such
as the development of a 3D cadaster; (vi) the supply of IT hardware and equipment and possible IT hardware installation
associated small-scale retrofitting works9; (vii) cybersecurity support; and (viii) consultant support for the supervision,
coordination and quality control of the data and systems to be implemented and/or expanded. Sub-Component B.2:
support to the National Spatial Data Infrastructure will finance the implementation of RGA’s NSDI Action Plan, including
the development of web and mobile applications and digital services using new technologies such as AI. Sub-Component
B.3: Digital Archive will finance: (i) development of a module for managing the analogue archive; (ii) development of e-
services for specialized users; and (iii) conversion of scanned geodetic plans to allow online access to them. As applicable,
IT hardware and equipment will also be financed via Component B that will, in line with the EU’s Directive on Energy
Efficiency10 and the EU Energy Performance Certificates, aim to achieve an “A” rating for energy performance, which is
considered above and beyond existing performance standards given that absence of a mandated energy efficiency rating
within Serbia’s existing regulatory framework which will ultimately lead to reduced GHG emissions compared to IT
hardware/equipment that do not meet these requirements. Component B’s NSDI activities will be implemented based on
the Action Plan and Business Models produced during REMP in line with the UN-endorsed Integrated Geospatial
Information Framework (IGIF).
26.     In terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation, the activities under Component B will support the tracking
of projected climate trends such as changes in precipitation intensity and flood, drought, and extreme heat occurrence
due to urbanization and urban sprawl that have contributed to strains on existing infrastructure and public utilities as well

9 Although not confirmed, there may be a possibility for small-scale retrofitting works (e.g., for the server room) that could be linked to the hardware installation. Any

identified environmental risks and impacts (e.g., dust, noise, waste, OHS) and mitigation measures will be addressed in the ESMPs checklist to be prepared prior to the
commencement of works (see Environmental and Social section of the PAD for more details).
10 Directive on Energy Efficiency 2012/27/EU, as amended in 2018 and 2023.



                                                                                                                                                        Page 12 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


as the loss of carbon sinks in Serbia. Moreover, the information provided by the advancement of GeoSrbija will be used
by public agencies such as the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure’s Sector for Spatial and Urban
Planning and the Ministry of Interior’s Sector for Emergency Management will directly access GeoSrbija and the platform
as part of their business operations to utilize these key tools and the cadaster and land registry information they contain
to inform disaster and flood simulations, land use planning, and resource management, which will identify areas
vulnerable to flooding and drought and ways to either avoid construction in these areas or improve climate resilience by
deploying resilient building design.
27.      In terms of MFD-e, Component B’s investments in the development of geospatial information and related services
are linked to greater private sector investment confidence, as a single point of accurate and reliable information that can
be utilized to reduce investor risk will be developed.
28.      Component C: Institutional Improvement, RGA Sustainability, and Project Management (EUR 3,325,000). This
component will finance activities related to RGA’s long-term institutional sustainability and project management for REMP
2. Activities will be financed via two Sub-Components. Sub-Component C.1: Institutional Improvement and RGA
Sustainability will finance (i) updates to RGA’s Roadmap, Strategic Plan, and Business Plan for institutional transition; (ii)
implementation of RGA’s Portfolio Management Plan11; and (iii) further implementation of several International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards for RGA’s full compliance with international standards for land
administration and associated IT systems. Sub-Component C.2: Project Management will finance (i) Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) operations and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) activities; (ii) capacity building programs; (iii)
customer satisfaction surveys; (iv) consulting services in support of various project activities including the provision of
legal expertise for, among other things, improving registration of “old”12 transactions, and development of social
assessments; and (v) the supply of IT hardware and equipment in support of project management. The specialized training
to be financed via this component will target RGA management and technical staff, as well as other NSDI stakeholders
including government institutions, local authorities, and other relevant entities. Similarly, the capacity building programs
will be designed and implemented for real estate registration and valuation institutions, including RGA, municipal
authorities and Serbia’s Tax Administration.
29.    Gender. Although Serbia adopted the Law on Gender Equality in 2009, which seeks to ensure equal status of
women and men, there are more men registered as property owners than women at RGA. The share of properties with
women registered as owners is, on average, approximately 41 percent, but ranges from 13 percent in the south to 50
percent in the north of the country. There are many reasons for the disparities in property ownership between women
and men, including cultural, economic, and gaps in the regulatory framework. The low rates for women also have broader
impacts on their participation in the Serbian economy, as a lack of property documentation for land and property
ownership negatively impacts one’s ability, among other things, to access public services and credit markets.
30.      At RGA, a contributing factor to the disparity in property ownership rates is due to 40 percent of properties in
ISREC for which ownership data cannot be gender disaggregated. This is due to a lack of a unique identification (ID) number
(which contains indication of sex and age) of the person registered as the property owner. In addition, property data are
distributed in more than 120 cadastral databases and conducting any analysis is cumbersome and may produce unreliable
results. Under Component B, the national implementation of ISREC and its associated data quality improvement activities
will be carried out in cooperation with other government agencies such as the Ministry of Interior, which provides missing
unique ID numbers to RGA so that the identity of the property owner can be properly established. The result of this data
quality improvement will increase the number of properties for which data on ownership can be gender disaggregated.

11 The Portfolio Management Plan was first developed in 2024 in cooperation with the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) and will be fully

implemented under REMP 2.
12 “Old” transactions are property transactions that took place prior to July 2018 and had not been submitted for registration before the new law on cadastral procedures

was introduced.

                                                                                                                                                       Page 13 of 56
       The World Bank
       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


Additionally, ISREC’s national implementation will facilitate quick and easy access to property data throughout Serbia and
enable the creation of valuable reports such as an improved understanding of property ownership disparities between
women and men.
31.      Building on the successful support provided by REMP and its Additional Financing, REMP 2 will aim to prioritize
the linking of unique ID numbers for women to these backlogged properties in ISREC. An Intermediate Results Indicator
“Women with land rights confirmed as a result of ISREC property data completion” will measure the number of women
owners who have their land rights confirmed upon the completion of land ownership information as a result of the
recordation of their unique ID number being linked to ISREC with support from the Project.
32.      Climate Co-Benefits. Land administration provides the basis of the system of land rights, records and information.
Core components of the system are cadaster and land registry functions and geospatial information systems that develop
and share real estate and other geospatial information. A functioning land administration system, with accurate and up-
to-date cadaster and registry data, allows for the development of land tools to address climate change risks such as
drought and floods and strengthen disaster risk management. These tools include land use planning, land-related nature-
based solutions, geospatial imaging needed to implement climate change adaptation and responses to flood and drought.
Strong land institutions, including functions of the REC, are necessary to address risk management and adaptation. The
current discrepancies between what is recorded in the cadastral, building and infrastructure records, and the reality on
the ground, particularly in terms of buildings and infrastructure, undermine planning and policy measures in both of these
areas due to uncertainty about what is located where. In this context, REMP 2 activities will enable the improvement of
spatial planning tools to inform climate-related decision making by identifying zones vulnerable to climate risks which, in
turn, improve land-use planning. This will support Serbia in achieving its climate change adaptation and mitigation
objectives. Access to improved geospatial information, which contains climate data on projected trends on flood, drought
and rising temperatures, including uniform digital cadastral data in all LCOs and the expansion and integration of GeoSrbija
datasets, will contribute to enhanced climate resilient and disaster risk management and recovery, as this will enable GoS
entities, non-governmental organizations, and academia to monitor climate change exacerbated floods, drought and rising
temperatures and subsequent planning for disaster recovery more effectively (including damage assessment,
identification of compensation levels and eligibility, building back better efforts). The Results Framework also includes a
dedicated Intermediate Results indicator that will track the number of public institutions in Serbia with access to key
geospatial datasets maintained by RGA to improve forecasting and assessment of the consequences of disaster and
climate hazard events and inform climate-related decision-making.
33.      Citizen Engagement. The proposed Project’s public awareness campaigns, user satisfaction surveys and related
activities will accommodate for all Serbians’ needs (elderly, women, etc.) and will use technology (e.g., e-surveys) and
dissemination methods (e.g., public awareness campaigns) to maximize citizen engagement. Regular customer satisfaction
surveys will collect data to monitor customer’s satisfaction with RGA’s new products and services developed during REMP
2’s implementation, as well as any issues or challenges users face in the process. The development of a Stakeholder
Engagement Plan (SEP) as part of the Environment and Social Framework (ESF) commitments will also help to target
relevant stakeholders during implementation to ensure their feedback, suggestions, and priorities are also fully reflected
in Project activities. The PIU will gather the data for the indicators in the Results Framework with the support of relevant
institutions. In addition to administrative data, the Project will generate data on user experience and perceptions through
a series of targeted surveys of end users. Surveys will be publicly available and used to engage with stakeholders and the
public in a two-way dialogue, in accordance with the World Bank Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen
Engagement in World Bank Operations. Feedback will also be collected via RGA’s Help Desk that was developed during
REMP 1 that, along with the information from the customer satisfaction surveys, will be used to inform training programs
for RGA staff. Additionally, RGA will explore the introduction of user feedback tools as part of its website advancements.



                                                                                                               Page 14 of 56
       The World Bank
       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


34.     Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The GRM established under REMP will continue to be used. The formal
and legal two-stage appeal mechanism at RGA (appeals against RGA resolutions to the local office and appeal to the legal
department in the RGA head office) allows for feedback and grievances on any issue. A Help Desk will continue to provide
information on the status of the appeals. Project specific complaints will be reported to the PIU (office mail and email)
and monitored. Finally, RGA will continue to implement “e-complaint”, a service available to all citizens to raise any issues
related to RGA’s work by submitting a short online form.

 C. Project Beneficiaries

35.     The primary beneficiaries of this Project will be Serbia’s citizens while the Project-supported activities would also
be beneficial for businesses. It is anticipated that clarity of property ownership and improved data about property units
will contribute to increased mortgages as well as clarity for insurance companies concerning the determination of
premiums in the event of a disaster and the need for citizens to make claims. Private sector decision-makers will also
benefit from better access to data about buildings and individual units in making investment and lending decisions. Since
businesses use property assets as collateral for raising finance for expansion, improvements in quality of property market
information from the collection and publication of more accurate data should result in improved investment in the
economy. This has the potential to raise Serbia’s property market from its current semi-transparency to being transparent
with corresponding benefits in terms of increased investment quality and reduced risk premiums.
36.      The Project will also directly benefit decision-makers from all levels of government (local to central), as the
breaking down of information silos will facilitate a more collaborative environment between GoS ministries and
institutions that maintain key datasets. It is widely recognized that many municipalities in Serbia lack the data they require
to enhance disaster response, urban planning and investment plans, and improved and more reliable data about buildings
and individual units will help considerably in achieving this. Activities related to cadaster innovations will help key
stakeholders in government to better utilize location-based data for planning purposes as well as to achieve their
respective objectives in various government strategies such as the Program for Combatting the Grey Economy. The
Project’s capacity building initiatives will also build the technical expertise of government officials and staff to provide
more effective public services throughout Serbia, which includes increased climate resilience of land-use planning that
also incorporates less GHG emissive pathways. Long-term sustainable growth in Serbia requires a reduction in the physical,
social and economic shocks associated with geophysical and climate change-induced disasters such as flood, drought, and
rising temperatures. More broadly, institutions responsible for disaster management and response plans will benefit from
expanded data on land and other real estate that incorporate climate data, which is not currently available countrywide,
so that urban investments plans are better able to take hazard events into account.

 D. Results Chain

37.      Theory of Change. The proposed Project activities and related outputs and outcomes are expected to contribute
toward achievement of the PDO as shown in the diagram below. The key elements in the causal results chain for achieving
the PDO are (i) national rollout of mass valuation methodologies for residential properties and development of associated
information systems; (ii) further advancement of existing geospatial databases and land information systems at RGA,
including the national implementation of ISREC; and (iii) continued support to RGA’s long-term financial sustainability,
compliance with international standards for land administration, and technical and human capacity building. By doing so,
REMP 2 will set stage for turning RGA into a single, accessible, transparent, and reliable source (i.e., a single source of
truth) for all land and geospatial information in Serbia and contribute to additional revenue generation, improving spatial
and investment planning, enhancing real estate markets, supporting Serbia’s climate agenda, and improving governance
of land and natural resources for sustainable development in the long term.



                                                                                                                 Page 15 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)




 E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners

38.     The World Bank is uniquely placed to support RGA in executing the Project due to its global experience, financial
resources, and technical expertise. The Bank has extensive experience in supporting land administration and geospatial
information management systems and processes around the world and can, therefore, provide global best practice and
knowledge to support Project design and implementation. The Bank has accumulated broad experience in land
administration globally and in the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region, including from the previous REMP as well as
projects supporting cadaster modernization, mass valuation, and NSDI in countries such as Türkiye, Croatia, Moldova,
North Macedonia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. These experiences, combined with the solid technical expertise of RGA
developed over the course of the ongoing REMP, provide an excellent opportunity for the World Bank to continue its
support to Serbia’s land sector through this Project. The Bank also brings to REMP 2 its expertise in catastrophe risk
assessment and finance, such as the work undertaken by the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative
and the work that has been undertaken on increasing community resilience through improved land administration and
geospatial information.13
39.     The proposed Project activities will also build upon, or fully complement, past and ongoing initiatives financed by
other development partners. This includes the ongoing Smart Geospatial Data Infrastructure Project, or “SmartSDI”,
financed by Sida, which is supporting the provision of accurate, complete, and electronically accessible information for
the purposes of improving services and increasing transparency. Beneficiaries include land market professionals (lawyers,
13 World Bank (2013) Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI): Better Risk Information for Smarter Investments – Risk Assessment –

Summary Report; World Bank (2020) Solid Ground: Increasing Community Resilience through Improved Land Administration and Geospatial Information.

                                                                                                                                              Page 16 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


surveyors, appraisers) and organizations that deal with mortgages that rely on more accurate and accessible real estate
data to provide better services to the public. REMP 2 will also build upon Sida’s support to RGA through the
implementation of the aforementioned Portfolio Management Plan under Component C. Additionally, Dutch Kadaster,
through its Spatial II Project, is supporting RGA with improved data management, sharing and using practices as well as
supporting institutional development for the strengthening of its data sharing capacities, all of which are necessary for
ensuring the interoperability of the cadaster with other key datasets maintained by other GoS institutions that participate
and consume the data offered through the NSDI.
40.     The Project also presents an opportunity for learning and generating knowledge that can be shared with other
World Bank clients and partners in three critical areas. The first relates to the opportunity for a digital future that utilizes
geospatial information in support of planning for a greener, resilient and more sustainable future, and second to ensure
that sustainability and improved land administration and management tools are at the heart of long-term resilience and
post-disaster recovery initiatives. Third, this Project will focus on central government and local administrations
collaboration for data sharing as part of the development of Serbia’s NSDI, which will help to establish the entity as a
successful example of intergovernmental cooperation in the realm of geospatial information management from which
other countries can draw lessons for their own initiatives.

 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

41.     The Project design builds on the following key lessons drawn from the first REMP’s implementation as well as from
international best practice:
42.      Investments in the advancement of NSDI and the further development of key registries pertaining to land and
other real estate set the stage for a natural next step concerning support to the advancement of property valuation for
revenue generation, improvements in real estate market efficiency and transparency, and disaster risk management.
As illustrated during REMP’s implementation, a comprehensive mass valuation of all residential properties based on
current market values, a tax register being interoperable with the cadaster and address register, and integrated building
records helps to prevent loss of revenues from the evasion of property registration fees by enhancing the GoS’s revenue
generation through annual property tax assessments that more accurately reflect market values. These also offer the
potential for land value capture to support the provision of infrastructure and affordable, quality housing. Revenue from
registration fees is diminished through illegal buildings, informal transfers, and inability to check whether declared prices
are the true ones as well as creating a climate in which tax evasion and illegality is normalized. For this to be realized,
there needs to be a comprehensive mass valuation system based on current market values with regular revaluations. Such
a system should be unified, fairer, transparent, and more equitable than current systems.
43.      The integration and interoperability of land and geospatial information systems is a requirement for value
addition of location-based data. REMP 2 is designed to incorporate the global best practice concerning the need for full
coverage by a digital database (i.e., ISREC) and its maintenance so that it reflects realities on the ground concerning land
and property ownership and use rights. This cadastral database should also be fully interoperable with external
authoritative information systems pertaining to topics such as physical addresses, zoning, and spatial planning, as well as
civil and business registries. The development of this “Single Source of Truth”, which contains the true, current real-world
version of spatial data will help to enable geospatial information systems to communicate and exchange data in an
accurate, effective, and consistent manner, thereby helping to facilitate the advancement of NSDI. The proposed Project
will build on this important lesson from past interventions concerning geospatial information management to ensure the
successful further development of ISREC and its interoperability with other systems.
44.     Broad stakeholder engagement and dialogue is crucial for successful institutional reform and long-term
sustainability. Experiences from REMP’s implementation as well as past land sector engagements consistently articulate
the need to ensure that all affected stakeholders, such as other government entities, are consulted about the impacts of
                                                                                                                   Page 17 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


institutional reforms on their own business processes, institutional mandates, etc. Any real and/or perceived risks
associated with the envisioned reforms must also be identified with appropriate mitigation measures defined. In addition
to those identified during REMP’s implementation, lessons learned from the World Bank’s support to institutional reforms
and the associated stakeholder engagement and dialogue in neighboring countries such as Türkiye and Greece will be
considered as part of the ongoing policy discussions concerning RGA’s efforts to become a financially sustainable
institution in the long-term.

 III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

45.      The Project will be managed by RGA with activities related to RGA’s long-term institutional sustainability and
project management financed via Component C. RGA has vast experience implementing Bank-financed projects and has
built a strong partnership with the World Bank’s task team for REMP. A PIU will be housed at RGA and will manage
implementation of project activities. The PIU will include civil servants and contracted consultants and will provide day-
to-day support for project implementation. The PIU will include a PIU director in addition to a technical team consisting
of an office manager, and procurement, financial management (FM), Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), IT, data
protection/cybersecurity, environmental and social specialists, as further described in the Environmental and Social
Commitment Plan (ESCP) and the Project Operational Manual (POM). Adherence to the POM and ESCP, approved by the
World Bank, will govern the PIU’s activities by detailing consultants’ and civil servants’ expert roles, their responsibilities,
and internal processes. The PIU will oversee and monitor all Project operating costs and logistics, all in coordination with
RGA management. Additionally, the PIU will be responsible for the preparation, update, and disclosure of ESF documents
as well as overall ESF and national legislation compliance throughout Project implementation.
46.     While RGA will be solely responsible for REMP 2’s implementation, a Steering Committee comprised of Director
General of RGA, the relevant RGA sector and department directors whose units are directly related to the Project activities
shall be in charge of supervising the regular implementation of activities of REMP 2. A Project Council consisting of
members from the Ministry of Construction, Transport, and Infrastructure, the Ministry of Public Administration and Local
Self-Government, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Economy, RGA, the Statistical Office, the
Office for IT and e-Government, and the Tax Administration, among other institutions as applicable, will also be
established. The Steering Committee will report to the Project Council on a quarterly basis, or as requested by the Project
Council. Roles, responsibilities, and operational procedures for the Steering Committee and Project Council will be defined
in the POM.

 B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements

47.      Implementation progress towards the PDO will be monitored based on completed procurements, Project
disbursements, and achievement of the results indicators. Under the ongoing REMP, the PIU developed a comprehensive
M&E system to monitor the progress of the Project activities. This M&E system will be modified as needed to ensure
adequate monitoring of the PDO and intermediate results indicators and periodic reporting. In addition to implementation
support missions conducted by the Bank every six months, the PIU will be required to submit quarterly progress reports
to its management and the Bank for review. A Mid-Term Review will be carried out by the Bank at the mid-point of Project
implementation to assess the overall Project progress, identify critical implementation issues, and make any necessary
revisions to the Project design or schedule.
 C. Sustainability

48.     RGA has made vast strides in the improvement and accuracy of cadastral and legal land records as well as the
provision of public services over the past two decades. As seen during REMP implementation, it has proven capacity to
                                                                                                                   Page 18 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


implement updates to cadastral and land registry data and has transformed from a paper-based institution into one that
utilizes digital technologies for all aspects of its business operations. Moreover, its establishment of a Building Register,
advancement of NSDI capacities through the provision of new datasets such as the utility cadaster, and introduction of
property valuation methodologies make it one of the leading land administration institutions in the Western Balkans.
Nevertheless, the implementation of ISREC in all LCOs, as well the introduction of new property valuation methodologies
for residential properties will require capacity building efforts to ensure long-term sustainability. As such, the Project
includes financing for capacity building programs for enhancing the knowledge of RGA management and technical staff,
stakeholders, and data providers to effectively maintain these new initiatives after Project completion.
49.     The sustainability of the advances to be made under REMP 2 are also reinforced by two factors: (i) Serbia’s strong
high-level political commitment to land sector reform; and (ii) Serbia’s ongoing efforts to further EU integration and
compliance with key initiatives such as the INSPIRE Directive. RGA also continues to demonstrate commitment and
ownership of the reforms. Throughout project preparation, RGA has actively engaged with the Bank through informative
discussions and sharing of required data, which also demonstrates its commitment to achieving sustainable project
impact.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis

50.      Technical. The land administration system in Serbia has a strong legal framework in place. All current data is in
digital form and RGA is intensively working on data quality improvement to strengthen the reliability of land and property
data. Service provision is good, with continuous improvements through the introduction of new systems such as GeoSrbija
for geospatial information access. Staff are trained, and a comprehensive training program is in place to address needs for
any additional capacity building. RGA has strong ownership of the Project and is committed to achieving the project
objectives. There is a high level of public perception that the quality and speed of service has improved significantly since
REMP implementation began, which has been reflected in the results of past customer satisfaction surveys. RGA has
embraced the e-Government agenda that is considered one of the GoS’s top priorities. Serbia has also been recognized as
the leader on the geospatial agenda in the Western Balkans with strong progress made on advancing NSDI. There is still
work to be done to achieve best international standards in terms of harmonizing records and the speed of processing
applications, especially within some of the LCOs. This will be addressed via REMP 2’s activities. Strong partnerships have
also been developed with relevant institutions such as other agencies that report to the Ministry of Construction,
Transport and Infrastructure, the Ministry of Justice, the Tax Administration, the Ministry of Interior, the Office for
Information Technologies and e-Government, and many others with the goal of developing a strong and reliable land
administration system. RGA has also developed strong implementation capacity over the course of REMP implementation.
51.      Paris Alignment. The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Alignment on both mitigation and adaptation.
On adaptation, the climate change disaster risk screening has identified floods, drought and extreme temperature as
climate risks. The proposed Project aims to address these climate risks by supporting the development and advancement
of geospatial information to improve urban planning, land-use zoning, and the siting of critical infrastructure. More
specifically, project activities will help to provide important market information for calculating the costs of climate resilient
reconstruction and determine insurance premiums in support of crisis preparedness and disaster risk management efforts
in Serbia that are led by government entities. The satellite imagery for updated key registries for the Building Register will
also feed into RGA’s Risk Register and will be directly relevant for the identification of climate impacts such as floods,
drought, and extreme temperature along with zones that are most vulnerable to these impacts. Additionally, climate
considerations will be integrated into spatial and disaster risk planning, and in targeting climate disaster related evaluation
activities for zones that are most vulnerable to these climate impacts.


                                                                                                                   Page 19 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


52.      Concerning the reduction of mitigation risks, a crucial mitigation activity highlighted in Serbia’s updated NDC is its
pledge to cut GHG emissions by 33.3 percent by 2030 compared to 1990 levels. Since this is a land administration project,
according to the Paris Alignment guidance notes prepared by the World Bank’s Global Practice for Urban,
Resilience/Disaster Risk Management, and Land, activities such as the development of geospatial information and
property valuation, are considered universally aligned and do not have a negative impact on Serbia’s low-GHG emissions
development pathway. For instance, no foreseen construction of emission intensive infrastructure is expected to be
financed. However, some hardware and equipment such as IT servers will be purchased as part of datacenter expansion
initiatives in support of the advancement of Serbia’s NSDI initiatives. The new equipment to be purchased via REMP 2 will
comply with energy efficiency standards to cut any potential emissions associated with high energy consumption.
53.      Economic and Financial. The Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) prepared by the World Bank team reveals that
the Project’s economic benefits are estimated to significantly exceed its costs, even if only a sub-set of fiscal revenue
sources and economic benefits are considered. Reliably quantifying the wide-ranging socio-economic benefits of the
Project is challenging without further data collection. However, as the EFA described in Annex 3 shows, REMP 2 is expected
to yield substantial financial and wider socio-economic benefits, which are expected to start materializing as soon as the
new data is collected, information systems are integrated, and mass valuation is carried out.
54.      THE cost-benefit analysis yields an estimated new present financial benefit of EUR 65.92 million associated with
REMP 2. This figure is likely to be an underestimate as it only considers the fiscal revenue benefits and not wider socio-
economic benefits. The total additional fiscal revenue over an operational period of ten years is estimated at EUR 90.18
million. The estimated benefit assumes a EUR 30 million investment package, a 6 percent discount rate and a planning
horizon of 10 years. Since the benefits of the Project are expected to start once implementation has progressed to a level
where the Building Register and mass valuation enable a more transparent land and real estate market, the fiscal impacts
are expected to start towards the end of the implementation period. The majority of additional fiscal revenue is expected
to be generated by increased property tax collection, resulting from a higher compliance rate and taxation of unregistered
buildings that were so far avoiding taxation. This is followed by the annual reduction of government spending on disaster-
related repair and reconstruction spending.
55.     Net benefits are expected to materialize soon after the operationalization of the new land administration systems.
The financial analysis assumes that positive fiscal revenues are expected starting in 2030, after the Building Register has
been updated and mass valuation of the building stock has been conducted. The Project is expected to breakeven in 2031,
only one year after the project implementation phase has ended, resulting from a higher compliance rate and taxation of
unregistered buildings that were so far avoiding taxation.

 B. Fiduciary

56.    Financial Management (FM). The Project will continue to benefit from the appropriate FM arrangements that
have been put in place under the ongoing REMP. The existing PIU at RGA for REMP and its Additional Financing will be
responsible for implementation of the FM arrangements of REMP 2. These FM arrangements include planning and
budgeting, accounting, financial reporting, flow of funds (including disbursement), internal controls, and external audit.
The application of the controls and procedures in practice will be verified via World Bank supervision.
57.      The existing PIU has acceptable capacity and a track record for meeting project fiduciary expectations. The existing
FM arrangements at the PIU are satisfactory, with appropriate staffing, sound internal controls, and effective planning
and budgeting, accounting, financial reporting, and disbursement. In particular, the existing FM system (i) ensures use of
adequate accounting software; (ii) have no major issues as revealed by the audits of REMP and its Additional Financing;
and (iii) has always sent the Interim, Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs) on time, all of which were acceptable to the
Bank.

                                                                                                                  Page 20 of 56
          The World Bank
          Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


58.     The PIU will submit a full set of IUFRs for each calendar quarter throughout the life of the Project, which will be
due 45 days after the end of each quarter. There is already an acceptable accounting system within the PIU that will be
used for project accounting and reporting, including principal financial reports used as quarterly IUFRs as well as annual
project financial statements.
59.     The annual audited project financial statements will be provided to the World Bank within six months of the end
of each fiscal year and at Project closing. The audit will be conducted by a private auditing firm acceptable to the world
Bank, and in line with agreed Terms of Reference (TORs). The audited project financial statements will be posted by RGA
on its website within two weeks of the audit report’s acceptance by the World bank.
60.     The Designated Account (DA) for administering the Project funds will be opened at the National Bank of Serbia
(NBS) in EUR and will be managed by RGA. The corresponding Serbian dinar (RSD) account will be opened at the Treasury
Administration. The control environment in the NBS and the Treasury is considered acceptable. Allowed methods of
disbursement will include advances to the DA, direct payments, reimbursement, and special commitments.
61.     The overall FM risk for REMP 2 is Moderate, based on the above-referenced arrangements and the Project design.
In order to finalize the FM arrangements, a POM acceptable to the World Bank will be prepared. The POM will provide
more details on the implementation of the FM arrangements and the effective communication channels and reporting
lines between RGA, the PIU, and other involved parties.
62.     Procurement. Procurement for REMP 2 will be carried out by the PIU at RGA and in accordance with the World
Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (Procurement in Investment Project Financing Goods, Works, Non-
Consulting and Consulting Services, Fifth Edition, September 2023) and the provisions stipulated in the Loan Agreement.
The Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents, including evaluation report forms for procurement of Goods, Civil Works,
Non-Consulting Services and Selection of Consultants will be used. Procurement for the Project will be carried out by three
Procurement Specialists14. RGA will ensure that this procurement arrangement remains throughout the implementation
of REMP 2. The PIU has some experience with implementing the World Bank Procurement Regulations given that REMP 1
was largely implemented using the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers: Procurement in Investment
Project Financing – Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services (August 2018). However, there is a lack of
experience in applying some of the new features from the latest edition of the Procurement Regulations, such as
mandatory use of rated criteria for all international competitive biddings, which may be considered a potential
procurement risk that can be mitigated by training PIU and RGA staff who will be involved in the procurement of activities
during REMP 2’s implementation.
63.     The procurement risks rating for REMP 2 is Moderate. A Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD)
was finalized by the Borrower and the World Bank reviewed it on April 25, 2024. The assessed procurement risks and
mitigation measures are described in Table 1. The initial procurement plan for the Project is presented in Annex 1.
64.     The Procurement Plan prepared by the PIU as part of the PPSD includes activities/packages to be financed under
Components A, B, and C of REMP 2. Project procurement communication and Procurement Plan implementation will be
performed through the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system. The Procurement Plan shall set
forth those contracts that will be subject to the World Bank’s prior review. All other contracts shall be subject to post
review by the World Bank.
65.      Based on the market analysis presented in the PPSD, the PIU has identified that one of the procurement items
estimated to cost EUR 3.5 million (i.e., the very high-resolution satellite imagery) could be delivered by only one company;
justification for the proposed direct selection for this contract, as well as for any other contract proposed for direct
selection, will be provided by the PIU in accordance with the provisions of the World Bank Procurement Regulations.

14 One Senior Procurement Specialist/Deputy Director; ne Procurement Specialist/Environmental Specialist; one Procurement Specialist.



                                                                                                                                        Page 21 of 56
       The World Bank
       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



66.      Additionally, prior to signing a contract with a state-owned enterprise should the necessity arise during project
implementation, the eligibility of the company should be verified to ensure that it is eligible, otherwise a proper
justification shall be prepared and submitted to the Bank’s procurement authorities with a request to grant a waiver. The
justification should be based on the confirmation that implementation of the Project requires awarding a contract to an
otherwise ineligible state-owned enterprise due to the absence of suitable private sector alternatives, or as a consequence
of the regulatory framework, or because their participation is critical to Project implementation.
                                 Table 1: Key Procurement Risks and Proposed Mitigation
                           Risks                                                   Mitigation Measures
 Lack of experience in applying the provisions of the latest   Conduct training on the provisions of the latest edition of
 edition of the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations due       the Bank’s Procurement Regulations for the PIU and RGA
 to REMP 1 use the regulations’ August 2018 edition.           staff involved in the Project-financed procurement
                                                               activities.
 Poor capacity in preparation of Terms of Reference and        PIU/RGA will hire consultants/experts to improve in-
 technical specifications for Project-financed                 house capacity.
 procurement.
 Lengthy evaluation process of high-value and complex          PIU/RGA will engage technical consultants in evaluations
 procurement packages.                                         when needed.
 Low level of participation in Project-financed                Ensure broader advertisement (in the local and
 procurements.                                                 international media) of the Project-financed contracting
                                                               opportunities and provide sufficient time for bid/proposal
                                                               preparation.
 C. Legal Operational Policies

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


 D. Environmental and Social

67.      Overall Environmental and Social (E&S) risk of the Project is Moderate. The Project is not expected to have
significant adverse environmental impacts, as it will mostly support desk-based work, (i.e., software development for the
development of a mass valuation system for residential properties; digital transformation of RGA; improvement of
cybersecurity, data and systems protection and recovery, etc.). The Project will not support any civil works. It was
confirmed that the initially planned activity related to drone purchase and usage has been dropped. The only potential
indirect adverse environmental risk and impacts might arise from IT infrastructure upgrades (including the supply of
hardware, servers, block storage, etc.). These issues can be effectively mitigated by aligning with the national regulatory
framework and incorporating provisions under the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) for: (i) energy
efficiency standards for hardware appliances; and (ii) the management of electrical and electronic equipment waste (e-
waste). Although not confirmed, there may be a possibility for a small-scale retrofitting works (e.g., for the server room)
that could be linked to the hardware installation. Any identified environmental risks and impacts (e.g., dust, noise, waste,
OHS) and mitigation measures will be addressed in the ESMPs checklist to be prepared prior to the commencement of

                                                                                                               Page 22 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


works. On the other hand, the Project will bring some positive environmental and climate change impacts as the activities
under Component B (Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development) will track urbanization and
urban sprawl trends, which strain infrastructure and deplete carbon sinks. Public agencies will utilize information from the
advanced GeoSrbija National Geoportal, which enables interoperability and data sharing among various agencies) for
disaster simulations, land use planning, and climate-smart decision-making.
68.     Overall, the adverse environmental risks and impacts associated with this Project are anticipated to be minimal
or negligible in scope. Consequently, the environmental risk rating is assessed as Low.
69.      Social risk is considered Moderate. The Project involves various activities related to land tenure systems, including
mass valuation, updating building registry, and digitalization of cadaster services. The main social risks identified are (i)
concerns regarding fairness, particularly in addressing the unique needs and challenges of vulnerable groups within this
context; and (ii) downstream risks related to potential land disputes associated with insufficient transparency and
accuracy in the mass valuation system and its results. Financing of drones has been excluded from the Project. In the
appraisal stage, it has also been clarified that digitalization will not lead to any job displacement. Project activities will not
directly influence any potential land disputes. Any downstream risks of land disputes potentially triggered by mass
valuation will be prevented or mitigated through various measures such as establishment of clear processes, accurate
data collection, stakeholder engagement, grievance mechanisms, ensuring legal alignment, and technology integration.
These measures will be further elaborated in the POM to ultimately mitigate the likelihood of misinterpretation and
disputes arising. RGA will not carry out formal registration of informal properties but will record them in their system,
which will allow the GoS to get an understanding of the type of irregularities and illegalities. Mass valuation aims for a
fairer tax system by addressing existing inequalities, but it may inadvertently exacerbate disparities by disproportionately
valuing properties in certain areas or demographic groups. Undervaluation of properties in certain areas (often those with
lower incomes or predominantly occupied by certain demographic groups) can hinder homeowners’ access to credit and
other financial resources, while overvaluation may burden homeowners with higher taxes or limit affordable housing
options, which is particularly unfavorable for the poor. To achieve fair valuation, RGA will utilize accurate data, consider
socioeconomic disparities and vulnerable groups, involve stakeholders, continuously update methods, and implement
oversight for ensuring transparency and accountability. In this process, RGA will follow international best practices
established by the International Association of Assessing Officers, as well as adhere to International Valuation Standards
and European Valuation Standards. These standards, adopted by Serbia, include ethical guidelines and professional codes
of conduct that are binding for all valuers involved in mass valuation and will guide system development. To prevent
potential misunderstandings, the Project will utilize transparent and standardized valuation methodologies, clearly
documented, and widely understood. Information pertaining to the valuation process will be easily accessible to the
public, potentially through official websites, including details such as valuation criteria and assessment results.
Mechanisms for addressing grievances and resolving misinformation during mass valuation will be established, with all
procedures outlined in the POM and SEP. The SEP, prepared for stakeholder and citizen engagement, prioritizes reaching
vulnerable groups with tailored strategies. A Social Specialist from existing staff will be appointed to oversee SEP
implementation. The Building Register will not contain original satellite imagery but electronic versions. Overall, social
risk of the Project is moderate but reversible. The existing legal framework, ESCP and SEP, will be applied, as appropriate,
for effective risk management.
70.      Technical design risk. The Project involves the collection and processing of sensitive personal data. All data
protection and cybersecurity risks will be addressed by implementing national laws and regulations including in the design
of the GeoSrbija system (access controls including authentication of users, cyberthreat monitoring software, etc.). A recent
audit by the Serbian data protection authority determined the design of the platform complied with legal requirements.
In line with ISO standards 9001 (Quality management systems), 27001 (Information security, cybersecurity, and privacy
protection), and 27701 (Privacy information management systems), RGA maintains rigorous data protection protocols and
tools, including multiple firewalls, Endpoint Detection and Response, a Security Information and Event Management tool,

                                                                                                                    Page 23 of 56
       The World Bank
       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


and “SOC 24/7”, which is an operational and security management center that provides continuous protection and
monitoring of information systems and networks. A detailed description of all of RGA’s data protection protocols and tools
can be found in Annex 4. Data protection and data and cybersecurity specialists will also be recruited to oversee data
protection policy and regulation compliance for all outputs to be developed during REMP 2’s implementation. To address
potential digital divide in accessing digital services, the Project will draw upon international guidelines and successful
practices from the previous REMP. This may include collecting data on digital access and usage, providing support and
adapting the system to accommodate the needs of diverse vulnerable groups.

 V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES

71.       Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution
Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute
resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the
attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on
how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit
https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 VI. KEY RISKS

72.    The overall residual Project risk is considered Moderate based on adopted and planned mitigation measures.
Upon review of risks pertaining to Political and Governance, the Macroeconomy, Sector Strategies and Policies, Technical
Design of Project or Program, Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability, and Stakeholders, it was
determined that they are inherently moderate risks.
73.     The combined Fiduciary rating for Procurement and FM is Moderate. RGA has established fiduciary systems and
capacity for REMP 2. As noted in the Fiduciary section above, both Procurement and FM risks are rated Moderate. The
task team will work closely with RGA to improve capacities and make any modifications to existing fiduciary arrangements
as needed throughout Project implementation.
74.      E&S risk is rated Moderate. The environmental risk is rated as Low, and the social risk is rated as Moderate.
Therefore, the overall E&S risk is rated as Moderate. A detailed explanation of the assessment of these risks and assigned
rating is presented in the E&S section above.




                                                                                                             Page 24 of 56
         The World Bank
         Second Real Estate Management Project(P500611)



                                                                    VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                      Closing Period
                                                            Improved transparency of Serbia's real property management systems
   Enhanced data from multiple registries available via GeoSrbija (Text)
   Jul/2024                                                                                      Jul/2029
   Data available on multiple non-integrated registries and not interoperable and/or             Validated data from multiple registries available and interoperable via GeoSrbija.
   accessible through one aggregated source
                                                             Improved accessibility of Serbia's real property management systems
   Population with access to property services (Percentage)
   Jul/2024                                                                                      Jul/2029
   40                                                                                            90
                                                              Improved reliability of Serbia's real property management systems
   E-services providing authoritative data for official use through GeoSrbija (Number)
   Jul/2024                                                                                      Jul/2029
   2                                                                                             40
   RGA's institutional sustainability enhanced to ensure business continuity (Text)
   Jul/2024                                                                                      Jul/2029
   Strategic and methodological documents in support of sustainability not adopted or            RGA's Strategy and Business Plans for Institutional Sustainability are adopted, Roadmap is
   implemented                                                                                   updated, and Portfolio Management Plan is Implemented


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                                   Closing Period
                                                            Component A: Implementation of the Property Mass Valuation System
   Population living in a city or municipality for which residential mass valuation models have been developed and are ready to be used (Percentage)
   Jun/2024                                                                                   Jun/2029
   0                                                                                          85



                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 25 of 56
     The World Bank
     Second Real Estate Management Project(P500611)


Online access to mass valuation information system by municipalities, government authorities, citizens, and businesses (Text)
Jul/2024                                                                                  Jul/2029
No access                                                                                 Data is made available through (i) Mass Property Valuation Data Distribution Services; and
                                                                                          (ii) Market Information Data Distribution Services
Residential property price indexes are published on a quarterly basis (Yes/No)
Jul/2024                                                                                  Jul/2029
No                                                                                        Yes
Improvement, updating, and upgrading of the Building Register (Text)
Jun/2024                                                                                  Jun/2029
Initial Building Register created                                                         Building Register upgraded and made interoperable with other key datasets
                                                  Component B: Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development
LCOs using the Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster (ISREC -- Phase III) (Percentage)
Jun/2024                                                                                  Jun/2029
25                                                                                        90
RGA units using the Infrastructure Cadaster System (Percentage)
Jun/2024                                                                                  Jun/2029
0                                                                                         100
Women with land rights confirmed as a result of ISREC property data completion (Number)
Jul/2024                                                                                  Jul/2029
0                                                                                         120000
Public institutions with access to key geospatial datasets to improve forecasting and assessment of the consequences of disaster and climate hazard events and inform climate-
related decision-making (Number)
Jun/2024                                                                                  Jun/2029
0                                                                                         5
People using digitally enabled services (Number)
Jun/2024                                                                                  Jun/2029
0                                                                                         30000
                                               Component C: Institutional Improvement, RGA Sustainability, and Project Management
Public awareness campaigns completed for new RGA products and services (Number)
Jun/2024                                                                                  Jun/2029
0                                                                                         40
Persons who participate in capacity building programs (Number)
Jun/2024                                                                                  Jun/2029
0                                                                                         2500



                                                                                                                                                                           Page 26 of 56
     The World Bank
     Second Real Estate Management Project(P500611)


  ➢Women who participate in capacity building programs (Percentage)
Jul/2024                                                                                    Jul/2029
0                                                                                           30
Users' and stakeholders' satisfaction with respect to the efficiency, transparency, access, and reliability of RGA's delivery of new services (Percentage)
Jun/2024                                                                                    Jun/2029
0                                                                                           90




                                                                                                                                                             Page 27 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

Improved transparency of Serbia's real property management systems
Enhanced data from multiple registries available via GeoSrbija (Text)
                           This indicator will measure improvements in the transparency and accessibility of Serbia's property data through the
Description                interoperability of key registries such as the Address registry, Building Register, Sales Price Register, etc., with relevant
                           validated data available via GeoSrbija.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
Improved accessibility of Serbia's real property management systems
Population with access to property services (Percentage)
                           This indicator will measure the percentage of Serbia's population with access to the lates property registration and
Description
                           transactions services as a result of the implementation of ISREC to an additional 110 LCOs as a result of the Project.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
Improved reliability of Serbia's real property management systems
E-services providing authoritative data for official use through GeoSrbija (Number)
                           This indicator will measure the number of e-services produced for the use of reliable, authoritative datasets for official
Description
                           use through RGA's distribution platform (GeoSrbija) as a result of the Project.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
RGA’s institutional sustainability enhanced to ensure business continuity (Text)
                           This indicator will track the transformation of RGA into a sustainable, self-financing institution as a result of policy dialogue
                           support throughout the Project. To measure RGA’s sustainability, progress will tracked based on (i) the adoption of RGA’s
Description
                           Strategy and Business Plans for Institutional Sustainability by the GoS; (ii) updates to RGA’s Roadmap; and (iii) the
                           implementation of the Portfolio Management Plan.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components

 Component A: Implementation of the Property Mass Valuation System
 Population living in a city or municipality for which residential mass valuation models have been developed and are ready to be used



                                                                                                                                            Page 28 of 56
       The World Bank
       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


(Percentage)
                           This indicator will measure the percentage of Serbia's population living in a city or municipality for which residential
Description
                           mass valuation models have been developed and are ready to be used.
Frequency                  Semi-annual
Data source                RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
Online access to mass valuation information system by municipalities, government authorities, citizens, and businesses (Text)
                           This indicator will track progress towards the development and operationalization of data and services provided via the
                           mass valuation information system to be established as a result of the Project. It will monitor the types of services that
Description                will be tailored for use by municipalities, government authorities, citizens, and businesses. The indicator will be considered
                           achieved upon development and operationalization of (i) Mass Property Valuation Data Distribution Services; and (ii)
                           Market Information Data Distribution Services.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
Residential property price indexes are published on a quarterly basis (Yes/No)
                           This indicator will track the development and regular publication of residential property price indexes on a quarterly
Description
                           basis as a result of the Project.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
Improvement, updating, and upgrading of the Building Register (Text)
                           This indicator will track the further development of the Building Register maintained by RGA as a result of the Project.
Description                Progress will be mesaured through the Building Register’s interoperability with other key datasets maintained by RGA as
                           well as its upgrades in the form of data quality improvement and service provision.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
Component B: Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development
LCOs using the Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster (ISREC -- Phase III) (Percentage)
                           This indicator will measure progress on the national implementation of ISREC as a result of the Project, by monitoring
Description
                           and reporting the share of LCOs using the Integrated System of Real Estate Cadaster.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection



                                                                                                                                         Page 29 of 56
       The World Bank
       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


RGA units using the Infrastructure Cadaster System (Percentage)
                            This indicator will measure the percentage of RGA units that use the Infrastructure Cadaster System to be established
Description
                            during the Project.
Frequency                    Semi-annual
Data source                  RGA
Methodology for Data
                             Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                             RGA
Collection
Women with land rights confirmed as a result of ISREC property data completion (Number)
                            This indicator will measure the number of women who will have their land rights confirmed upon the completion of land
                            ownership information as a result of the recordation of their unique ID number as a result of the Project. As the
Description
                            indicator will measure the number of women beneficiaries as a result of REMP 2 specifically, the baseline is set at 0 with
                            an end target of 120,000.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
Public institutions with access to key geospatial datasets to improve forecasting and assessment of the consequences of disaster and climate
hazard events and inform climate-related decision-making (Number)
                            This indicator will measure the number of Public institutions with access to key geospatial datasets and other products
Description                 and services developed during the Project to improve forecasting and assessment of the consequences of disaster and
                            climate hazard events and inform climate-related decision-making.
Frequency                    Semi-annual
Data source                  RGA
Methodology for Data
                             Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                             RGA
Collection
People using digitally enabled services (Number)
                            This World Bank Group Scorecard indicator will measure the number of people or businesses who use new or enhanced,
Description                 digitally-enabled services through World Bank Group support, including new, digitally-enabled services as well as
                            enhancements to existing, digitally-delivered services, provided by the public or private sector.
Frequency                   Semi-annual
Data source                 RGA
Methodology for Data
                            Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            RGA
Collection
Component C: Institutional Improvement, RGA Sustainability, and Project Management
Public awareness campaigns completed for new RGA products and services (Number)
                             This indicator will measure the number of public awareness campaigns completed for new RGA products and services
Description
                             developed as a result of the Project.
Frequency                    Semi-annual
Data source                  RGA
Methodology for Data
                             Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data      RGA



                                                                                                                                      Page 30 of 56
       The World Bank
       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


Collection
Persons who participate in capacity building programs (Number)
                           This indicator will measure the number of persons (RGA technical staff, other stakeholders) who participate in capacity
Description
                           building programs for new products and services to be developed as a result of the Project.
Frequency                  Semi-annual
Data source                RGA
Methodology for Data
                           Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           RGA
Collection
Women who participate in capacity building programs (Percentage)
                           This indicator will measure the percentage of woman out of the total number of persons (RGA technical staff, other
 Description               stakeholders) who participate in capacity building programs for new products and services to be developed as a result of
                           the Project.
 Frequency                 Semi-annual
 Data source               RGA
 Methodology for Data
                           Progress Reports
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                           RGA
 Collection
Users' and stakeholders' satisfaction with respect to the efficiency, transparency, access, and reliability of RGA’s delivery of new services
(Percentage)
                           This indicator will measure the percentage of satisfaction of users and stakeholders with respect to access and quality of
Description
                           new products and services that will be developed by RGA as a result of the Project.
Frequency                  Semi-annual
Data source                RGA
Methodology for Data
                           Progress Reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           RGA
Collection
Women users' and stakeholders' satisfaction with respect to the efficiency, transparency, access, and reliability of RGA’s delivery of new
services (Percentage)
                           This indicator will measure the percentage of satisfaction of users and stakeholders with respect to access and quality of
 Description
                           new products and services that will be developed by RGA as a result of the Project.
 Frequency                 Semi-annual
 Data source               RGA
 Methodology for Data
                           Progress Reports
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                           RGA
 Collection




                                                                                                                                    Page 31 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                               ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan



                                              COUNTRY: Republic of Serbia
                                         Second Real Estate Management Project
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
1.      The main institution responsible for implementing REMP 2 will be RGA, with the General Director of RGA having
the ultimate responsibility for the Project. RGA has built significant implementation capacity over the years, and this will
be an asset in implementing the proposed Project efficiently. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be financed via
Component C will be in charge of the day-to-day management of the Project and will be comprised of a team leader (i.e.,
project manager) and a team of technical and administrative staff capable of ensuring efficient Project implementation.
The PIU will include a PIU director in addition to a technical team consisting of an office manager, and procurement, FM,
M&E, IT, data protection/cybersecurity, environmental and social specialists, as further described in the ESCP and the
POM. Adherence to the POM and ESCP, approved by the World Bank, will govern the PIU’s activities by detailing
consultants’ and civil servants’ expert roles, their responsibilities, and internal processes. The PIU will prepare the
procurement packages for the Project activities. It will also help coordinate and oversee the implementation teams and
will work with other teams working on complementary project/TA financed outside of REMP 2. The PIU will be responsible
for the preparation of the Terms of Reference for technical experts who will be recruited for the implementation teams.
The M&E Specialist will be responsible for the preparation of the M&E framework and design of the reporting templates,
which will be used by the implementation teams to provide timely and accurate information on the progress with the
achievement of results throughout Project implementation. Additionally, the PIU will be responsible for the preparation,
update, and disclosure of ESF documents as well as overall ESF and national legislation compliance throughout Project
implementation.
2.       While RGA will be solely responsible for REMP 2’s implementation, a Steering Committee comprised of Director
General of RGA, the relevant RGA sector and department directors whose units are directly related to the Project activities
shall be in charge of supervising the regular implementation of activities. A Project Council consisting of members from
the Ministry of Construction, Transport, and Infrastructure, the Ministry of Public Administration and Local Self-
Government, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Economy, RGA, the Statistical Office, the
Office for IT and e-Government, and the Tax Administration will also be established. The Steering Committee will report
to the Project Council on a quarterly basis, or as requested by the Project Council. Roles, responsibilities, and operational
procedures for the Steering Committee and Project Council will be defined in the POM.
3.       Annual Workplan. Based on the information concerning agency prioritization, Project assessments and financial
audits, the PIU will prepare an annual workplan and budget to be submitted at the end of the previous calendar year,
which will include (i) all activities to be carried out under REMP 2 during the following year; (ii) other TA or training
activities that may be required under the Project, including the purpose, cost and type of training and draft Terms of
Reference; and (iii) a proposed financing plan. Each annual workplan will be discussed with, and approved by, the World
Bank.
Financial Management and Disbursement
4.     Implementing Entity and Staffing. The existing PIU at RGA for REMP and its Additional Financing will be
responsible for the implementation of the Project’s FM arrangements. The team responsible for the Project’s FM
arrangements at the PIU is staffing with an FM Specialist and FM Assistant—the same staff who have been implementing
REMP and its Additional Financing that will close on July 31, 2024. The FM team will perform tasks related to planning and

                                                                                                                  Page 32 of 56
             The World Bank
             Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


budgeting, accounting, financial reporting, disbursement, and ensuring application of internal controls, and will work with
the external auditors during the audit of financial statements.
5.       Planning and Budgeting. The Project’s budget will be prepared by RGA through the PIU. There is sufficient
capacity for planning and budgeting within the PIU in order to manage project funds in terms of optimal allocation,
liquidity, and overall performance. Variances of actual versus budgeted figures should be monitored on a regular basis,
appropriately analyzed, and correct actions taken. The PIU will prepare in-year financial plans and cash forecasts based
on the Project’s budget, thus ensuring adequate liquidity management and withdrawal of funds.
6.       Accounting System. Acceptable accounting software is in place and administered by the PIU, and it will be used
for project accounting and reporting. Accounting records should include appropriate analytics of expenditures per
contracts and each specific payment. The Project will follow a cash basis of accounting (cash based IPSAS), recording
transactions when actual payments are done, rather than when they are incurred. Transactions should be accounted for
within 8 days after incurring them. There should also be appropriate back-up of accounting records on external drives, as
well as appropriate security regulation regarding access and editing rights of the financial information.
7.           Internal Controls. Some of the key controls to be applied for the Project should include:
     (i)         Appropriate authorizations and approvals of all purchases, relevant documentation, transactions of
                 payments, etc.;
     (ii)        Segregation of duties so that different persons are responsible for different phases of a transaction;
     (iii)       Reconciliations between project accounting records and other relevant sources of information (Client
                 Connection, bank account statements, etc.) performed at least monthly by senior finance staff; and
     (iv)        Original documentation supporting all project transactions is properly filed.
8.      The POM will provide more details on the design of the internal controls processes and procedures as well as their
application in practice.
9.       Contract Management. Respective technical staff at the PIU will evaluate and select contractors, act as signatory
to the contracts, letters of acceptance of goods and services and monitor and evaluate the contract implementation and
quality of deliverables. The FM staff will perform checks and controls of contract commitments, payments due under each
contract, and review invoices and the accompanying documentation for correctness and completeness. Upon technical
staff acceptance and approval of the goods received and services rendered, the FM staff will process payments to
contractors and account for the transactions.
10.     Financial Reporting. The PIU will submit a full set of IUFRs consolidated for all project components and sub-
components for each calendar quarter throughout the life of the Project. The IUFRs will be due 45 days after the end of
each quarter. The format of the IUFRs will be agreed between the GoS and the World Bank and attached the POM. The
following financial reports will be submitted to the Bank:
     •       The Statement of Sources and Uses;
     •       The Statement of Expenditure by Activity;
     •       Designated Accounts Statements; and
     •       Notes to the Statements.
11.     The PIU has acceptable accounting software that will be used for project accounting and reporting, including
quarterly IUFRs and annual project financial statements.




                                                                                                                Page 33 of 56
              The World Bank
              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


12.    External Audit. The annual audit of the project financial statements will be conducted by a private audit firm
acceptable to the World Bank in line with agreed TORs. The TOR will be agreed between the GoS and the World Bank and
attached to the POM.
13.    The audit of the project financial statements will be funded by REMP 2. The audit report will be submitted to the
World Bank no later than six months after the end of the audited period. The audited project financial statements will be
posted on the RGA website within two weeks upon the audit report being accepted by the World Bank.
14.           Financial Management Covenants. The FM covenants for REMP 2 will be as follows:
      (i)        The PIU is to maintain an adequate financial management system;
      (ii)       The PIU is to prepare IUFRs for each calendar quarter and deliver to the Bank no later than 45 days after the
                 end of the reporting quarter.
      (iii)      Annual project financial statements audited by a private audit firm acceptable to the Bank and such audit is
                 to be delivered to the Bank not later than six months after the end of the audited period.
15.      Funds Flow and Disbursement Arrangements. Project funds will flow from the World Bank Loan Account to the
DA opened by RGA at the NBS. This will be a foreign currency account (EUR) from which the funds will be withdrawn and
will be used only for the purpose of inflows and outflows under respective project components. Payments in foreign
currency to contractors based abroad will be executed directly from the DA. Funds needed for payments in local currency
will be transferred to a corresponding Serbian dinar (RSD) account opened at the Treasury for the same purpose. RGA will
prepare withdrawal applications for the replenishment of the DA. Allowed methods of disbursement will be advances to
the DA, direct payments, reimbursement, and special commitments.
16.      The ceiling for the DA will be defined in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL) that accompanies
the Loan Agreement. Applications for replenishment of the DA will be submitted monthly or when one-third of the amount
has been withdrawn, whichever occurs first. Documentation requirements for replenishment would follow standard Bank
procedures as described in the Disbursement Handbook. Before funds from the Loan Account may be withdrawn or
committed, the authorized representative of the implementing entities, as designated in the Loan Agreement, must
furnish to the world Bank, electronically through the Client Connection website (http://clientconnection.worldbank.org),
or through an authorized signatory designation letter, the names of the officials authorized (i) to sign and submit
applications for withdrawal; and (ii) to receive Secure Identification Credentials (SIDC) from the World Bank.
17.      Financial Management Supervision Plan. During project implementation, the World Bank will supervise the
Project’s FM arrangements in two main ways: (i) review the Project’s IUFRs for each calendar quarter, as well as the
Project’s annual audited financial statements and auditor’s management letter; and (ii) perform on-site supervisions,
review the Project’s FM and disbursement arrangements to ensure compliance with the Bank’s minimum requirements.
The on-site supervision will include monitoring of agreed actions, review of randomly selected transactions, review
internal controls, and other specific supervision activities. Supervision will be performed by the Bank-accredited FM
Specialist.
Procurement Arrangements
18.      As per the requirements of the Bank’s Procurement Regulations, a Project Procurement Strategy Document
(PPSD) has been developed by the PIU and reviewed by the World Bank on April 25, 2024. Market analysis has been carried
out for different packages of procurement, and, based on the findings, decisions on the packages and lots have been
finalized for goods and technical services to ensure adequate participation of bidders. Consultancy contracts are also
framed based on market research and packaging in terms of scope and services.



                                                                                                                   Page 34 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


19.     General Procurement Notices will be prepared by the PIU based on the template available at the World Bank’s
website and submitted to the World Bank to arrange for publication in the United Nations Development Business online
and on the World Bank’s external website after the loan negotiations.
20.     Procurement of goods, works, and non-consulting services. Goods may be procured using procedures and
methods (Request for Proposals, Request for Bids, Request for Quotations and Direct Selection) in accordance with Section
VI. Approved Selection Methods: Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services of the Procurement Regulations.
21.     Based on the market analysis presented in the PPSD, the PIU has identified that one of the items in the
Procurement Plan (i.e., Procurement of satellite imagery, estimated to cost EUR 3.5 million) could be delivered by only
one company under the Direct Selection method. Justification for this proposed direct selection as well as for direct
selection proposed for any other contract during project implementation, will be provided by the PIU in accordance with
the World Bank Procurement Regulations.
22.      Additionally, prior to signing a contract with any state-owned enterprise should the necessity arise during project
implementation, the eligibility of the company should be verified to make sure that it is eligible, otherwise a proper
justification shall be prepared and submitted to the Bank’s procurement authorities with a request to grant a waiver. The
justification should be based on the confirmation that implementation of the Project requires awarding a contract to an
otherwise ineligible state-owned enterprise due to the absence of suitable private sector alternatives, or as a consequence
of the regulatory framework, or because their participation is critical to project implementation.
23.     IT systems procurement will use the World Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents (Initial Selection Document,
Request for Proposals Single Stage/Request for Proposals Two Stage). The draft PPSD makes reference to the available
robust international market for IT procurement and specifies that procurement notices will be published locally and
internationally.
24.     Procurement of consulting services will use the World Bank standard procurement documents. Following
provisions of the Procurement Regulations, Section VII, “Approved Selection Methods: Consulting Services”, the selection
methods to be used are (i) Quality- and Cost-Based Selection; (ii) Least Cost Selection; (iii) Fixed Budget Selection; (iv)
Quality Based Selection; (v) Consultant’s Qualifications Based Selection; and (vi) Direct Selection. Individual consultants
are selected from those that expressed interest in response to a Request for Expression of Interest or through limited
competitive selection. For direct selection of individual consultants, due justifications under the circumstances, as
specified in Paragraph 7.39 of Section VII of the Regulations, apply.
25.    Operating Costs. The activities to be financed by the Project (as defined in the Loan Agreement) will be procured
in compliance with the POM that will be reviewed and found acceptable to the Bank.
26.    Post-Review Percentages and Frequency. Contracts not subject to the Bank’s prior review will be subject to post
review by the World Bank’s Procurement Specialist assigned to the Project. Post review of contracts will be carried out
once per year. At a minimum, one out of five contracts will be randomly selected for post review. Physical inspection will
be conducted for at least 10 percent of the contracts.
                                        Table 1: Initial Project Procurement Plan




                                                                                     Proc Method
                                                              Cost

                                                                                                           Prior/Post
                                    COMPONENTS /
                                                                          Type                     Pcks
                                                          estimation

                       Activity #
                                    ACTIVITIES IN
                                                            in EUR
            Item #
                                      REMP-2
                                                            (IBRD)




                                                                                                                        Page 35 of 56
The World Bank
Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


                     Component A –
                     Implementation of the
1.        A
                     property mass valuation
                     system
                     Subcomponent A1.
                     Support to Mass
2.        A.1        Valuation for Residential
                     and Non-Residential
                     Properties
                     Consultant for Sales
3.        A.1.1
                     Price Register data entry
                     Consultant for Sales Price
                     Register data entry and
4.        A.1.1.1                                   800,000    CS   DS    Multi    Post
                     verification(14 local
                     consultants)
                     Consultant for Sales Price
                     Register data entry and
5.        A.1.1.1a                                  200,000    CS   IC    Multi    Post
                     verification(4 local
                     consultants)
                     Consultant for the QC of
6.        A.1.1.2    the Sales Price Register       406,000    CS   DS    Multi    Post
                     data (6 local consultants)
                     Consultant for the QC of
7.        A.1.1.2a   the Sales Price Register       200,000    CS   IC    Multi    Post
                     data (4 local consultants)
                     Consultant for data
                     analysis & modeling
8.        A.1.2                                     125,000    CS   DS    Single   Post
                     services (1 local
                     consultant)
                     Consultant for data
                     analysis & modeling
9.        A.1.2 a                                   125,000    CS   IC    Single   Post
                     services (1 local
                     consultant)
                     Coordinator for pilot
10.       A.1.3      municipalities (2 local        144,000    CS   DS    Multi    Post
                     consultants)
                     International consultant
                     for Mass Valuation
11.       A.1.4                                     200,000    CS   DS    Single   Post
                     (1 international
                     consultant)
                     Information system for
12.       A.1.5                                    1,200,000   IT   RfP   Single   Post
                     Mass Valuation
                     Sub-total               for
13.                                                3,400,000
                     subcomponent A1
                     Subcomponent A.2
14.       A.2        Building Register
                     Advancement
                     Record on identified
15.       A.2.1                                     500,000    IT   RfP   Single   Post
                     changes on buildings




                                                                                          Page 36 of 56
The World Bank
Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


                      Procurement of the
16.         A.2.2                                   3,500,000   G    DS    Single   Prior
                      Satellite imagery
                      Subtotal for
      17.                                           4,000,000
                      subcomponent A2
                      Total Costs for
      18.                                           7,400,000
                      Component A
                      Component B -
                      Integration of
19.         B         information systems and
                      NSDI services
                      development
                      Subcomponent B.1
                      Further Development and
20.         B.1       Rollout of the Integrated
                      System for Real Estate
                      Cadaster.
                      National Information
21.         B.1.1     System of Real Estate         3,000,000   IT   DS    Single   Prior
                      Cadaster
                      Information system for
22.         B.1.2                                   1,100,000   IT   RfP   Single   Post
                      infrastructure
                      Information system for
23.         B.1.3                                   1,600,000   IT   RfP   Single   Post
                      land consolidation
24.         B.1.4      3D cadaster study              200,000   IT   CQS   Single   Post
                      Procurement of Hardware
25.         B.1.5     (servers, storage, routers,
                      workstations...)
                      Procurement of Hardware
26.         B.1.5.1   (servers, storage,            3,000,000   G    RfB   Single   Post
                      routers,…)
                      Procurement of Hardware
27.         B.1.5.2                                 1,100,000   G    RfB   Multi    Post
                      (workstations, scanners...)
                      Disaster recovery system
28.         B1.6                                    1,500,000   G    RfP   Single   Post
                      of the RGA
                      Cyber security system of
29.         B1.7                                    1,500,000   G    RfP   Single   Post
                      the RGA
                      Improvement of the
30.         B1.8                                    1,300,000   IT   RfP   Multi    Post
                      RGA IT system(s)
31.         B1.9      ICT Individual consultant
                      Support to data migration
32.         B1.9.1    and IT training (5 local        450,000   CS   DS    Multi    Post
                      consultants)
                      Support to data migration
33.         B1.9.1a   and IT training (3 local        220,000   CS   IC    Multi    Post
                      consultants)
                      Support to technical
                      infrastructure at the local
34.         B1.9.2                                    510,000   CS   DS    Multi    Post
                      offices (8 local
                      consultants)


                                                                                            Page 37 of 56
The World Bank
Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


                     Support to technical
                     infrastructure at the local
35.        B1.9.2a                                   120,000    CS   IC    Multi    Post
                     offices (2 local
                     consultants)
                     Graphical Data Quality
36.        B1.9.3    improvement - (18 local         900,000    CS   DS    Multi    Post
                     consultants)
                     Graphical Data Quality
37.        B1.9.3a   improvement - (2 local          115,000    CS   IC    Multi    Post
                     consultants)
                     Support to data
38.       B1.9.4     preparation and testing         120,000    CS   DS    Single   Post
                     prior migration
                     Infrastructure Cadaster
                     Contract Management
39.       B1.9.5                                      90,000    CS   DS    Single   Post
                     and quality assurance
                     expert
                     Supervision,
                     coordination, quality
40.       B1.10
                     control of IT
                     implementation
                     Supervision and
41.       B1.10.1    coordination of IT               90,000    CS   CQS   Single   Post
                     implementation
                     Quality Assurance and
42.       B1.10.2                                    150,000    CS   CQS   Multi    Post
                     Quality Control
                     Subtotal for
43.                                                17,065,000
                     subcomponent B1
                     Subcomponent B.2
                     Support to the National
44.       B.2
                     Spatial Data
                     Infrastructure
                     RGA services through
45.       B.2.1      web and mobile                 1,600,000   IT   RfP   Multi    Post
                     applications
                     Consultant for the
                     development of data
                     harmonization
46.       B.2.2      methodology and                 155,000    CS   DS    Single   Post
                     development of OGC
                     services (1 local
                     consultant)
                     Consultant for the
                     development of data
                     harmonization
47.       B.2.2a     methodology and                 155,000    CS   IC    Single   Post
                     development of OGC
                     services (1 local
                     consultant)
                     Subtotal for
48.                                                 1,910,000
                     subcomponent B2



                                                                                           Page 38 of 56
The World Bank
Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


                    Subcomponent B.3.
49.       B.3
                    Digital Archive
                    Improvement of digital
50.       B.3.1                                     225,000   IT     DS      Single   Post
                    services-Phase 3
                    Subtotal for
51.                                                 225,000
                    subcomponent B3
                    Total Costs for
52.                                              19,200,000
                    Component B
                    Institutional
                    improvement, RGA
53.       C
                    sustainability and Project
                    Management
                    Subcomponent C1.
54.       C.1       Institutional Improvement
                    and RGA Sustainability
                    Services for legislative
                    regulation of the reform
55.       C.1.1                                     100,000   CS   CQS, IC   Multi    Post
                    changes in the business of
                    the RGA
                    Support for
56.       C.1.2     reorganization of RGA           300,000   CS   CQS, IC   Multi    Post
                    and strategic documents
                    IT system for portfolio
57.       C.1.3                                     700,000   IT    RfP      Single   Post
                    management
                    ISO standards
                      - ISO 22301 - Security
                    and Resilience - Business
                    Continuity Management
                    Systems
58.       C.1.4       - ISO 45001 -                 300,000   CS    CQS      Single   Post
                    Occupational Health and
                    Safety Management
                    Systems
                      - ISO 14001 -
                    Environmental
                    Management Systems
                    Unresolved cases
59.       C.1.5     document preparation            235,000   CS     DS      Multi    Post
                    (4 local consultants)
                    Unresolved cases
60.       C.1.5a    document preparation            100,000   CS     IC      Multi    Post
                    (2 local consultants)
                    Subtotal for
61.       C.1.2                                   1,735,000
                    subcomponent C1
                    Subcomponent C.2
62.       C.2
                    Project Management
63.       C.2.1     PIU Team
64.       C.2.1.1   PIU Director                    131,228   CS     DS      Single   Post


                                                                                             Page 39 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


                                Senior Procurement
        65.          C.2.1.2    Specialist                      120,733      CS          DS        Single      Post
                                (PIU Deputy Director)
                                Procurement Specialist
        66.          C.2.1.3    (Environmental                   94,150      CS          DS        Single      Post
                                Specialist)
                                Procurement Specialist
        67.          C.2.1.4                                     90,454      CS          IC        Single      Post
                                Associate
                                Information Technology
        68.          C.2.1.5                                     90,466      CS          IC        Single      Post
                                Specialist
                                Monitoring and
        69.          C.2.1.6    Evaluation                       45,226      CS          DS        Single      Post
                                (Social Specialist)
                                Financial Management
        70.          C.2.1.7                                    108,630      CS          DS        Single      Post
                                Specialist
                                Financial Management
        71.          C.2.1.8                                     70,995      CS          IC        Single      Post
                                Assistant
        72.          C.2.1.9    Office Manager                   56,318      CS          DS        Single      Post
                                Social studies and user
        73.          C.2.2                                       90,000      CS         CQS        Single      Post
                                surveys
                                Public Awareness
        74.          C.2.3                                      100,000      CS         CQS        Single      Post
                                Campaign
        75.          C.2.4      Training                        250,000      CS         CQS        Multi       Post
        76.          C.2.5      Annual Financial Audit           50,000      CS         LCS        Single      Post
                                Incremental operating
        77.          C.2.6                                      291,800      IOC        RfQ        Single      Post
                                costs
                                Subtotal for
              78.                                             1,590,000
                                subcomponent C2
                                Total Costs for
              79.                                            3,325,000
                                Component C
                                Preparation fee
              80.                                               75,000
                                (0.25%)
                                TOTAL SRB REMP2
              81.                                           30,000,000
                                PROJECT
Implementation Support Plan and Resource Requirements
27.      The following implementation support plan reflects the preliminary estimates of the skill requirements, timing,
and resource requirements over the life of the Project. Keeping in mind the need to maintain flexibility over project
activities, the skill requirements may change over time to ensure that they continue to meet the implementation support
needs of the Project.
28.     Implementation support will be provided in the form of direct support from the World Bank team and additional
consultants will provide technical assistance as needed. During the first year of the Project, it is foreseen that frequent
missions will take place to essential areas to support RGA in its initiation of project activities. Table 2 indicates the level of
input that will be needed from the World Bank to provide implementation support for the proposed Project for the initial
12 months and the remainder of the Project implementation period.


                                                                                                                      Page 40 of 56
      The World Bank
      Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


                                    Table 2: Implementation Support Plan
 Time                           Focus                   Skills Needed                     Partner Role
First 12   Support to:                                     All skills       - Task team to support smooth start-up
months         - Successful start of the Project;                           - Ensure E&S commitments are on track
               - Establishment of the FM system,                            - Support PIU
                     M&E system and grievance                               - Ensure systems and processes in place
                     mechanisms in line with World                          to launch project activities
                     Bank standards
               - Launching Component activities
12 to 48   - Ensure adequate implementation support       All skills        - Ensure ESF is on track
months     for all aspects of the Project                                   - Support PIU
           - Ensure M&E measures are undertaken in                          - Provide technical assistance
           accordance with planned activities
           - Monitor implementation of project
           activities, including site visits
           - Support to final evaluation of the ICR
                                         Table 3: Skills Mix Required
     Skills Needed           Number of Staff Weeks            Number of Trips                     Comments
   Task Team Leaders                 56                            18                     International and Field-
                                                                                                  based Staff
Senior Land Administration             50                              15                   International or Field-
         Specialist                                                                               based Staff
 Environmental Specialist              10                  Local travel as needed              Field-based Staff
      Social Specialist                28                  Local travel as needed              Field-based Staff
  Procurement Specialist               50                  Local travel as needed              Field-based Staff
       FM Specialist                   20                  Local travel as needed              Field-based Staff
    Technical Specialist               40                            15                    International and local
 (Geospatial Information                                                                          consultants
       Management)
    Technical Specialist               40                              15                  International and local
   (Property Valuation)                                                                          consultants




                                                                                                             Page 41 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                                    ANNEX 2: Detailed Project Components Description

                                               COUNTRY: Republic of Serbia
                                          Second Real Estate Management Project
1.      The Project will include three components:
2.       Component A: Implementation of the Property Mass Valuation System (EUR 7,400,000). This component will
finance the following activities in support of the advancement of mass valuation for all properties in Serbia. Activities will
be financed via two Sub-Components. Sub-Component A.1: Support to Mass Valuation for Residential and Non-Residential
Properties will finance: (i) the development of mass valuation models for non-residential properties in Serbia; (ii) the
national rollout of mass valuation models already developed for residential properties for the majority of Serbia’s
population; (iii) the development of an information system for mass property valuation; and (iv) the creation of a
residential property index that includes all types of residential property, with sub-indexes for different types. Sub-
Component A.2: Building Register Advancement will finance (i) the development of a Building Register module as part of
ISREC; (ii) establishment of a central database; (iii) migration of data from the existing Building Register and from other
external data sources; (iv) integration of the Building Register with the information system for mass property valuation
and GeoSrbija; (v) the acquisition of very high-resolution satellite imagery and climate-related data; (vi) creation of a digital
orthophoto and processing of its data; (vii) updates to the Building Register’s Registry of Established Changes to
Constructions; and (viii) consulting services to assess the options for automating and obtaining of data from external
sources, quality assurance and quality control during software development and the development of a long-term
sustainable model for the maintenance of the Building Register and the information system for the mass property
valuation system.
3.        In terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation, the activities under Component A will help to inform the
GoS about which properties are considered more prone to GHG emissions and incentivize emissions reductions seeking
to factor into the valuation methodology for each of the property types’ household and business preferences for energy
efficiency. The connection between real estate valuation and reducing GHG emissions (e.g., incentives for improving the
energy efficiency of buildings) will be further explored and integrated as part of the capacity building activities to be
financed via Component C. Moreover, Component A activities will provide important market information for calculating
the costs of resilient reconstruction (e.g., flood proofing, adaptable during a heat wave) and determine insurance
premiums in support of crisis preparedness and disaster risk management efforts in Serbia that are led by government
entities such as the Ministry of Interior’s Sector for Emergency Management. The purchase and utilization of satellite
imagery will also help to enable more efficient updates of key registries in addition to the Building Register. The imagery
is a critical requirement for RGA’s Risk Register (see Component B) and will be directly relevant for the identification of
climate impacts such as floods, drought, and extreme temperature along with areas that are most vulnerable to these
impacts. These climate considerations will be integrated into spatial and disaster risk planning, and in targeting climate
disaster related evacuation activities for areas most vulnerable to these climate impacts.
4.       Sub-Component A.1: Support to Mass Valuation for Residential and Non-Residential Properties. This sub-
component will support (i) the development of mass valuation models for non-residential properties in Serbia; (ii) the
rollout of mass valuation models already developed for residential properties for the majority of Serbia’s population; (iii)
the development of an information system for mass property valuation; and (iv) the creation of a residential property
price index that will include all types of residential property, with sub-indexes for different types. The information system
for mass valuation will be used primarily by governmental and municipal authorities, banks, insurance companies, real
estate agents, professional users, and citizens. It will also be interoperable with RGA’s Building Register, Sales Price
Register, ISREC, GeoSrbija, and other systems, and will generate various statistical reports, that reflect the current market


                                                                                                                     Page 42 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


trends and will provide location-based indexes and historical data for market research and analysis. The investments under
Sub-Component A.1 will enhance the quality of market data available to market participants, valuers, banks, and
government bodies, thereby helping to improve market transparency and the data available for policy making. In terms
of climate change adaptation and mitigation, the valuation models and residential property price index to be produced,
as well as the associated IT investments for a mass valuation information system, are new tools that will be subsequently
used to better define insurance premiums in support of crisis preparedness and disaster risk management efforts in Serbia
that are led by government entities such as the Ministry of Interior’s Sector for Emergency Management. Additionally, the
development of mass valuation models will inform Serbia’s Risk Register (details in Sub-Component B.1). Combined with
the use of hazard maps for natural disasters such as floods and wildfires in the Risk Register, the ability to determine
values for all buildings will aid both the Ministry of Interior’s Sector for Emergency Management and municipal
governments in deciding how to prioritize risk mitigation actions and priorities. Additionally, valuation has been identified
as a key gap in completing building retrofitting to meeting climate change objectives (e.g., enhanced energy efficiency,
building construction standards, etc.). The development of the mass valuation models will enable Serbian government
entities to identify the buildings that are still pending climate change retrofitting due to the existing valuation gap, which,
in turn, will strengthen Serbia’s climate change mitigation efforts.
5.       Sub-Component A.2: Building Register Advancement. This sub-component will finance (i) the development of a
Building Register module as part of ISREC; (ii) establishment of a central database; (iii) migration of data from the existing
Building Register and from other external data sources; (iv) integration of the Building Register with the information
system for mass property valuation and GeoSrbija; (v) the acquisition of very high-resolution satellite imagery and climate-
related data; (vi) creation of a digital orthophoto and processing of its data; (vii) updates to the Building Register’s Registry
of Established Changes to Constructions; and (viii) consulting services to assess the options for automating obtaining of
data from external data sources, quality assurance and quality control during software development and the development
of a long-term sustainable model for the maintenance of the Building Register and the information system for the mass
property valuation system. In terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation, improvements in the data quality of the
Building Register and its interoperability with other key registers and datasets as a result of the Project will directly
complement the expansion of Serbia’s NSDI and will be used by public agencies to identify buildings constructed in high-
risk hazard zones and contribute to their disaster risk planning. The Building Register’s interoperability with GeoSrbija will
also allow its information to be combined with other key geospatial information housed in the platform to portray a real-
time model to be used by government decision-makers for Serbia’s long-term climate change planning. Moreover, the
purchase of satellite imagery and orthophoto production will provide high-quality images of on-the-ground realities to
further inform key stakeholders about areas most prone to natural hazard zones while using mass valuation models, the
Building Register, and other key datasets and information systems financed by REMP 2 under Component B (further details
below).
6.       Component B: Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development (EUR 19,200,000). This
component will finance activities related to the further digital transformation of RGA and the advancement of Serbia’s
NSDI (including the expansion of GeoSrbija) in line with national and international best practice and standards. Activities
will be financed via three Sub-Components. Sub-Component B.1: Further Development and Rollout of the Integrated
System for Real Estate Cadaster will finance: (i) ISREC upgrades and the completion of its national implementation to an
additional 110 LCOs that do not yet have access to the system; (ii) establishment of the infrastructure cadaster; (iii)
development and implementation of an information system for land consolidation; (iv) expansion of the Risk Register; (v)
technical studies for the advancement and use of cadastral data such as the development of a 3D cadaster; (vi) the supply
of IT hardware and equipment; (vii) cybersecurity support; and (viii) consultant support for the supervision, coordination
and quality control of the data and systems to be implemented and/or expanded. Sub-Component B.2: support to the
National Spatial Data Infrastructure will finance the implementation of RGA’s NSDI Action Plan, including the development
of web and mobile applications and digital services using new technologies such as AI. Sub-Component B.3: Digital Archive

                                                                                                                     Page 43 of 56
             The World Bank
             Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


will finance: (i) development of a module for managing the analogue archive; (ii) development of e-services for specialized
users; and (iii) conversion of scanned geodetic plans to allow online access to them. As applicable, IT hardware and
equipment will also be financed via Component B that will, in line with the EU’s Directive on Energy Efficiency15 and the
EU Energy Performance Certificates, aim to achieve an “A” rating for energy performance, which is considered above and
beyond existing performance standards given that absence of a mandated energy efficiency rating within Serbia’s existing
regulatory framework which will ultimately lead to reduced GHG emissions compared to IT hardware/equipment that do
not meet these requirements. Component B’s NSDI activities will be implemented based on the Action Plan and Business
Models produced during REMP in line with the UN-endorsed Integrated Geospatial Information Framework (IGIF).
7.       In terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation, the activities under Component B will support the tracking
of projected climate trends such as changes in precipitation intensity and flood, drought, and extreme heat occurrence
due to urbanization and urban sprawl that have contributed to strains on existing infrastructure and public utilities as well
as the loss of carbon sinks in Serbia. Moreover, the information provided by the advancement of GeoSrbija will be used
by public agencies such as the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure’s Sector for Spatial and Urban
Planning and the Ministry of Interior’s Sector for Emergency Management will directly access GeoSrbija and the platform
as part of their business operations to utilize these key tools and the cadaster and land registry information they contain
to inform disaster and flood simulations, land use planning, and resource management, which will identify areas
vulnerable to flooding and drought and ways to either avoid construction in these areas or improve climate resilience by
deploying resilient building design.
8.       Sub-Component B.1: Further Development and Rollout of the Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster. This sub-
component will support (i) ISREC upgrades and the completion of its national implementation to an additional 110 LCOs
that do not yet have access to the system; (ii) establishment of the infrastructure cadaster; (iii) development and
implementation of an information system for land consolidation; (iv) expansion of the Risk Register; (v) technical studies
for the advancement and use of cadastral data, such as the development of a 3D cadaster; (vi) the supply of IT hardware
and equipment; (vii) cybersecurity support; and (viii) consultant support for the supervision, coordination, and quality
control of the data systems to be implemented and/or expanded. The national implementation of ISREC will require data
quality improvements, as the data must be migrated from the systems that operate under old technical platforms that are
not integrated and have different data models and data structures. The infrastructure cadaster will aim to register critical
underground and above-ground infrastructure facilities and will include existing data themes under the utility cadaster
and will cover additional infrastructure facilities: (i) industrial pipelines; (ii) transportation infrastructure (roads, railways,
cable cars, water traffic, air traffic, terminals and border crossing points); and (iii) other infrastructure facilities (irrigation
systems, irrigation canals, derivation pipelines, landfills, and other supporting facilities). The system for land consolidation
will improve the efficiency of land consolidation processes, contribute to the modernization of agriculture, and increase
rural and agricultural investments. The system will also support land consolidation monitoring and control procedures,
will generate various statistical reports, and will be interoperable with ISREC. The technical studies for cadastral data
expansion and usage will help RGA to prepare for initiatives such as the nascent implementation of the 3D cadaster for
buildings and infrastructure. The studies will also provide guidance for legal framework amendments, data model
modifications, upgrades of existing business processes and systems, and will provide time and cost estimations.
Furthermore, Sub-component B.1’s support to IT infrastructure upgrades will include the supply of servers, block storage,
storage area network (SAN), backup and archiving infrastructure, network infrastructure, replacement of the outdated
office equipment, and will support the initial phase of the establishment of the Disaster Recovery and Backup Data Center.
Although not confirmed, there may be a possibility for small-scale retrofitting works (e.g., for the server room) that could
be linked to hardware installation. Any identified environmental risks and impacts (e.g., dust, noise, waste, OHS) and
mitigation measures will be addressed in the ESMPs checklist to be prepared prior to the commencement of works.

15
     Directive on Energy Efficiency 2012/27/EU, as amended in 2018 and 2023.


                                                                                                                        Page 44 of 56
             The World Bank
             Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



9.       In terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation, the activities under Sub-Component B.1 will provide a
variety of benefits. The national implementation and upgrades to ISREC will provide up-to-date cadastral information
throughout Serbia, which will be utilized by key climate change ministries such as the Ministry for Mining and Energy16
and the Ministry for Agriculture and Environmental Protection17. as a foundational dataset for accurate, location-based
planning for climate change adaptation decision-making and measure by providing the agency with reliable land parcel
data for areas of Serbia most at risk of natural disaster and climatic events. These data will also feed into the information
contained in the Building Register, information system for mass valuation, infrastructure cadaster, land consolidation
system, and Risk Register that will be used by multiple government agencies for climate-related decision making and
activities such as energy analysis, disaster and flood simulations, and resource management. The Risk Register is crucial
for these efforts, as it specifically monitors and maintains spatial data for all natural hazards in Serbia, including floods and
wildfires. Investments in infrastructure cadaster development will directly contribute to climate change mitigation, as its
data will be used by the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure to plan quality infrastructure investments
that are not located in flood-prone areas, earthquake fault lines, and other natural hazards that may jeopardize long-term
sustainability of infrastructure in Serbia. The development of a land consolidation information system will provide a
screening tool of climate-adaptive features for compact land development and enhanced land consolidation management
to reduce GHG and increase carbon sequestration. Moreover, the expansion of the Risk Register and its enhanced
interoperability with GeoSrbija and other information systems, will directly provide accurate and up-to-date information
on areas of Serbia most vulnerable to climate change risks to help users of this data to make informed decisions about
infrastructure development, land consolidation for improving agricultural development, housing provision, etc. To
measure the use of these investments for climate change adaptation and mitigation purposes, an Intermediate Results
Indicator “Public institutions with access to key geospatial datasets to improve forecasting and assessment of the
consequences of disaster and climate hazard events and inform climate-related decision making” has been added to REMP
2’s Results Framework. All IT hardware and equipment to be purchased under this sub-component will, in line with the
EU’s Directive on Energy Efficiency18 and the EU Energy Performance Certificates, aim to achieve an “A” rating for energy
performance, which is considered above and beyond existing performance standards given that absence of a mandated
energy efficiency rating within Serbia’s existing regulatory framework.
10.     Sub-Component B.2: Support to the National Spatial Data Infrastructure. This sub-component will finance the
implementation of RGA’s NSDI Action Plan, with the aim to increase the benefits and usability of NSDI through the
development of web and mobile applications and digital services using new technologies, including AI, for improving
business processes, real estate management services and providing online support to users, particularly for users’ needs
related to the legal base, business processes, and property related information.
11.     Sub-Component B.3: Digital Archive. This sub-component will support the upgrade of the Digital Archive system,
including the (i) development of a module for managing the analogue archive; (ii) development of e-services for specialized
users; and (iii) conversion of the scanned geodetic plans to allow online access to them. It will build upon the achievements
of REMP, during which a central analogue and digital archive system were developed.
12.     Component C: Institutional Improvement, RGA Sustainability, and Project Management (EUR 3,325,000). This
component will finance activities related to RGA’s long-term institutional sustainability and project management for REMP
2. Activities will be financed via two Sub-Components. Sub-Component C.1: Institutional Improvement and RGA
Sustainability will finance (i) updates to RGA’s Roadmap, Strategic Plan, and Business Plan for institutional transition; (ii)



16 This Ministry is responsible for exploring options for renewable energy, energy efficiency, climate change, and environmental protection.
17 This Ministry works on issues concerning, among other things, environmental protection, waste management, and climate change.
18
     Directive on Energy Efficiency 2012/27/EU, as amended in 2018 and 2023.


                                                                                                                                               Page 45 of 56
           The World Bank
           Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


implementation of RGA’s Portfolio Management Plan19; and (iii) further implementation of several International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards for RGA’s full compliance with international standards for land
administration and associated IT systems. Sub-Component C.2: Project Management will finance (i) PIU operations and
M&E activities; (ii) capacity building programs; (iii) customer satisfaction surveys; and (iv) consulting services in support of
various project activities including the provision of legal expertise for, among other things, improving registration of “old”20
transactions, and development of social assessments. The specialized training to be financed via this component will target
RGA management and technical staff, as well as other NSDI stakeholders including government institutions, local
authorities, and other relevant entities. Similarly, the capacity building programs will be designed and implemented for
real estate registration and valuation institutions including RGA, municipal authorities, and Serbia’s Tax Administration.
13.      Sub-Component C.1: Institutional Improvement and RGA Sustainability. This sub-component will finance updates
to RGA’s strategic documents, including its Strategic and Business Plans as well as the implementation of the Portfolio
Management Plan that was developed with support from the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency in
2024. It will also support the further implementation of several International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
standards: (i) ISO 22301: Security and Resilience; (ii) ISO 45001: Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems;
and (iii) ISO 14001: Environmental Management Systems. The implementation process of these standards includes
analysis of the current situation and establishment of expert groups, training of RGA employees, development of standard
requirements documentation, implementation of the standards in the RGA business environment, internal audits, and
improvements per the audit results and recommendations.
14.      Sub-Component C.2: Project Management. This sub-component will finance a PIU consisting of a PIU director in
addition to a technical team consisting of a senior procurement specialist (PIU deputy director), a part-time procurement
specialist (who will also oversee the responsibilities of an environmental specialist), a full-time procurement specialist, an
FM specialist, an FM assistant, an IT specialist, an M&E specialist (who will also oversee the responsibilities of a social
specialist), and an office manager. Additionally, the sub-component will finance consulting services to support various
project activities, provide legal expertise, develop social assessments, conduct customer satisfaction surveys, organize
public awareness campaigns, and provide capacity building programs for RGA management and technical staff, as well as
for other key stakeholders. Legal expertise is needed to further strengthen the regulatory framework for property
registration to address the first instance backlog requests for registration of property transactions that occurred before
July 2018 and are being processed in accordance with the “old” Law on State Survey and Cadaster. While certain regulatory
improvements have already been made (e.g., registration through intermediaries), additional ones are needed to prevent
the creation of further backlogs. The capacity building programs will include innovative approaches to climate change
adaptation and mitigation for key stakeholders and users of geospatial information to consider, including factoring
greenhouse gas emissions of buildings into valuation models as a means of incentivizing energy efficiency efforts. As these
are new ideas to be considered, the World Bank team will further explore these topics with RGA as it prepares annual
training plans. Sub-Component C.2 will also finance the supply of IT hardware and equipment in support of project
management if the need arises during project implementation.




19 The Portfolio Management Plan was first developed in 2024 in cooperation with the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) and will be fully

implemented under REMP 2.
20 “Old” transactions are property transactions that took place prior to July 2018 and had not been submitted for registration before the new law on cadastral procedures

was introduced.


                                                                                                                                                          Page 46 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                                        ANNEX 3: Economic and Financial Analysis

                                              COUNTRY: Republic of Serbia
                                         Second Real Estate Management Project
1.       While the Project has the specific objective of improving the accuracy and accessibility of land administration
information, its wider socio-economic benefits are far-ranging. For instance, the enhancement of land administration
data promises to strengthen transparency within the real estate sector, potentially leading to more efficient tax revenue
collection. Such improvements lay the groundwork for more strategic planning and investment decisions. For example,
granular information about the location and value of buildings can inform strategies for disaster risk management, such
as pinpointing areas at greater risk and optimizing the placement of emergency services and preventative measures. A
system for mass appraisal could further clarify property market dynamics, allowing financial institutions to more
accurately assess the value of assets used as loan collateral. This system might also pave the way for the growth of private
catastrophe insurance markets by providing data to assess the risk associated with individual buildings, thus enabling fair
insurance pricing. A refined building registry is essential for the rigorous application of environmental regulations and the
focus of energy or water efficiency improvement initiatives. Additionally, the integration of high-resolution satellite
imagery could assist the GoS in identifying properties with higher carbon emission tendencies, potentially incorporating
carbon emissions into property valuation methods and enabling targeting policies to encourage emission reductions.
Enhanced property valuations could unlock dormant capital within real estate, offering businesses the opportunity to
leverage increased equity for borrowing, often at lower interest rates compared to loans secured against inventories.
Integrating existing services under RGA and adding additional services to the land registry will make RGAs service delivery
more efficient and improve access of the public and private actors to important land informaiton.
2.      As this economic analysis shows the Project’s economic benefits are estimated to significantly exceed its costs,
even if only a sub-set of fiscal revenue sources and economic benefits are considered. Reliably quantifying the wide-
ranging socio-economic benefits described above is challenging without further data collection. However, as this economic
and financial analysis shows, the Project is expected to yield substantial financial and wider socio-economic benefits, which
are expected to start materializing as soon as the new data is collected, information systems are integrated, and mass
valuation is carried out. In short, the expected fiscal benefits alone present a strong business case for this Project.
3.      The Project’s socio-economic benefits arise from a combination of its complementary project components. The
largest contribution to the economic gains is expected to result from efficiency gains to RGA under Component B.
Specifically, each component will provide different ingredients necessary for delivering the Project’s expected benefits:
    •   Component A consists of two subcomponents. The aim is to enhance the efficiency and transparency of the
        property market by introducing mass valuation models, which will guide market participants, valuers, and banks
        on potential sale prices. Municipalities may also use these models for property tax purposes, since the publicly
        available data will make apparent current gaps in the property tax collection of unregistered buildings. The
        component includes developing an interoperable information system for mass valuation, a comprehensive
        residential property index with sub-indexes, and a Building Register module using high-resolution satellite
        imagery. These data are expected to enhance the foundations for urban planning, disaster risk management, land
        use management, and more.
    •   Component B consists of three subcomponents. Overall, the aim is enhancing Serbia's digital transformation and
        NSDI. The component is aimed at making the housing market, the non-residential property market, and their
        prices more transparent and enabling more efficient real estate transactions. This component focuses mainly on
        data collection and digital infrastructure, thereby facilitating wider economic benefits and efficiency gains to RGA



                                                                                                                  Page 47 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


        from digitalization. The economic benefits under component B will include savings to customers using RGA’s
        services and resulting from a reduction in waiting times for inquiries and services.
    •   Component C is focused on project implementation, institutional improvements, and capacity building, both of
        which are crucial for successfully delivering components A, and B but is not expected to directly contribute to
        fiscal or economic benefits per se. It will contribute to a roadmap aimed at enabling RGA to move towards a self-
        financing mode of operations in the future.
                               Table 1. Principal project outputs and outcomes (benefits)
                                                                      Without Project              With Project
         REMP 2 Project                                 Level         Pace of data integration and harmonization
         Cadastral update                               Output        Slow                         Faster
         Cadastral data harmonization                   Output        Slow                         Faster
         INSPIRE Data standard implementation (EU
         compatible)                                    Output        Exists                       Strengthened
         Transparent mass valuation of housing prices   Output        Non-existent                 Generated

         Operational efficiency of land market          Outcome       Sub-optimal                  Higher efficiency
         Enhanced financing of housing market           Outcome       Modest                       Improved
         Increased fiscal revenues                      Outcome       Low                          Improved
         Growth in private mortgage markets             Outcome       Low                          Substantial
         Private catastrophe insurance                  Outcome       Practically non-existent     Higher efficiency
         Efficiency gains within RGA                    Outcome       Low                          Substantial

4.      The fiscal benefits quantified in this EFA rely on two channels resulting from improved data availability and data
quality because of REMP 2, increased fiscal revenues and the development of a private catastrophe insurance market.
    •   The integration of illegal properties into the REC has the potential to increase tax and fee revenues. The
        publication of mass valuation models may indirectly lead to revenue growth despite limited enforcement
        capabilities over municipalities and the Tax Authority's use of the Building Register for fiscal purposes. GoS is not
        expected to mandate the legalization of informal properties or require municipalities to revise fiscal cadasters
        using the REC and Building Registers. Nor is it anticipated that municipalities will be audited for taxing all
        properties listed in the REC. Nevertheless, the visibility of previously hidden properties through the Building
        Register could encourage voluntary compliance, reducing the number of illegal structures. Buyers and mortgage
        lenders will more readily be able to identify the legal status of buildings and assess the risk to them of any future
        policies to bring about mandatory compliance.
    •   Improvements to data quality, coverage and accessibility will help to improve the market of private catastrophe
        insurance for households and businesses. The development of the NSDI, integrating the Real Estate Cadaster,
        Buildings Register, and Ministry of Interior risk registers, will provide insurers with precise property locations and
        risk factors, enabling more accurate premium assessments. In the event of a natural disaster, like flooding, this
        would alleviate pressure on the GoS to compensate losses and finance the repairs to people’s homes and
        infrastructure. A more transparent real estate market and mass valuation could thus enable insurance companies
        to more accurately price risks and in turn re-insure their potential losses.
5.       The financial analysis focuses on estimating the increase in tax revenues and annual savings from the direct
transfer of annual costs caused by disasters to the private sector. Both income streams of fiscal revenues are based on
effects from reducing market inefficiencies and increasing the transparency of land and property markets alongside price
effects of a transparent and standardized real estate valuation policy. Further impacts on government revenue streams


                                                                                                                       Page 48 of 56
             The World Bank
             Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


may arise from increasing demand in the real estate market due to higher trust in a transparent and fair real estate market.
A more transparent market with efficient prices may also reduce incentives for informal or illicit transactions. This analysis
focuses on estimating a subset of the wider benefits that are likely to arise from this Project, the real benefits are likely
significantly larger.
6.       Fiscal analysis – data, inputs, and assumptions. The two channels through which fiscal benefits are estimated in
this EFA are additional tax revenues from property taxation based on increased compliance and reduced government
spending after catastrophes based on wider private market insurance coverage. The assumptions behind the fiscal analysis
are stated in Table 2. In Serbia, a large number of buildings are informal, i.e., only partially compliant with building
regulations, lacking required permits, or completely illegal. Based on the institutional context, this Project is not expected
to result in a change of tax policies or the destruction of illegal buildings. However, compliance to regulate buildings that
so far are not included in municipal tax practices might be increased through better information and wide availability of
property data. With 4.9 million formal and 4.8 million informal properties, including 2.1 million illegal and 2.7 million
partially regulated, a study for RGA by the University of Leuven states that an annual loss of EUR 127 million in property
taxes due to unregistered properties21. If 20 percent of these properties were legalized, resulting in payment of
registration fees, annual property taxes, property transfer taxes, and development fees, it could yield an additional EUR
25 million in revenues per year. Furthermore, legally registered properties not currently on municipal fiscal cadasters
might be identified and taxed accordingly. Additional to the expected tax benefits, the Project is expected to increase
coverage of private catastrophe insurance, thus reducing the fiscal burden on the government in the aftermath of natural
disasters. While quantifying the potential benefits is complex, the advantages of outsourcing some of the costs from
natural disasters to the private sector are obvious. The state-funded relief for the Sava floods in 2014 incurred EUR 1.5
billion in direct costs and another EUR 200 million in indirect costs22. Assuming that only direct costs are insurable and
considering the Sava floods as a 1 in 100-year event, the potential annual direct losses to households and businesses could
be around EUR 15.1 million. However, with climate change likely increasing flood frequency, this estimate may be
conservative. If the Project could transfer 25 percent of the direct cost risk exposure to private insurance, it could benefit
state revenues by approximately EUR 3 million annually.
                         Table 2. Overview of data inputs and assumptions underpinning the fiscal benefits
                    Description                                                     Without Project               With Project
                    Number of buildings (2023)                                            4.9 million               4.9 million
                    Informal buildings (2023)                                             4.8 million               4.8 million
                             Partially regulated (2023)                                   2.1 million               2.1 million
                             Illegal buildings (2023)                                     2.7 million               2.7 million
                    Registration rate of illegal buildings                    1% annually from 2031     4% annually from 2031
                    Annual insurance losses from missing coverage                  EUR 12.1 million          EUR 9.75 million
                    Annual inflation rate                                                      3.5%                      3.5%
                    Discount rate                                                                 6%                        6%

7.      The cost-benefit analysis using the above-described data and methodology yields an estimated positive net
present financial benefit of EUR 65.92 million associated with the Project (Table 3). This figure is likely to be an
underestimate as it only considers the fiscal revenue benefits and not wider socio-economic benefits. The total
additional fiscal revenue over an operational period of 10 years is estimated at EUR 90.18 million. The estimated benefit
assumes a EUR 30 million investment package, a 6 percent discount rate and a planning horizon of 10 years. Figure 1
shows the expected revenue streams divided by the two income sources described above. Since the benefits of the Project
are expected to start once implementation has progressed to a level where the building registry and mass valuation enable

21 https://lirias.kuleuven.be/retrieve/651724
22
     ILO: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_397685.pdf


                                                                                                                                  Page 49 of 56
                            The World Bank
                            Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


a more transparent land and real estate market, the fiscal impacts are expected to start towards the end of the
implementation period. The majority of additional fiscal revenue is expected to be generated by increased property tax
collection, resulting from a higher compliance rate and taxation of unregistered buildings that were so far avoiding
taxation. This is followed by the annual reduction of government spending on disaster-related repair and reconstruction
spending.
8.       Net benefits are expected to materialize soon after the operationalization of the new land administration
systems. The financial analysis assumes that positive fiscal revenues are expected starting in 2030, after the building
registry has been updated and the mass valuation of the building stock has been conducted. The Project is expected to
break even in 2031, only one year after the Project implementation phase has ended, resulting from a higher compliance
rate and taxation of unregistered buildings that were so far avoiding taxation.
                      Table 3. Financial analysis of REMP 2 compared to a no-Project scenario, including costs and revenue streams.
                            Fiscal benefits
                            Without Project
                            Without Project                                                                         Implementation Period                                                               Operational Period
                            Description                                 Unit      Baseline             2025    2026      2027       2028        2029                  2030         2031       2032         2033        2034            2035
                            increase in registrations (cumulative)      percent          0%              0%      0%        0%         0%          1%                    2%           3%         4%           5%          6%              7%
                            Annual savings through reduced
                            disaster insurance costs                    million EUR         0          0.00    0.00      0.00       0.00           0.00                0.00         0.00      0.00          0.00           0.00         0.00
                            Increase in tax revenue from
                            registration of buildings                   million EUR         0          0.00    0.00      0.00       0.00           1.51                3.12         4.85      6.69          8.65          10.75        12.98
                            With Project
                            increase in registrations (cumulative)      percentage         0%            0%      0%        0%        0%                     4%          8%          12%           16%       20%            20%          20%
                            Annual savings through reduced
                            disaster insurance costs                    million EUR         0          0.00    0.00      0.00       0.00           0.00                0.00         4.80      4.97          5.14           5.33         5.51
                            Increase in tax revenue from
                            registration of buildings                   million EUR         0          0.00    0.00      0.00       0.00           6.46               12.93        19.39     26.76         34.62          35.83        37.08

                            Financial analysis (discounted at 6%)
                            incremental fiscal Benefits                 million EUR                     0.00    0.00      0.00      0.00       3.70                    6.91        12.87     15.71         18.41          16.98        15.60
                            project costs                               million EUR                     0.03    3.02      7.70      8.72       4.46                    0.32         0.00      0.00          0.00           0.00         0.00
                            cash flow                                   million EUR                    -0.03   -3.02     -7.70     -8.72      -0.75                    6.59        12.87     15.71         18.41          16.98        15.60
                            NPV
                            NPV benefits                                million EUR               $90.18
                            NPV costs                                   million EUR               $24.26
                            NPV (total)                                 million EUR               $65.92

Note: Net present value figures use a 6 percent discount rate. Incremental fiscal benefits, project costs and cash flow are discounted at
6 percent.

                                            Figure 1: Left: Expected additional annual revenue streams; Right: Net annual cash flows.
                      20                                                                                                                                        20
                      18
                                                                                                                                                                15
                      16




  million EUR (NPV)
                      14                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                            million EUR (NPV)
                      12
                      10                                                                                                                                        5
                      8
                                                                                                                                                                0
                      6
                      4                                                                                                                                          5
                      2
                      0                                                                                                                                         10
                           2025   2026     2027   2028   2029    20 0   20 1   20 2   20        20 4    20 5
                                                                                                                                                                15
                                         catastrophe insurance     tax revenue increase                                                                              2025   2026   2027    2028    2029   20 0     20 1    20 2   20       20 4   20 5

Note: All figures are discounted at 6 percent. The decline in annual revenues comes from the fact that the discount rate (6 percent) is
                              higher than the assumed inflation rate of the economy and housing sector.

9.     This EFA also estimates a subset of wider economic benefits, which are expected to exceed the narrow fiscal
revenue benefits estimated above. As discussed at the beginning of this section and throughout this PAD, there are a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 50 of 56
             The World Bank
             Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


wide range of welfare and economic benefits that can be expected to result from the Project, including the reduction of
tax evasion and corruption, increasing transparency, increased efficiency of land administration services, enabling more
effective urban planning, disaster risk management, enforcement of building standards and environmental regulations,
lower interest rates on property backed loans, and improved land tenure security. To quantify some of these economic
benefits, this EFA focuses on four channels:
        •    Efficiency gains within RGA. Enhanced efficiency within RGA has led to increased staff productivity, with a 19
             percent rise in resolved cases from 2022 to 2023. Through REMP 2, additional efficiency increases can be expected,
             for example through a complete shift to electronic queries and improvements to the administration and
             integration of cadastral and land administration services.
        •    Reduced compliance costs for service users. Streamlining RGA services can reduce compliance costs for users.
             Faster processing times and more data and services offered electronically will reduce the number of hours spent
             to make requests and waiting for these to be processed, leading to efficiency gains (and reduced compliance costs)
             for service users.
        •    Growth in residential mortgages. The residential mortgage market is poised for growth. The rate of mortgage
             purchases has decreased recently. This means a shift of capital from the formal banking sector towards informal
             channels of the economy. A recovery of the rate of purchases made through official bank mortgages relative to
             cash purchases can be expected as interest rates are lowered again. The further increased transparency of the
             real estate market from REMP-2 are likely to further contribute to a reduction of informal transactions in the
             housing sector, making a further increase of the mortgage to cash purchase ratio likely.
        •    Reduced risk premium on commercial property. The development of price indexes and commercial mass
             appraisal models is expected to improve market transparency in Serbia, potentially reducing the risk premium on
             commercial properties. Currently, higher yields in Serbia indicate a less transparent market compared to regional
             counterparts. Improvements to market transparency will promote the ability of banks to correctly assess risks,
             thereby reducing market inefficiencies. This is likely to impact businesses’ ability to borrow at lower interest rates,
             through effectively lowered risk premiums.
10.       Economic analysis – data, inputs, and assumptions. The key assumptions and data inputs are presented in Table
4. Firstly, recent efficiency gains to the RGA are notable; in 2023, the RGA processed 786,000 transactions, 89 percent of
which were electronic, and handled nearly 10 million institutional and professional queries along with 71 million citizen
queries23. Further efficiency gains are expected from the integration and harmonization of different databases and
services. With an annual salary expenditure of EUR 31.3 million, a 2 percent annual productivity increase can be expected
– i.e., staff time is freed up to provide other kinds of public services. This would increase output given the same resource
input and enable effective savings (in real terms: wage/output) of EUR 626,000 annually, accumulating to EUR 3.13 million
over a five-year span. The value of additional services provided is expected to far surpass these savings. Secondly, RGA's
service users currently face substantial compliance costs, with mandatory services causing an estimated 9 million hours
of time loss over five years24. Given the median hourly wage of approximately EUR 3.4, the financial equivalent of this lost
time is around EUR 4 million each year (assuming a 50 percent rate of the hourly salary to reflect lower productivity rates
for hours waited). A 10 percent improvement in service access could translate into annual savings of roughly EUR 400,000
for users, amounting to EUR 1.7 million over five years, and this estimate is likely conservative considering the potential
for even greater productivity enhancements. Thirdly, regarding the expected increase in residential mortgage rates,
recently there has been a decline in residential mortgages (apartments), from 31 percent in 2021 to 18 percent in Q1
2024, attributed to rising European Central Bank base rates25. However, with an anticipated normalization of interest rates

23 Data received from RGA.
24 Based on estimates from RGA
25
     Based on data from RGA


                                                                                                                         Page 51 of 56
           The World Bank
           Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


and improved market transparency due to price indexes and mass valuation models, it is expected that mortgage
purchases could rise by an additional 3 percent above the normal market recovery rate. Impacts of REMP 2 on residential
mortgages due to improved data availability and accuracy from mass valuation are expected to start in 2028. Finally, the
Project is expected to impact risk premiums on commercial properties. For instance, a prime office in Belgrade with a yield
of 8.7526 percent is valued at EUR 1.097 million27, but if the yield were to drop to 7.875 percent, its value would escalate
to EUR 1.219 million. This decrease in yields, brought about by heightened transparency, could substantially increase
property values and bolster businesses' capacity to secure capital. It is assumed that there are roughly 3300 medium and
large firms in Serbia28 with at least 50 employees. To estimate the country-wide impact, it is further assumed that the
average office or property is 300sqm with a lower-end average price of EUR 8 per square meter29. The economic impacts
on reduced risk premiums are expected to start towards the completion of the implementation period in 2029.
                               Table 4. Overview of data inputs and assumptions underpinning the EFA
            Description                                                                                  Without Project             With Project
            Annual Salary costs to RGA (million EUR)                                                                31.3                     31.3
            Efficiency gain to RGA’s services                                                                        0%                       2%
            Efficiency gains to compliance (reduced processing times)                                                0%                      10 %
            Lost work hours (annual) due to long wait times                                                    1,800,000                1,620,000
            Average hourly wage                                                                                 EUR 3.40                 EUR 3.40
            Mortgage to cash rate for real estate transaction                                                20% (2024)               20% (2024)
                                                                                                             30% (2030)               33% (2030)
            Total Number of transactions of apartments (Belgrade)                                                 19,168                   19,168
            Total Number of transactions of apartments in (Rest of Serbia)                                        27,609                   27,609
            Number of transactions of houses                                                                      24,179                   24,179
            Average apartment price (Belgrade)                                                              EUR 146,000              EUR 146,000
            Average apartment price (rest of Serbia)                                                         EUR 93,500               EUR 93,500
            Average house price (rest of Serbia)                                                             EUR 37,000               EUR 37,000
            Annual price increase in building sector                                                                5.5%                     5.5%
            Number of medium and large firms                                                                       3,300                    3,300
            Average floor space per firm                                                                        300 sqm                  300 sqm
            Average rent / sqm (Belgrade)                                                                          EUR 8                    EUR 8
                                                                                                           8.75 % (2025)            8.75 % (2025)
            Annual yield                                                                                   8.75 % (2035)           7.875% (2035)

11.      Economic impacts of the Project – effects of increased market transparency and service efficiency: By improving
the efficiency and integration of services offered, this Project is estimated to impact service delivery of RGA and the
efficiency of its staff. Through this, additional outputs worth at least EUR 570,00030 are estimated for 2028 (cumulative
4.2 million over 10 years) based on existing labor inputs, which can be seen as effective savings. Furthermore, savings to
RGA’s customers because of reduced compliance costs are expected to amount to at least EUR 1.7 million until 20 5. This
is an extremely conservative estimate, based on lower bound wage levels and lower bound processing times. The wider
economic benefits to the mortgage market and the commercial property market resulting from increased transparency,
more accurate risk measures and lower yields on commercial real estate are harder to quantify. Conservative aggregate
estimates amount to EUR 167 million and EUR 109 million until 2035, respectively. These wider economic benefits are

26
   Cushman & Wakefield, 2024 (https://www.cushmanwakefield.com/en/insights/serbia-marketbeat)
27
   Based on EUR 16 monthly rent per square meter, 500 square meter office size, which can be considered representative for larger office spaces in Belgrade.
28 OECD: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/8bc6e718-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/8bc6e718-en
29 Based on estimates by Cushman & Wakefield for the average of rental prices for offices (EUR 15.5-17.5/sqm), retail (EUR 48 - 50/sqm), and industrial (EUR 4.0-

5.5/sqm).
30
   Discounted at the standard 6 percent rate.


                                                                                                                                                   Page 52 of 56
            The World Bank
            Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


likely a lower bound estimate. The total estimated discounted benefits for a 10-year planning horizon amount to EUR
282.2 million, suggesting that when accounting for the wider economic benefits, the Project is highly profitable. A
breakdown of the economic benefits of the Project is presented in Table 5.
    Table 5. Economic analysis of REMP 2 compared to a no-Project scenario, including costs and revenue streams.

 Economic Benefits
 Without Project                                                                             Implementation Period                             Operational Period
 Description                                          Unit     Baseline        2025   2026        2027       2028    2029    2030    2031    2032        2033       2034     2035
 Savings to yealry salary costs of RGA           million EUR         0.00      0.00   0.00        0.00        0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00       0.00     0.00
 savings due to increased compliance             million EUR         0.00      0.00   0.00        0.00        0.00   0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00        0.00       0.00     0.00
 Value of commercial property (growth from lower
 risk premiums)                                  million EUR    1,357.7        38.0   39.3       40.7        42.1    43.6    45.2    46.7    48.4        50.1       51.8     53.6
 additional volume of residential mortgages      million EUR                    196    188        201         215     229     244      95      99         103        107      111
 With Project
 Savings to yealry salary costs of RGA           million EUR       31.30       0.00   0.00        0.00       0.72     0.74    0.77    0.80    0.82        0.85       0.88    0.91
 savings due to increased compliance             million EUR        0.00       0.00   0.00        0.00       0.00     0.36    0.38    0.39    0.40        0.42       0.43    0.45
 Value of commercial property (growth from lower
 risk premiums)                                  million EUR    1,357.7        38.0   39.3       40.7        42.1    62.3    65.7    69.3    73.2        77.2       81.6     86.2
 additional volume of residential mortgages      million EUR                    196    188        201         215     229     244     137     144         151        159      215

 Economic analysis (discounted at 6%)
 Savings to yealry salary costs of RGA           million EUR                   0.00   0.00        0.00       0.57     0.56    0.54    0.53    0.52        0.50       0.49    0.48
 savings due to increased compliance                                           0.00   0.00        0.00       0.00     0.27    0.27    0.26    0.25        0.25       0.24    0.24
 Reduced risk premium on commercial property     million EUR                   0.00   0.00        0.00       0.00    13.97   14.50   15.03   15.56       16.09      16.62   17.15
 Growth in residential mortgages                 million EUR                   0.00   0.00        0.00       0.00     0.00    0.00   27.46   27.98       28.46      28.92   54.80
 NPV
 NPV (total)                                     million EUR                $282.53




                                                                                                                                                                       Page 53 of 56
         The World Bank
         Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                                   ANNEX 4: RGA Data Protection Products and Services

                                               COUNTRY: Republic of Serbia
                                          Second Real Estate Management Project

1.      RGA is fully certified with ISO standards 9001 (Quality management services), 27001 (Information security,
cybersecurity, and privacy protection), and 27701 (Privacy information management systems). These certifications
confirm the agency’s commitment to quality management, information security, and privacy protection, thereby ensuring
the highest standards in its operations and services.
2.       RGA uses a combination of various tools for ICT system access control:
     •   Single Sign-On (SSO) is an authentication technology that enables users to access different applications and
         services using a single set of login credentials. This technology eliminates the need for multiple entries of user
         information and passwords when accessing different resources, thereby simplifying the user experience and
         increasing productivity. SSO ensures secure and efficient access to digital systems and applications through a
         simple authentication process, reducing the risk of misuse of user data and facilitating access rights management
         within RGA.
     •   Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA) is a security technology that requires users to provide multiple proofs of
         identify to access digital resources. In addition to traditional username and password authentication, MFA
         includes additional factors such as SMS codes, biometric data, or physical security keys. This additional verification
         enhances security, as even if one factor is compromised, other factors remain protected, reducing the risk of
         unauthorized access and account misuse. MFA is a key tool for strengthening digital identity security and
         protecting sensitive information.
     •   Privileged Access Management (PAM) is a security solution that enables control and management of privileged
         access to IT infrastructure and critical resources. This tool provides capabilities such as centralized privilege
         management, user activity recording, and behavior analysis to limit the risk of privileged account misuse and
         mitigate the impact of potential threats. SafeViewer PAM helps organizations maintain system integrity and
         prevent unauthorized access to critical resources, thereby contributing to the overall security of the IT
         environment.
3.       RGA also has three segments under which protection mechanisms can be classified:
     •   First Segment: Network Protection Mechanisms
             o   The Adaptive Security Appliance Firewall is a network security device designed to protect the network
                 perimeter. It provides comprehensive protection by combining advanced features such as stateful
                 inspection, virtual private networks (VPN), application control, and integration with advanced security
                 solutions to enable real-time threat detection and prevention. Its flexibility and scalability make it suitable
                 for various sizes and types of network environments.
             o   The Web Application Firewall is a security solution designed to protect web applications from various
                 threats such as denial-of-service (DDoS), SQL injections, and cross-site scripting (XSS). F5 WAF uses
                 advanced traffic analysis techniques and adaptive security policies to recognize and block malicious
                 activities in real-time, ensuring the continuous availability and integrity of web applications. Its scalability




                                                                                                                     Page 54 of 56
    The World Bank
    Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


           and integration capabilities with other security tools make it essential for protecting complex and dynamic
           web environments.
       o   The FortiGate Firewall is an advanced security solution used to protect networks, positioned in front of
           the datacenter. This firewall provides robust protection against various threats, including DDoS, malware,
           and unauthorized access, using features such as deep packet inspection, an Intrusion Prevention System
           (IPS), and application control.
•   Second Segment: Endpoint Protection Mechanisms
       o   Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) is a security solution used to protect endpoint devices in the
           network. This tool provides continuous monitoring and analysis of activities on endpoint devices to detect
           and respond to threats in real-time. Carbon Black EDR uses machine learning and advanced analytics to
           identify suspicious activities and enables a rapid response to incidents, helping prevent attacks and
           minimize potential damage.
       o   Antivirus (AV) is a reliable security solution used to protect computers and networks from malware,
           viruses, trojans, and other malicious threats. This antivirus software provides continuous protection using
           advanced threat detection and removal technologies, including heuristic analysis and machine learning.
       o   Email Security is a cybersecurity solution used to protect email communication from threats such as
           phishing, malware, and spam. This tool uses a multi-layered approach, including machine learning,
           behavioral analysis, and proactive threat detection to identify and block malicious email messages before
           they reach users. Sophos Email Security also provides features such as email encryption and data leakage
           protection, ensuring secure and reliable communication for organizations of all sizes.
       o   IBM Guardium is an advanced cybersecurity solution designed to protect data in databases and other
           information repositories. This tool provides continuous monitoring, threat detection, and protection of
           sensitive data through features such as automatic data classification, user behavior analytics, and
           encryption. IBM Guardium also offers comprehensive compliance reporting and the ability to respond
           quickly to incidents.
       o   The Advanced Security Processing Engine (ASPEN) serves as a Security Information and Event
           Management (SIEM) tool, designed for monitoring and counterintelligence tasks critical for detecting
           cyber-attacks targeting critical infrastructure. This tool enables the collection, analysis, and correlation of
           various data sources, including logs, network events, and system information to identify suspicious
           activities and threats. ASPEN uses advanced data analysis techniques, including machine learning and
           anomaly detection, to enable rapid incident detection and appropriate protective measures. With its
           ability to monitor complex IT environments, ASPEN contributes to the security of critical infrastructure
           from increasingly sophisticated cyber threats.
•   Third Segment: 24/7 Infrastructure Monitoring Mechanisms
       o   SOC 24/7 is an operational and security management center that provides continuous protection and
           monitoring of information systems and networks. SOC uses advanced technologies and a team of expert
           analysts to identify, analyze, and respond to security threats in real-time, enabling rapid incident
           recognition and appropriate response. With its continuous presence and ability to address a wide range
           of security challenges, SOC 24/7 provides critical support to organizations in maintaining the integrity and
           security of their digital resources.



                                                                                                               Page 55 of 56
        The World Bank
        Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)


4.      RGA also emphasizes the protection of personal data of citizens and business entities whose data it processes,
and has established a robust technical protection system that encompasses the following key aspects:
   •   ISO 27701 Certification: RGA is certified according to the ISO 27701 standard, which confirms commitment to
       high-level personal data protection. This standard is an extension for privacy management within the information
       security management system (ISO 27001), ensuring that all processes are aligned with the highest standards in
       privacy.
   •   Systematic Supervision and Controls: Continuous supervision and controls conducted by the Commissioner for
       Information of Public Importance and Personal Data Protection confirm that RGA operates in accordance with
       laws and regulations. RGA’s practices have been repeatedly rated as exemplary, guaranteeing the security of data
       entrusted to it.
   •   Access Control: Access to personal data is strictly controlled. Only authorized users have access to specific
       information, granted based on the principle of least privilege. Additionally, all user activities are logged and
       monitored for added security.
   •   Regular Updates and Patching: RGA’s systems are regularly updated, and patches are applied as soon as they
       become available to minimize vulnerability to known threats. This includes operating systems, applications, and
       all other components of the information system.
   •   Incident Detection and Response System: RGA has a sophisticated system for detecting and responding to
       security incidents. This system enables the rapid identification of potential threats and their efficient mitigation
       to minimize damage and protect data.
   •   Employee Training: All RGA employees regularly undergo training in information security and personal data
       protection. RGA recognizes that employees are a key element of the data protection system and heavily invests
       in their education and awareness of the importance of data protection.




                                                                                                                Page 56 of 56
