Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 10/25/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03876




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P500611                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         REMP 2                       2025

                     Operation Name            Second Real Estate Management Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Serbia                    Serbia                                    EUROPE AND CENTRAL            Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                         ASIA                          Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Serbia        Republic Geodetic Authority               15-Apr-2024                   29-Jul-2024


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     23-Oct-2023               32,500,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve the transparency, accessibility, and reliability of Serbia’s real property management systems.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Second Real Estate Management Project will build upon activities completed under the ongoing Real Estate
                     Management Project (P147050) and its Additional Financing. REMP 2 would be implemented by the Republic Geodetic
                     Authority (RGA), and components envisioned under the proposed project include: Component A: Implementation of the
                     Property Mass Valuation System. This component will support (i) the rollout of mass valuation models for residential
                     properties for the bulk of Serbia's population; (ii) the development of an information system for mass property
                     valuation; (iii) the creation of a residential property price index that includes all types of residential property; (iv) the
                     development of a Building Register module as part of the Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster (ISREC); (v) the
                     supply of very high-resolution satellite imagery and orthophoto creation; (vi) technical assistance for the development

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     of a sustainable model for the long-term maintenance of both the Building Register and Mass Property Valuation
                     Information System; and (vii) the development of mass valuation models for non-residential properties in Serbia.
                     Component B: Integration of Information Systems and NSDI Services Development. This component will support (i) the
                     further development and national implementation of ISREC; (ii) the establishment of an infrastructure cadaster; (iii)
                     implementation of a land consolidation system; (iv) cybersecurity improvements; (v) implementation of the Republic
                     Geodetic Authority's (RGA) NSDI Action Plan; and (vi) upgrades to RGA's digital archive system. Component C:
                     Institutional Development, RGA Sustainability, and Project Management. This component will support (i) updating of
                     strategic documents such as RGA's Business Plan and Transformation Strategy; (ii) implementation of RGA's Portfolio
                     Management Plan; (iii) further implementation of key land administration standards at RGA; and (iv) project
                     management functions of the Project Implementation Unit and its associated staff and consultants.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     This nationwide project aims to advance land administration reforms in Serbia, encompassing both urban and rural
                     areas. It focuses on digitalizing property management in Serbia including valuation and property taxation of non-
                     residential properties, but without making physical changes. In general, environmental risk management practices in
                     Serbia align closely with EU directives. Serbia is a pre-accession country and has been receiving support and guidance
                     from the EU to harmonize various sectors, such are environment, waste management, climate and sustainable
                     development. Ensuring strict compliance with national legislation provides a solid basis for effectively managing
                     environmental risks that might arise during the project’s implementation. The E- Gov Law addresses various aspects of
                     e-government, including the development of e-services for citizens and businesses, electronic transactions between



Public Disclosure
                     public administration bodies. In addition Serbia has Law on Electronic Document, Electronic Identification, and Trust
                     Services and Law on Telecommunications. However, regulatory framework to tackle digital divide has not been
                     developed yet. Furthermore, no survey on use of E-Gov services has been conducted yet. The survey from 2021,
                     conducted by the Statistical Office showed that 76.7% of households in the Republic of Serbia have a computer. The
                     digital divide is evident when analyzing geographic areas and the availability of internet connections in urban and rural
                     areas. The percentage of computers in households varies depending on the territory: in Belgrade, it amounts to 94.7%,
                     in Vojvodina 72.2%, in Šumadija and Western Serbia 69.1% and in Southern and Eastern Serbia 70.9%. The internet is
                     mostly used for phone conversation (99.9% students and 57.8% pensioners). Digitization and development of
                     electronic administration is a priority of the Government of Serbia, though it involves extreme complexity and high
                     sensitivity.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Republic Geodetic Authority (RGA) will continue as the proposed project’s implementing agency as it was for the
                     original Real Estate Management Project (REMP). RGA has built significant implementation capacities for land
                     administration projects over the past 20 years, and this will remain an important asset throughout project
                     implementation. The agency’s PIU will continue its role under the new project and has competencies and experience
                     with World Bank protocols and procedures for project implementation, including fiduciary aspects, safeguards (but not
                     the WB Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), and M&E, the latter of which is fully overseen by RGA, with the PIU
                     consolidating data for reporting to the World Bank. The PIU performed satisfactorily in applying E&S policy, and in
                     particular social risk management under safeguards. To ensure the project align with social requirements under ESF
                     the PIU The PIU's will designate social specialist from the existing team or hire a part-time social specialist. The
                     Information and Communication Technology (ICT) capacities of RGA are already considered very advanced, particularly

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     with the rollout of Integrated System for Real Estate Cadaster (ISREC). This capacity will be further enhanced as
                     technical staff are become trained on geospatial information management. However digitalization generally pose
                     multiple challenges especially regarding proper management of social risks. The borrower has limited capacity in this
                     area, therefore the ESCP will outline the requirement to appoint one part time data privacy and cybersecurity specialist
                     who will adequately address digital divide, algorithm biases and data privacy and security. The task team will discuss
                     with RGZ the necessary capacity building programs related to REMP 2 activities, including its preparation and execution
                     phase.




                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                         Low
                     The project is not expected to have significant adverse environmental impacts, as it will mostly support desk based
                     work, i.e. software development (e.g., development of mass valuation system for non-residential properties,
                     gathering and evaluating of real estate data; upgrade of additional e-services for citizens and businesses;
                     modernization of the Republic Geodetic Authority (RGA) Web Portal; improvement of cybersecurity, data and systems
                     protection and recovery, etc.) The project will not support any civil works. Potential indirect adverse environmental
                     risk and impacts might arise from IT hardware purchase. These issues can be effectively mitigated by aligning with the



Public Disclosure
                     national regulatory framework and incorporating provisions within the ESCP for: (i) energy efficiency (EE) standards
                     for hardware appliances and (ii) the management of electrical and electronic equipment waste (e-waste). Another risk
                     related to community safety pertains to the procurement of drones for cadastral mapping activities, under
                     Component D. However, this aspect is well-regulated within the country. Specifically, the Regulation on Unmanned
                     Aircraft (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, no. 108/2015) outlines conditions for safe unmanned aircraft use,
                     permit acquisition procedures, and requirements for individuals operating drones. Furthermore, the Law on Public
                     Peace and Order (OG of the RS, no. 6/2016, 24/2018) imposes penalties for drone operations that endanger public
                     safety or disrupt order and peace. The ESCP will incorporate relevant provisions for the safe use of drones. While the
                     PIU may not be familiar with the ESF, the original REMP and additional financing have been successfully implemented
                     under safeguards by the same PIU responsible for this project. Overall, the potential adverse environmental risks and
                     impacts associated with this project are anticipated to be minimal or negligible in scope. Consequently, the
                     environmental risk rating is assessed as low.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project aimed at digitalization of real estate government services has moderate social risk. The platform for
                     property valuation will handle sensitive data about properties and their owners, which raises privacy and
                     cybersecurity concerns. At concept stage it is not clear whether privacy considerations will be built into the platform
                     design, and if there will be a clear plan in place in the event of any breach. Strong data privacy and security measures
                     in accordance with national regulations and GIIP will be part of ESCP requirements. The platform's design must
                     guarantee transparency, and accurate property valuations to avoid conflicts, legal issues, or financial losses for
                     property owners and buyers, and this requirement will be detailed in project ESCP. Discrimination against specific


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     demographic and bias in property valuation algorithms should be prevented by adhering to national
                     antidiscrimination laws and best international practice. Collecting information via drones poses a data privacy risks,
                     and their usage will be strictly aligned with General Data Protection Regulation and the Serbian Law on Personal Data
                     Protection. Although full information is not available at the concept stage, it is unlikely that the Project will result in
                     technology driven job displacement. However, if it does happen, a plan will be drawn up to train workers for new
                     technologies or compensate for job loss as prescribed by law. The introduction of E-Gov in real estate information
                     poses a risk of a digital divide. To address this, the project will draw on GIIP and good practices from prior REMPs,
                     including data collection on digital access and usage, support for diverse age groups, and ensuring accessibility for
                     individuals with disabilities. SEP will prioritize transparency and stakeholder engagement. Finally, the social risk for
                     the project is moderate, but reversable as it can be managed through the existing legal framework, GIIP, ESCP, and
                     SEP.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      The project will not support activities with a physical footprint, so there are no identified direct environmental
                      impacts. The risks associated with the property valuation process, procurement of hardware and drones can be to a
                      certain extent mitigated by aligning with the national regulatory framework. Nonetheless, considering the potential
                      shortcomings in the implementation and adherence to national regulations, the ESCP will incorporate relevant



Public Disclosure
                      requirements on energy efficiency, drone use, permitting, property valuation process and its transparency, data
                      privacy and security, GRM and stakeholder engagement and labor conditions. These topics will also be addressed in
                      the POM. SEP will be created to ensure sufficient level of transparency, guide engagement and enhance public
                      awareness among various stakeholders. It will also address potential digital divide and establish clear communication
                      channels to ensure property owners are informed about how their data will be utilized.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      Transparency in mass data valuation process, potential digital divide, and data privacy and security are the main
                      ESS10 related social concern. The SEP will be developed to ensure sufficient level of transparency, guide engagement
                      and enhance public awareness among citizens, businesses, and authorities in Serbia. SEP will identify all vulnerable
                      groups expected among commercial owners such are: women, Roma, people with disability, ethnic minorities,
                      migrants, elderly, and provide strategies for addressing their specific needs and challenges in this context. The SEP
                      will consider any potential digital divide and establish clear communication channels to ensure property owners are
                      informed about how their data will be utilized. The SEP will guide notification of the public about the drone project,
                      the purpose of data collection, and any potential impacts on owners’ privacy. The feedback loop will be ensured
                      through project GRM but also through satisfaction surveys

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      Although full information is not available at the concept stage, it is unlikely that the Project will result in technology
                      driven job displacement. Project workers will include direct workers (PIU staff), civil servants and consultants who will


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                      be hired following the Bank’s procurement guidelines. National labor law is overall consistent with and meets the
                      requirement of the ESS2 relevant to the project. The labor issues be addressed through the Recipient’s commitment
                      to the ESCP as follows: (1) Recipient is required to include in the ToRs and contracts for IT consultancies measures to
                      ensure compliance with the national labor law and ESS2, satisfactory to the Bank; and (2) Recipient will establish a
                      workers’ GM for PIU consultants and verify that consultancies have a workers’ GM in place before establishing a
                      contractual relationship with them. The Code of Conduct including on SEA/SH will be required as part of ESS2.The
                      ESS2 monitoring obligations will be reflected in ESCP and POM.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      Risks related to the procurement of some hardware components will be addressed and provisions will be made in the
                      POM and the ESCP to ensure full compliance with national regulations, notably with provisions of EE measures and e-
                      waste, and with the World Bank Group (WBG) Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guideline (including relevant
                      GIIPs stated in the document), as applicable.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      Risks related to the procurement of drones will be addressed and provisions will be made in the POM the ESCP and
                      SEP to ensure public awareness and full compliance with national regulations, particularly regarding the safe use of
                      drones and community safety. Collecting information via drones poses a data privacy risks, and their usage will be
                      strictly aligned with General Data Protection Regulation and the Serbian Law on Personal Data Protection. The
                      platform's design must guarantee transparency, and accurate property valuations to avoid conflicts, legal issues, or




Public Disclosure
                      financial losses for property owners and buyers, and this requirement will be detailed in project ESCP.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                   Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                    Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is not relevant.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           No



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     By appraisal the borrower will need to develop SEP, and ESCP. Measures related to improved transparency, data
                     privacy and security, energy efficiency, e-waste, safe use of drones, as well as project GRM and main provisions on
                     labor conditions will be outlined in the ESCP. ESCP will also outline the requirement to appoint one part-time data
                     privacy and cybersecurity specialist who will adequately address digital divide, algorithm biases and data privacy and
                     security.




Public Disclosure
                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:     Olivera Jordanovic                      Title:         Senior Land Administration Specialist

                      Email:                ojordanovic@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:          Caleb Travis Johnson                    Job Title:     Land Administration Specialist

                      Email:                cjohnson10@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Second Real Estate Management Project (P500611)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                             Olivera Jordanovic, Caleb Travis Johnson

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                    Ivana Novakovic

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Olivera Kovacevic




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                 Page 8 of 8
