Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Belize Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option(P505490)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Mar-2025 | Report No: PIDIC00146




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Belize Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option(P505490)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                            Belize Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe
Belize                         P505490
                                                            Deferred Drawdown Option
Region                         Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
LATIN AMERICA AND                                                                          Development Policy
                               29-Jul-2025                  Urban, Resilience and Land
CARIBBEAN                                                                                  Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Ministry of Finance,           Ministry of Finance,
Economic Development           Economic Development
and Investment                 and Investment

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To PDO is to enhance the Government of Belize's institutional, technical, and financial capacity to manage risk
resulting from the occurrence of natural or health-related hazards, including the adverse effects of climate change and
disease outbreaks.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                                 20.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                20.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                          20.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate




                                                                                                                    Page 1
          The World Bank
          Belize Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option(P505490)



Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context
    Belize has the smallest population in Central America, with an estimated 430,191 people as of 2021. As a small economy
    that is primarily reliant on tourism, the exportation of agricultural products, and an energy sector that is dependent on
    oil imports, Belize is highly vulnerable to fluctuations in international commodity prices and external economic shocks.
    Between 1999 and 2008, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 5.6 percent, supported by expansionary
    monetary and fiscal policies, before falling to 1.8 percent between 2009 and 2019, which, combined with a similar rate
    of population growth, resulted in GDP per capita near stagnation over the past decade. As a result of the country's
    underperforming economy, the poverty rate increased from 34 percent in 2002 to 52 percent in 2019, with 9 percent
    of the population living in extreme poverty, a trend that contrasts sharply with poverty reductions in other parts of
    Latin America. The economy was deeply affected by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic but has been
    recovering quickly following the reopening of the country to tourists.

    Belize’s disaster and climate risk profile underscores the urgent need for a coordinated approach to disaster risk
    management (DRM) and climate adaptation across sectors. Ranked third in disaster risk and fifth in climate change risk
    among small island developing states, Belize faces increasing threats from hurricanes, floods, and coastal erosion,
    exacerbated by rising sea levels.1 Approximately 57.9 percent and 36.2 percent of the population of Belize reside within
    25 km of the coast and in low elevation zones respectively, and an additional 25 percent of the population resides on
    riverbanks, exposing them to increased inland flooding. Additionally, the country has seen an increase in mean annual
    temperatures of approximately 0.45°C since 1960, along with a higher frequency of hot days and nights.2 Belize’s coastal
    areas, including its critical coral reefs and marine ecosystems, are particularly threatened by rising sea levels at an
    alarming rate of 3–5 mm per year. This rise, combined with more frequent and severe storms, poses a significant risk
    to coastal infrastructure and livelihoods, particularly in sectors such as tourism, agriculture and fishing.3 These
    vulnerabilities are compounded by unsustainable land development and settlement practices, which have made them
    even more vulnerable to climate change.

    Belize has faced a diverse range of disasters over the past 15 years, significantly affecting its economy and underscoring
    the need for improved fiscal and institutional resilience. Various disasters, including hurricanes, tropical storms,
    earthquakes, droughts, floods, and landslides, public health emergencies (that is, epidemics and pandemics), frequently
    affect the country. According to the Climate Risk Index for 1997–2016, Belize ranks within the top 5 percent globally for


1
 Economically, the country has recently witnessed high loss caused by Hurricane Lisa in 2022, estimated at about 10 percent of Belize’s national
budget. (Statement by Hon. Orlando Habet, Minister of Sustainable Development, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management at the 27th
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/BELIZE_cop27cmp17cma4_HLS_ENG.pdf)
2
  https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/belize/vulnerability ---
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/belize/climate-data-historical
3
  https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2021/03/24/resilience-and-conservation-in-a-changing-climate-the-case-of-belize

                                                                                                                                              Page 2
         The World Bank
         Belize Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option(P505490)


    economic losses and within the top 12 percent for fatalities due to climate-related disasters.4 Since 2016, Belize has
    encountered a prolonged drought in 2019; the COVID-19 pandemic, which contracted GDP by 13.4 percent in 2020;
    Hurricane Nana in 2020, and Hurricane Lisa in 2022. These events caused extensive damage to agriculture,
    infrastructure, and livelihoods. Based on probabilistic modeling and historic losses, it was estimated that the
    Government of Belize (GoB) would need to cover losses of roughly US$29.5 million, or 1.69 percent of Belize’s GDP,
    annually to address contingent liabilities related to hurricanes and floods.

    Relationship to CPF

    The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2025–29, which is under preparation, aims to support Belize in
    achieving inclusive, resilient, and sustainable growth. The program is fully aligned with the existing CPF FY 2018-22,
    which has two Focus Areas: (a) Fostering Climate Resilience and Environmental Sustainability; and (b) Promoting
    Financial Inclusion and Social Resilience, and CPF FY2025-29 that three core objectives: promoting healthier lives with
    reduced learning poverty, strengthening climate resilience, and reducing vulnerability to natural shocks. It emphasizes
    building Belize’s institutional, technical, and financial capacity to effectively manage risks from natural and health-
    related hazards, including the impacts of climate change and disease outbreaks. Additionally, the program fortifies
    economic, financial, and infrastructure resilience to climate and disaster risks. The program directly contributes to two
    of CPF FY2025-29 proposed country-level outcomes. The first, Increased climate resilience, aims to preserve Belize's
    natural resources and wealth, while the second, Reduced vulnerability to Natural Shocks, aims to establish a reliable,
    low-cost, and sustainable energy system that incorporates renewable sources, enhance resilience, and foster private
    investment. In alignment with these goals, the program reduces vulnerability to natural shocks by strengthening
    economic, financial, and infrastructure resilience. This involves fortifying Belize’s DRM and resilience framework and
    enhancing emergency preparedness and response (EP&R) systems through improved operational management
    structures, planning and construction practices, and access to financing following an emergency.

    C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


    To PDO is to enhance the Government of Belize's institutional, technical, and financial capacity to manage risk
    resulting from the occurrence of natural or health-related hazards, including the adverse effects of climate change
    and disease outbreaks.


    Key Results

    The proposed policy actions aim to strengthen policy and legislative reforms to improve climate and disaster resilience
    in construction, planning, preparedness, and response activities by strengthening emergency preparedness, land use
    management, construction standards, fiscal stability, and the insurance sector. Updating the National Preparedness
    and Response Plan (PA1) will improve disaster response in urban areas, protecting vulnerable populations, while the
    National Land Use Policy (PA2) promotes sustainable land management to reduce climate vulnerabilities and updating
    the Belize Building Act and Building Codes (PA3) ensures safer, more resilient infrastructure. Financial and fiscal
    resilience will be bolstered through the Disaster Risk Financing Policy (PA4), which enables rapid access to financial
    resources for disaster response, and the Fiscal Strategy Plan (PA5), which ensures fiscal transparency and disaster
    preparedness. Lastly, approval of Microinsurance Regulations (PA6) strengthens the sector’s capacity to handle

4
    IMF Country Report No 18/329, Belize Climate Change Policy Assessment, November 2018.

                                                                                                                          Page 3
       The World Bank
       Belize Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option(P505490)


 disaster-related claims, reducing economic hardship and government fiscal burdens. Together, these actions aim to
 protect communities, stabilize public finances, and foster sustainable development.

 D. Concept Description

The proposed Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe-Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) addresses these
challenges by enhancing Belize’s institutional and financial capacity to manage disaster and climate risks. Policy reforms
are organized under two pillars: Pillar 1— Strengthening Infrastructure Resilience and Multi-Sector Capacity for Disaster
Preparedness and Response —will support the development and updating of key policies and legislation to strengthen
disaster preparedness and response, improve land use management, and enhance climate-adaptive infrastructure. Pillar
2—Strengthening Financial Fiscal Resilience Against Natural Hazards and Climate Change —will support the adoption of
key financial policies to enhance financial resilience and risk management, expand access to risk insurance markets, and
ensure fiscal stability in the face of natural hazards and climate change. The program is closely aligned with country’s
Disaster Preparedness and Response (DPR) Act of 2000 (DPR Act, 2000), National Hazard Mitigation Policy, Plan Belize
(2023), the updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC 2021), Low Emissions Development Strategy and Action
Plan, and the National Adaptation Plan, etc.

Under Pillar 1, PAs prioritizes reforms supporting the integration of disaster risk considerations in building codes and land
use planning and building robust preparedness and response systems to manage multi-hazard risk across government
entities and geographical areas. Key activities include updating legislation on building practices; reviewing and refining
policies related to spatial and land use planning; and improving operational procedures for DRM to ensure they effectively
reduce vulnerabilities to climate change and disasters. PAs under Pillar 1 include PA1. Updating of the National
Preparedness and Response Plan, PA2. Approval of the National Land Use Policy, and PA3. Updating of the Belize Building
Act and Building Codes.

Pillar 2 is foundational to Belize's disaster risk management strategy, enabling both rapid recovery and sustained resilience
against the growing risks posed by climate change and natural hazards. PAs under Pillar 2 include PA4. Approval of a
Disaster Risk Financing Policy and Implementation Plan, PA5. Preparation and Publication of Fiscal Strategy Plan with a
Medium-Term Fiscal Framework, and PA6. Approval of the Microinsurance Regulations.


 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts
 The policy reforms under pillar 1 are expected to moderately decrease household vulnerabilities and mitigate the
 effects of future climate-related disasters. Updating the NDPRP (PA1), will strengthen disaster response capabilities,
 providing protection to those impacted by climate-related crises. Adoption of a National Land Use Policy (PA2),
 promotes sustainable agricultural practices and protects natural resources essential for rural livelihoods, reducing
 vulnerability to climate shocks. Updating the Belize Building Act (PA3) is expected to improve construction standards to
 ensure safer housing that can withstand extreme weather, including in poor, high-risk areas. Pillar 2 has the potential
 to strengthen the country’s fiscal resilience to natural disasters with mostly indirect implications for poverty. The
 adoption of a DRF Policy (PA4) will provide a structured approach to managing financial risks associated with natural
 hazards, improving fiscal stability and enabling quicker fund mobilization for disaster response and recovery. The
 incorporation of adaptive social protection mechanisms to shield vulnerable populations from disaster impacts could
 potentially have important poverty mitigating effects in the event of a natural disaster. The requirement for the Ministry
 of Finance to annually prepare and publish a Fiscal Strategy Plan (PA5) and the adoption of regulations for the insurance

                                                                                                                         Page 4
       The World Bank
       Belize Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option(P505490)


 sector (PA6) aim to strengthen the country’s capacity to absorb shocks and preparedness to respond to natural disaster-
 related, which may have longer-term indirect implications for poverty reduction.


 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

The proposed policy actions are likely to have positive environmental impacts by reducing Belize’s vulnerability to climate
change and strengthening resilience against natural hazards. PA1. National Disaster Preparedness and Response Plan is
expected to have positive effects as it directly contributes to the environmental protection in Belize by ensuring close
coordination with environmental authorizes in case of emergency. PA2. Sustainable Land Use Practices is likely to have
significant positive effects over the long term as it aims to enhance sustainable, and environmentally sound land use
practices, and reduce Belize’s carbon footprint by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. PA3. Strengthening Building
Regulations and Standards is expected to have significant positive effects on the environment as building practices will
become more sustainable, supporting long-term economic growth and environmental conservation.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Jared Phillip Mercadante
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

   Anton Dobronogov
   Senior Economist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment
  Joseph Waight
  Financial Secretary
  joseph.waight@mof.gov.bz

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment
  Joseph Waight
  Financial Secretary
  joseph.waight@mof.gov.bz

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                                                       Page 5
     The World Bank
     Belize Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option(P505490)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                  Jared Phillip Mercadante, Anton Dobronogov

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:             Federica Ranghieri                    03-Feb-2025

Country Director:                     Federico E. Baechli                   03-Mar-2025




                                                                                           Page 6
