Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                         The World Bank
                                                                         Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P505490)




                                                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized          Public Disclosure Authorized




                       _For Official Use Only_
                                                                                     Program Information Document (PID)

                                                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2025 | Report No: PIDDA00171




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P505490)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                      Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe
                          Belize                         P505490
                                                                                      Deferred Drawdown Option
                          Region                         Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
                          LATIN AMERICA AND                                                                          Development Policy
                                                         29-Jul-2025                  Urban, Resilience and Land
                          CARIBBEAN                                                                                  Financing (DPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency




_For Official Use Only_
                          Ministry of Finance,           Ministry of Finance,
                          Economic Development           Economic Development
                          and Investment                 and Investment

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          To PDO is to enhance the institutional, technical, and financial capacity of the Government of Belize (GoB) to manage
                          risk resulting from the occurrence of natural hazards, including the adverse effects of climate change

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          Financing (US$, Millions)


                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Financing                                                                                                 20.00

                          DETAILS
                            Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                20.00
                              World Bank Lending                                                                                          20.00

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
                          Decision
                          The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate


                                                                                                                                              Page 1
                                  The World Bank
                                  Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P505490)




                           Explanation




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context


                          1.       Belize has the smallest population in Central America, with an estimated 430,191 people as of 2021. As a small
                          economy that is primarily reliant on tourism, the exportation of agricultural products, and an energy sector that is
                          dependent on oil imports, Belize is highly vulnerable to fluctuations in international commodity prices and external




_For Official Use Only_
                          economic shocks. Between 1999 and 2008, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 5.6 percent, supported by
                          expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, before falling to 1.8 percent between 2009 and 2019, which, combined with a
                          similar rate of population growth, resulted in GDP per capita near stagnation over the past decade. As a result of the
                          country's underperforming economy, the poverty rate increased from 34 percent in 2002 to 52 percent in 2019, with 9
                          percent of the population living in extreme poverty, a trend that contrasts sharply with poverty reductions in other parts
                          of Latin America. The economy was deeply affected by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic but has been
                          recovering quickly following the reopening of the country to tourists.


                          2.      Belize’s disaster and climate risk profile underscores the urgent need for a coordinated approach to disaster risk
                          management (DRM) and climate adaptation across sectors. Ranked third in disaster risk and fifth in climate change risk
                          among small island developing states (SIDS), Belize faces increasing threats from hurricanes, floods, and coastal erosion,
                          exacerbated by rising sea levels.1 Since 1960, the country has seen an increase in mean annual temperatures of
                          approximately 0.45°C, along with a higher frequency of hot days and nights.2 Belize’s coastal areas, including its critical
                          coral reefs and marine ecosystems, are particularly threatened by rising sea levels, which have been increasing by around
                          3–5 mm per year. Approximately 57.9 percent and 36.2 percent of the population of Belize reside within 25 km of the
                          coast and in low elevation zones, respectively, and an additional 25 percent of the population resides on riverbanks,
                          exposing them to increased inland flooding. These vulnerabilities are compounded by unsustainable land development
                          and settlement practices.
                          3.      Belize has faced a diverse range of disasters over the past 15 years, significantly affecting its economy and
                          underscoring the need for improved fiscal and institutional resilience. Various hazards affect Belize, including high-
                          frequency events such as hurricanes, tropical storms, and floods and less frequent ones such as earthquakes, droughts,
                          landslides, and public health emergencies (that is, epidemics and pandemics). According to the 2022 Climate Risk Index,
                          Belize ranked as the second most affected country by extreme weather events in 2022, due to its exceptionally high



                          1 Economically, the country has recently witnessed high loss caused by Hurricane Lisa in 2022, estimated at about 10 percent of Belize’s national

                          budget. (Statement by Hon. Orlando Habet, Minister of Sustainable Development, Climate Change, and Disaster Risk Management at the 27th
                          Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change).
                          https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/BELIZE_cop27cmp17cma4_HLS_ENG.pdf.
                          2 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/belize/vulnerability;

                          https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/belize/climate-data-historical

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 2
                                  The World Bank
                                  Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P505490)


                          relative economic losses, which account for 3.53 percent of GDP, and over 4.2 percent of its population being affected.3 It
                          is a significant rise from its rank of 19 on the 1993–2022 Climate Risk Index. In recent years, Belize has experienced a
                          prolonged drought in 2019; the COVID-19 pandemic, which contracted GDP by 13.4 percent in 2020; Hurricane Nana in
                          2020; and Hurricane Lisa in 2022. Climate and disaster risks pose a significant threat to Belize’s economy and public
                          finances, as highlighted by the average annual loss from tropical cyclones, based on the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk
                          Insurance Facility (CCRIF) Segregated Portfolio Company (SPC) model, estimated at US$27.2 million, which with a 1 percent
                          chance (1-in-100) could exceed US$672 million (22 percent of 2023 nominal GDP).4


                           Relationship to CPF


                          4.      The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2025–35, which is under preparation, aims to support Belize in
                          achieving inclusive, resilient, and sustainable growth. The program is fully aligned with the two objectives achieved under
                          the existing CPF FY2018–22: (a) Fostering Climate Resilience and Environmental Sustainability and (b) Promoting Financial
                          Inclusion and Social Resilience. It directly contributes to the two proposed Country-Level Outcomes (CLOs) under the CPF




_For Official Use Only_
                          FY2025-35: (a) building resilience to exogenous shocks and climate change impacts and (b) fostering inclusive and
                          sustainable growth. The first CLO aims to boost resilience across multiple sectors from macroeconomic and fiscal
                          management, green and blue planet and population, digital services, and sustainable food systems, while the second CLO
                          aims to establish an affordable, reliable, and sustainable energy system; foster private investment and job opportunities;
                          and promote gender equality and youth inclusion. In alignment with these goals, the program reduces vulnerability to
                          natural shocks by fortifying Belize’s DRM and resilience framework and enhancing EP&R systems through improved
                          operational management structures, planning and construction practices, and access to financing following an emergency.


                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

                           To PDO is to enhance the institutional, technical, and financial capacity of the Government of Belize (GoB) to manage
                           risk resulting from the occurrence of natural hazards, including the adverse effects of climate change.


                           Key Results


                          5.       The proposed policy actions aim to strengthen policy and legislative reforms to improve climate and disaster
                          resilience in construction, planning, preparedness, and response activities by strengthening emergency preparedness,
                          land use management, construction standards, fiscal stability, and the insurance sector. Updating the National
                          Preparedness and Response Plan (PA1) will improve disaster response in urban areas, protecting vulnerable populations,
                          while the National Land Use Policy (PA2) promotes sustainable land management to reduce climate vulnerabilities and
                          updating the Belize Building Act and Building Codes (PA3) ensures safer, more resilient infrastructure. Financial and fiscal
                          resilience will be bolstered through the Disaster Risk Financing Policy (PA4), which enables rapid access to financial
                          resources for disaster response, and the Fiscal Strategy Plan (PA5), which ensures fiscal transparency and disaster
                          preparedness. Lastly, approval of Microinsurance Regulations (PA6) strengthens the sector’s capacity to handle disaster-



                          3 IMF Country Report No 18/329: Belize Climate Change Policy Assessment, November 2018.
                          4 World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 2024. Disaster Risk Finance in Belize: Progress and Perspectives.



                                                                                                                                                      Page 3
                                 The World Bank
                                 Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P505490)


                          related claims, reducing economic hardship and government fiscal burdens. Together, these actions aim to protect
                          communities, stabilize public finances, and foster sustainable development.


                           D. Project Description


                          6.      The proposed Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe-Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) addresses
                          these challenges by enhancing Belize’s institutional and financial capacity to manage disaster and climate risks. Policy
                          reforms are organized under two pillars: Pillar 1— Strengthening National Resilience and Disaster Preparedness and
                          Response Capacities —will support the development and updating of key policies and legislation to strengthen disaster
                          preparedness and response, improve land use management, and enhance climate-adaptive infrastructure. Pillar 2—
                          Strengthening Financial Fiscal Resilience Against Natural Hazards and Climate Change —will support the adoption of key
                          financial policies to enhance financial resilience and risk management, expand access to risk insurance markets, and
                          ensure fiscal stability in the face of natural hazards and climate change. The program is closely aligned with country’s




_For Official Use Only_
                          Disaster Preparedness and Response (DPR) Act of 2000 (DPR Act, 2000), Plan Belize (2023), the updated Nationally
                          Determined Contribution (NDC 2021), Low Emissions Development Strategy and Action Plan, National Climate Change
                          Strategy, and the National Adaptation Plan, etc.


                          7.       Under Pillar 1, PAs prioritizes reforms supporting the integration of disaster risk considerations in building codes
                          and land use planning and building robust preparedness and response systems to manage multi-hazard risk across
                          government entities and geographical areas. Key activities include updating legislation on building practices, establishing
                          risk-informed policies related to spatial and land use planning, and institutionalizing operational procedures for DPR. PAs
                          under Pillar 1 include PA1. Approval of the National Preparedness and Response Plan, PA2. Approval of the National Land
                          Use Policy, and PA3. Approval of the updated Belize Building Act and Building Codes.


                          8.       Pillar 2 is foundational to Belize's disaster risk management strategy, enabling both rapid recovery and sustained
                          resilience against the growing risks posed by climate change and natural hazards. PAs under Pillar 2 include PA4. Approval
                          of a Disaster Risk Financing Policy and Implementation Plan, PA5. Preparation and Publication of Fiscal Strategy Plan with
                          a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework, and PA6. Enactment of the Microinsurance Regulations.


                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements


                          9.       The Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment (MoF) will be the entity responsible for the
                          monitoring, evaluation, and results framework and will coordinate actions across relevant ministries and agencies involved
                          in the operation. The agencies responsible for the implementation of the PAs supported by the Cat DDO under Pillar 1 are:
                          (i) the Ministry of Blue Economy and Disaster Risk Management; (ii) the National Emergency Management Organization-
                          NEMO; (iii) the Ministry of Natural Resources, Petroleum and Mining; and (iv) the Ministry of Infrastructure Development
                          and Housing. The agency responsible for the implementation of Pillar 2 is MoF.




                                                                                                                                                  Page 4
                                  The World Bank
                                  Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P505490)


                          10.    The World Bank will monitor implementation of the DPC program through regular supervision missions. The World
                          Bank will also maintain close dialogue with counterparts throughout preparation and collaborate with the MoF.


                           F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

                           Poverty and Social Impacts


                          11.      The policy reforms under Pillar 1 are expected to moderately decrease household vulnerabilities and mitigate the
                          effects of future climate-related disasters. In Belize, poverty is concentrated in rural areas where households rely on
                          agriculture, making them highly vulnerable to climate impacts such as erratic rainfall and water scarcity. These issues are
                          exacerbated by challenges such as low education levels; limited healthcare; and inadequate infrastructure, including
                          insufficient access to clean water, sanitation, and electricity. Updating the National Preparedness and Response Plan (PA1)
                          will strengthen disaster response capabilities, providing protection to those affected by climate-related crises, including




_For Official Use Only_
                          the poorest and most vulnerable. Adoption of a National Land Use Policy (PA2) promotes sustainable agricultural practices
                          and protects natural resources essential for rural livelihoods, reducing vulnerability to climate shocks. Updating the Belize
                          Building Act (PA3) is expected to improve construction standards to ensure safer housing that can withstand extreme
                          weather, including in poor, high-risk areas.
                          12.      Pillar 2 has the potential to strengthen the country’s fiscal resilience to natural disasters, with mostly indirect
                          implications for poverty. By enhancing Belize’s fiscal capacity to manage and respond to such events, the proposed actions
                          may reduce the social and economic costs stemming from these disasters. The adoption of a DRF Policy (PA4) will provide
                          a structured approach to managing financial risks associated with natural hazards, which coupled with an annual Fiscal
                          Strategy Plan (PA5), will improve fiscal stability and enable quicker fund mobilization for disaster response and recovery.
                          Lastly, the adoption of regulations for the insurance sector (PA6) should foster the development of insurance products
                          (including microinsurance) designed for natural disasters, helping covered households and businesses to quickly respond
                          to and recover from natural hazards, mitigating the impact of these shocks, which may have longer-term implications for
                          poverty reduction.


                           Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects


                          13.      PAs 2 and 3 under Pillar 1 supported through this operation are anticipated to have significant positive effects on
                          Belize’s environment, forests, and other natural resources. The approved National Land Use Policy (PA 2) emphasizes the
                          productive and sustainable use of land, particularly in rural and agricultural contexts. This approach aims to reduce land
                          degradation and promote sustainable land management practices that improve soil health, conserve water resources, and
                          protect biodiversity, thereby strengthening the resilience of both ecosystems and local communities. Additionally, the
                          policy is expected to support the creation of land use plans that align public infrastructure needs with environmental
                          preservation, promoting sustainable development. The updated Belize Building Act, with the Building Codes of Belize
                          (PA3), is expected to establish and standardize sustainable and climate-resilient building construction, supporting long-
                          term economic growth and promoting environmental conservation by reducing GHG emissions,5 improving water and
                          energy efficiency, and encouraging nature-based solution approaches, among others.


                          5 The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) notes that buildings and the construction sector is a major contributor to climate change,

                          responsible for 38 percent of global related CO2 emissions. UNEP. 2021. A Practical Guide to Climate Resilient Buildings and Communities.
                          https://www.unep.org/resources/practical-guide-climate-resilient-buildings.

                                                                                                                                                                      Page 5
                                   The World Bank
                                   Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P505490)




                          14.      Although no negative environmental impacts are anticipated, Belize has a comprehensive legal and institutional
                          framework to manage potential adverse effects. Key regulations such as the EPA6 provide the legal basis for environmental
                          management in Belize; the Forest Act,7 the Protected Areas Act, 8and the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                          regulations support land use by regulating development and conserving natural resources. The EIA system ensures that
                          any proposed land and infrastructure development project is screened for potential environmental impacts and designed
                          to minimize harm. The Department of the Environment9 is the main authority body in Belize for environmental
                          management and is responsible for overseeing and enforcing the EIA process, while the Ministry of Sustainable
                          Development, Climate Change, and Disaster Risk Management leads policy making for sustainable land use and climate
                          resilience. Complementary national strategies such as the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan,10 the updated
                          Belize NDC 11 and National Development Framework (Horizon 2030)12,further reinforce sustainable land use and
                          environmental protection.13 International support, including from the World Bank14 and International Institute for
                          Sustainable Development,15 provides technical and financial capacity for implementation.




_For Official Use Only_
                           G. Risks and Mitigation

                          15.     The overall program risks are considered Moderate. However, risks to achieving the program objectives are
                          considered Substantial, with concerns regarding the risks associated with macroeconomic shocks, implementation
                          capacity given the country’s small pool of technical experts, sector strategies and policy caused by structural weaknesses,
                          operational inefficiencies, and potential funding limitations. These risks will be mitigated by government reforms to
                          enhance policy and institutional frameworks for disaster risk management and climate change and fiscal resilience against
                          natural hazards. The carefully prioritized reform actions will be supported by the World Bank’s continued technical
                          assistance, with consideration of capacity constraints, while leveraging technical or financial assistance support from other
                          international organizations. For specific PAs, such as PA1, PA2, and PA4, they will be complemented by implementation
                          plans to ensure that adequate mechanisms are introduced to the sectors and that the intended benefits of these policy
                          actions are fully realized.



                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank


                          6 EPA. 1992. https://www.fao.org/faolex/results/details/en/c/LEX-FAOC006462/.
                          7 Forest Act. https://www.fao.org/faolex/results/details/en/c/LEX-FAOC002737/.
                          8 National Protected Areas System Act. https://www.fao.org/faolex/results/details/en/c/LEX-

                          FAOC163048/#:~:text=The%20main%20objective%20of%20the,wildlife%20sanctuaries%20and%20natural%20monuments.
                          9 Department of the Environment.

                          https://doe.gov.bz/legislation/#:~:text=The%20Department%20of%20the%20Environment%20is%20responsible%20for%20the%20enforcement,vi
                          olation%20tickets%20for%20pollution%20offenses.
                          10 https://www.fao.org/faolex/results/details/en/c/LEX-FAOC167539/.
                          11 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/Belize%20Updated%20NDC.pdf.
                          12 https://www.fao.org/faolex/results/details/en/c/LEX-FAOC163501/.
                          13 https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2018/07/30/promoting-a-sustainable-natural-resource-based-economic-model-in-belize.
                          14 https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2018/07/30/promoting-a-sustainable-natural-resource-based-economic-model-in-belize

                          15 https://www.iisd.org/capa/belize.



                                                                                                                                                       Page 6
                               The World Bank
                               Belize Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P505490)


                           Jared Phillip Mercadante
                           Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                           Anton Dobronogov
                           Senior Economist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment
                           Joseph Waight
                           Financial Secretary
                           joseph.waight@mof.gov.bz

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment




_For Official Use Only_
                           Joseph Waight
                           Financial Secretary
                           joseph.waight@mof.gov.bz

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Jared Phillip Mercadante, Anton Dobronogov

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Federica Ranghieri                   07-May-2025

                          Country Director:                       Federico E. Baechli                  28-May-2025




                                                                                                                        Page 7
