Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Stakeholder Engagement Plan




                               Housing Response and Mortgage Market Enhancement (HOME) Project
                                                             (P508310)




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                           October 2025




                                   Prepared by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs of the Republic of Armenia
                                 Complemented by input from the National Mortgage Company Refinancing Credit
                                                                                                 Organization CJSC
Contents


List of Acronyms ............................................................................................................................................ 3
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 5
1. Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 7
    1.1 Project context .................................................................................................................................... 7
    1.2 Project Description ............................................................................................................................. 7
    1.4 Purpose of the SEP.............................................................................................................................. 9
2. Objective of SEP and Methodology......................................................................................................... 11
    2.1 SEP Objectives and Principles ........................................................................................................... 11
    2.2 Key Definitions .................................................................................................................................. 12
3. Stakeholder Identification, Analysis and Engagement Methods............................................................. 13
    3.1 Stakeholder Identification and Analysis............................................................................................ 13
        3.1.1 Affected Parties and Other Interested Parties........................................................................... 13
        3.1.2. Disadvantaged/vulnerable Individuals or Groups .................................................................... 13
    3.2 Stakeholder Engagement Program ................................................................................................... 14
        3.2.1 Summary of Stakeholder Engagement done During Project Preparation ................................. 14
        3.2.2 Stakeholder Engagement Methods and Approach ................................................................... 15
        3.2.3 Information Disclosure .............................................................................................................. 21
4. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement Activities ......................... 23
    4.1 Management Functions and Responsibilities ................................................................................... 23
    4.2 Resources .......................................................................................................................................... 24
5. Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism ........................................................................................ 27
    5.1 Government Systems on Grievance Resolution................................................................................ 27
    5.1. Key Elements of FGRM under the Project ....................................................................................... 28
6. Monitoring and Reporting....................................................................................................................... 31
    6.1. Monitoring of SEP ............................................................................................................................ 31
    6.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups ............................................................................................. 31
Annex 1: Key Stakeholder Groups ............................................................................................................... 33
Annex 2. Roles and Responsibilities of the Key Actors involved in SE Implementation .............................. 35
Annex 3. Sample Grievance Log Template .................................................................................................. 36
Annex 4. Sample Consultation Record Template ........................................................................................ 37
Annex 5: Summary of stakeholder feedback and how it was addressed.................................................... 38




                                                                               2
List of Acronyms
ADB                Asian Development Bank
AFD                Agence Française de Développement
CBA                Central Bank of Armenia
CSO                Civil Society Organization
COP                Communication and Outreach Plan
CoUD               Committee of Urban Development
DPM                Deputy Prime Minister
e-request.am       Unified government e-request platform
ESCP               Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF                Environmental and Social Framework
ESS                Environmental and Social Standard
FGRM               Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
FSM                Financial System Mediator
GIZ                Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GoA                Government of Armenia
GRS                Grievance Redress Service (WB)
ICA                Interagency Commission of Appeals
HH                 Household
HPC                Housing Purchase Certificate
HSP                Housing Support Program
                   Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (German Development
KfW
                   Bank)
LOC                Line of Credit
MCS                Migration and Citizenship Service
M&E                Monitoring and Evaluation
MLSA               Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
MoF                Ministry of Finance
NMC                National Mortgage Company
NGO                Non-Governmental Organization
NSS                National Security Service
PBC                Performance Based Conditions
PBL                Program-Based Lending
PFI                Participating Financial Institution
PIT                Project Implementation Team
PSSA               Program Safeguards System Assessment
SAP                Social Assistance Program
SC                 Steering Committee
SE                 Stakeholder Engagement
SEP                Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SECS               Stakeholder Engagement and Communications Specialist


                                                         3
UNDP     United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF   United Nations Children’s Fund
UNHCR    United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
USS      Unified Social Service
WB       World Bank




                                          4
Executive Summary


Context: Armenia faces pressing challenges in providing adequate and affordable housing, with the influx
of refugees adding further strain to an already limited housing market and underdeveloped mortgage
sector. The Housing Response and Mortgage Market Enhancement (HOME) Project seeks to address these
challenges by improving access to housing for refugee households, while also strengthening the long-term
sustainability of the mortgage finance market.
Introduction to HOME Project: The HOME Project, implemented by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
(MLSA) with support from the World Bank (WB) and other partners, provides a combination of immediate
assistance and institutional capacity-building. It supports upfront payments and mortgage installments for
eligible households, cash support to cover rent and utilities, and liquidity to the National Mortgage
Company (NMC) to ensure the continued availability of affordable housing finance. The HOME project is
comprised of three components as follows: (i) Housing subsidies and support for institutional
development, (ii) Housing finance market development, and (iii) Project management, communication,
monitoring, and evaluation.
Purpose and Objectives of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): This SEP has been prepared in line
with the WB Environmental and Social Standard 10 (ESS10) to guide meaningful, inclusive, and transparent
engagement with stakeholders throughout the Project cycle. Its objectives are to ensure that information
on the Project is accessible, that stakeholder feedback is considered in decision-making, and that effective
feedback and grievance redress mechanism (FGRM) is in place.
Stakeholder Identification, Analysis and Engagement Methods: This SEP identifies refugee households,
host communities, government institutions, financial intermediaries, civil society organizations (CSOs),
and development partners as key stakeholders. Beneficiaries will be engaged primarily through the Unified
Social Service (USS) network, CSOs, and mass/digital media, with special measures to reach vulnerable
groups such as female-headed households, persons with disabilities, elderly refugees, and those in rural
areas. Engagement will be continuous, combining consultations, outreach campaigns, and perception
surveys.
The SEP outlines methods for both stakeholder engagement and beneficiary outreach and communication.
Beneficiary-facing activities include outreach through USS territorial centers and CSOs, mass media and
digital campaigns, targeted support for vulnerable groups, and periodic perception surveys. Engagement
with other stakeholders will involve interagency coordination meetings, collaboration with partner banks
and NMC, roundtables with CSOs and development partners, and structured media engagement.
Information disclosure: Information on the Government Housing Support Program (HSP) is already
available on the MLSA website, including eligibility criteria and application procedures, complemented by
video explainers to guide beneficiaries. Throughout implementation, MLSA will continue to disclose key
project documents, updates, and guidance materials through digital, print, media, and community-level
channels, ensuring tailored formats for women-headed households, persons with disabilities, elderly
beneficiaries, and refugees in rural areas.
Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanisms: For Component 1, the Project will build on the MLSA’s
existing 114 hotline and USS territorial centers to ensure accessible grievance channels, with the newly
established Interagency Commission on Appeals serving as an additional mechanism for rejected
applicants. Grievance handling will follow the Law on Freedom of Information (2003), ensuring fairness,
                                                     5
transparency, and accountability, while sensitive cases such as SEA/SH will be managed under survivor-
centered protocols. For Component 2, NMC will rely on its internal grievance redress mechanism (GRM)
as outlined in the organizations Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) manual1.
Management resources and responsibilities for SEP implementation: The MLSA is responsible for
implementing this SEP related to Component 1 and NMC will be responsible for stakeholder engagement
(SE) activities under Component 2. MLSA will establish a project Implementing team (PIT) comprised of
civil servants and non-civil servants assigned from within the MLSA. The Project Coordinator is responsible
for managing and overseeing the implementation of stakeholder engagement activities, monitoring, and
reporting, as well as ensuring the quality of the SEP activities delegated to respective departments of the
MLSA. For SEP implementation, MLSA will hire or assign a Stakeholder Engagement and Communications
Specialist (SECS). As for Component 2, NMC will use in-house capacities to implement SE activities.
Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP: Monitoring and reporting will be carried out through biannual
progress reports, mid-term and end-of-project perception surveys, and regular updates to stakeholders.
Feedback will be incorporated into adaptive engagement strategies, ensuring that the SEP remains
responsive to community needs and program realities.
Final Notes: This SEP was disclosed on the MLSA website on September 15, 2025 and was circulated for
stakeholder feedback and consultation during September–October 2025 (Annex 5). The current version
integrates written inputs received within that period. The SEP will be updated within three months after
Project Effectiveness and afterwards will be reviewed annually and revised as needed following major
program or institutional change.
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project supported by the
World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance
Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the
Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which
determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and
procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the
opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at
any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management and after
Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to
the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.




1 In the SEP, Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism (FGRM) will be used to refer to Project grievance mechanism

established and operated by MLSA while Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be used to refer to internal grievance
mechanism of the NMC.

                                                           6
1. Introduction
1.1 Project context
Housing is one of the most pressing challenges in Armenia, with the recent influx of refugees adding
further strain to an already limited housing supply, while also putting pressure on labor markets and social
services. The country’s housing stock is largely aging and privately owned, with low vacant rates and
limited availability outside Yerevan. An estimated 20,000 households remain without long-term housing,
including families affected by the 1988 Spitak earthquake and successive refugee waves, while many
others live in overcrowded or inadequate conditions. Existing housing programs are fragmented, narrowly
targeted, and often costly, limiting both their reach and long-term impact.
To address these challenges, the Government of Armenia (GoA), with support from the WB and other
development partners, is implementing the Housing Response and Mortgage Market Enhancement
(HOME) Project. The Project provides immediate and medium-term support to refugee and vulnerable
households through cash assistance, housing solutions, and improved access to financial services.
1.2 Project Description
Project Development Objective is to improve refugees’ access to housing solutions and enable deepening
of the mortgage market.
The HOME project is comprised of three components as follows: (i) Housing subsidies and support for
institutional development, (ii) Housing finance market development, and (iii) Project management,
communication, monitoring, and evaluation.
Component 1: Housing Subsidies and Support for Institutional Development
This component will provide housing solutions to eligible beneficiaries, which will simultaneously increase
their resilience towards increasing climate risks such as extreme heat and floods. Financial assistance will
be provided in the form of direct cash transfers to beneficiaries to support rent, utilities, and other living
costs. The component will also provide financial assistance to eligible beneficiary HHs for the acquisition
of housing solutions through mortgages obtained from commercial banks. The component will also seek
to enhance the institutional capacities of the GoA and its relevant agencies for designing, establishing,
implementing, and managing future national housing sector policy and programs.
Subcomponent 1.1: Rental support through direct cash transfers
This subcomponent will provide direct cash transfers to beneficiaries supported through the ongoing social
assistance program (SAP). Beneficiaries will receive up subsidies of up to AMD50,000 (US$125) per person
per month for rent and utilities, as well as other HH-related expenses and consumption needs.2 The SAP
has been administered by the MLSA since December 2023, and program parameters have been gradually
adjusted over time to tailor support for the most vulnerable groups. Project financing will support both
the GoA’s past (reimbursement through retroactive financing) and ongoing cash assistance under the SAP.3
The rental assistance plays a critical role in enabling the freedom of mobility of refugee HHs to locate and
settle in suitable areas for jobs and for, eligible households, subsequently acquiring permanent housing
through the HSP. The subcomponent will utilize the current payment systems of the GoA’s SAP and rely on


2
    Beneficiaries already owning property in Armenia receive AMD10,000 per person per month to cover utilities.
3
  Up to a maximum US$48 million, based on the limit for retroactive financing under World Bank Investment Project Financing of 20 percent of
the Bank loan amount for expenditures incurred up to 12 months prior to Loan signing.

                                                                        7
the existing direct transfer mechanisms of the MLSA, through its USS,4 to deposit funds into beneficiary
bank accounts at commercial banks.
Subcomponent 1.2: Subsidies for the acquisition of housing solutions
This subcomponent will finance direct subsidies to eligible HHs for the acquisition of housing solutions
through participating financial institutions (PFIs)5. In support of the HSP administered by the MLSA since
June 2024, this subcomponent will finance: (a) up-front downpayment assistance of up to 30 percent of
the housing purchase price, and (b) monthly installment payments for mortgage loans provided through
commercial banks. The subcomponent will support HHs to: (a) acquire a new or existing individual
residential house or apartment; (b) acquire the right to purchase an apartment in a building under
construction; and (c) construct an individual residential house. The subcomponent will also provide
subsidy assistance for the repayment of an existing mortgage loan for HHs who already had property in
Armenia. As part of the mortgage origination process, PFIs will assess the technical condition of housing
units, their suitability for occupation, and will screen for seismic and climate risks while ensuring site
selection for new construction avoids hazard-prone areas. Additionally, all new construction of apartments
and individual residential homes will be performed by licensed contractors6, and screened for exposure to
seismic and climate-related risks7, and will adhere to relevant energy efficiency norms.
Subcomponent 1.3: Institutional Development in Housing
The subcomponent will finance procurement of goods, consulting, and non-consulting services for
technical assistance, advisory, and capacity building to support institutional strengthening and policy
reforms at the national level in the housing sector as well as improvements to the HSP’s management
information system managed by the MLSA.


Component 2: Housing Finance Market Development
This component is designed to support the NMC operations by enhancing long-term liquidity for
mortgage-originating financial institutions. A line of credit (LOC) of US$ 10 million extended by the project
to NMC seeks to increase access to mortgage loans by providing refinancing for PFIs i.e., commercial banks
with signed agreements with the GoA to provide mortgage loans under the refugee HSP.
Component 3: Project Management, Communication, Monitoring and Evaluation
This component will finance the procurement of consulting and non-consulting services, goods, training,
and overall operating costs to support the project implementing team under the MLSA in project
management, communications, and implementation activities, including for, but not limited to, monitoring
and evaluation, reporting, audits, independent verification of performance based conditions (PBCs),
procurement, financial management, environmental and social management, feedback and grievance
redress mechanism, citizen engagement activities including beneficiary surveys, and project



4
    The USS is an arm of the MLSA comprised of 49 territorial centers and is responsible for processing and channelling social assistance funds.
5
  Participating financial institutions refers to the financial institutions with signed agreements with the GoA to provide mortgage loans under the
refugee HSP. As of October 2025, participating commercial banks include AmeriaBank, Armeconombank, Converse Bank, EvocaBank, FastBank,
and UniBank.
6
  Up to 30 percent (or approximately 3,900) of the 13,000 potential beneficiary HHs are expected to opt for new construction.
7
  For single family homes, the CoUD makes freely available standardized template designs that are code compliant and can be customized for
specific site conditions by a licensed technical design firm and subsequently approved by an independent expert review.

                                                                          8
communication outreach services. The component will also finance the operating costs for maintaining a
fully staffed and equipped project implementing team housed within the MLSA.

1.3 Implementing Agency
The Project will have two implementing agencies: MLSA will be in charge of implementing Component 1
and Component 3 activities8 and NMC will be in charge of implementing Component 2. The PIT under
MLSA will utilize project management, communication, monitoring and evaluation support provided
under Component 3 for its activities.
A Steering Committee (SC) will be established by Decision of the Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) prior to
loan effectiveness. The SC will be chaired by the DPM. It will comprise relevant ministries and agencies
that are directly involved, or with delegated responsibilities, in the implementation of the refugee HSP and
housing sector activities overall including the Ministry of Finance (MoF), MLSA, Central Bank of Armenia
(CBA), NMC, and Committee of Urban Development (CoUD), among others. The SC’s main purpose will be
to provide strategic oversight over project implementation, provide high-level decision-making and
guidance, and facilitate inter-ministerial and interagency cooperation considering the complex nature of
the refugee HSP and housing sector in general. The SC will also be expected to serve as the platform for
obtaining decisions on setting housing and finance policy priorities, and providing overall guidance for the
formulation and administration of future national housing sector policy.
The MLSA will establish a PIT by Ministerial Decree prior to loan effectiveness. The PIT will be responsible
for the implementation of Components 1 and 3 of the Project. The PIT will be comprised of staff assigned
from within the MLSA and a team of technical experts (non-civil servants) contracted by the MLSA. The
MLSA staff assigned to the PIT will undertake project activities alongside their regular responsibilities. The
= Project Coordinator of the PIT will serve as the focal point for activities during implementation. Using
the available operating budget under Component 3, the PIT will be maintained with the required fiduciary,
environment and social, and technical specialists on a full-time basis and possessing adequate capacities
for implementing the project, including in FM, procurement, and E&S risk management according to TORs
and qualification requirements acceptable to the World Bank. The capacities of the PIT will be
supplemented with additional technical expertise (e.g., in housing sector policy) through the competitive
hiring of consultants, as needed. Finally, the PIT will coordinate and work closely with relevant staff of the
USS in charge of processing and channeling the refugee HSP funds.
The NMC will assign a dedicated team in support of Component 2 activities prior to loan effectiveness. The
team will comprise of assigned NMC senior staff with appropriate technical expertise in financial
management, environmental and social risk management, and monitoring and evaluation. The team will
be responsible for implementing Component 2 project activities and ensuring effective coordination with
the PIT at MLSA in support of overall project supervision, reporting and evaluation activities. The team will
also participate in implementation support missions to be held every six months.
1.4 Purpose of the SEP
The HOME Project is being prepared under the WB’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF). Per ESS10
on Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, the implementing agencies should provide
stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible information, and consult with them in


8 The MLSA is responsible for the implementation of the both the Government Decree N 1763-L, December 2023 governing the

implementation of the cash assistance program and the State Assistance Program for Housing for Displaced Families (N 710-L, 16
May 2024) and its subsequent regulation (N 989-L, 14 June 2024).

                                                              9
a culturally appropriate manner, which is free of manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination, or
intimidation.

This SEP prepared under the Project was disclosed through MLSA website and consulted on (See Annex
5). This SEP will be periodically reviewed, updated and improved to ensure that the information presented
herein is consistent and is the most recent, as well as to ensure that the identified methods of stakeholder
engagement are efficient and appropriate to the existing situation and context. The SEP will be updated
to reflect on any major changes to the project-related activities and to its schedule, if any.




                                                    10
2. Objective of SEP and Methodology


2.1 SEP Objectives and Principles
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public
information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP outlines the ways in
which the project team will communicate with stakeholders and includes a mechanism by which people
can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project activities.

SEP serves the following objectives:


    (i)         identify and analyze project stakeholders, including disadvantaged and vulnerable groups;
    (ii)        design inclusive engagement processes that allow their views to be considered in project
                decision-making;
    (iii)       (iii) ensure timely and accessible disclosure of project information;
    (iv)        (iv) define clear roles and responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities;
                (v) establish a robust FGRM; and
    (v)         (vi) monitor, evaluate, and report on the effectiveness of engagement throughout the project
                cycle.

To meet best practice approaches, the project will apply the following principles for stakeholder
engagement:

    ▪       Openness and life-cycle approach: Public consultations for the Project will be arranged during the
            whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference,
            coercion, or intimidation.
    ▪       Informed participation and feedback: Information will be provided to and widely distributed
            among all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for communicating
            stakeholder feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns.
    ▪       Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
            communications and build effective relationships. The participation process for the projects is
            inclusive. All stakeholders always are encouraged to be involved in the consultation process. Equal
            access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is the key
            principle underlying the selection of engagement methods. Special attention is given to vulnerable
            groups that may be at risk of being left out of project benefits, particularly women, the elderly,
            persons with disabilities, low income HHs.
    ▪       Closing the Loop - Providing Feedback to Stakeholders: As the Project will use the time and
            knowledge of its stakeholders, providing meaningful feedback to stakeholders on how their
            participation and feedback contributed to Project evolvement is crucial. The provision of feedback
            will help the stakeholders to understand how they influenced the Project decisions and outputs
            and will encourage their future participation in its activities. The record of all questions and
            feedback provided will be properly maintained.




                                                        11
2.2 Key Definitions
Project stakeholders are defined as individuals, formal or informal groups and organizations, governmental
entities whose interests or rights will be affected, directly or indirectly, by the HOME project, both
positively and negatively, and/or who may have an interest in Project implementation and who have the
potential to influence the Project outcomes in any way.
For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project can be
divided into the following core categories:

      ▪   Affected Parties: Persons, groups, and other entities within the Project Area of Influence (PAI)
          that are directly influenced (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified
          as most susceptible to change associated with the project, and who need to be closely engaged
          in identifying impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-making on mitigation and
          management measures.
      ▪   Other Interested Parties: Individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct impacts
          from the Project but who consider or perceive their interests as being affected by the project
          and/or who could affect the project and the process of its implementation in some way.
      ▪   Vulnerable Groups: Persons or groups who may be disproportionately impacted or further
          disadvantaged by the project(s) compared with any other groups due to their vulnerable status,
          and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure their equal representation in the
          consultation and decision-making process associated with the project.




                                                    12
3. Stakeholder Identification, Analysis and Engagement Methods


3.1 Stakeholder Identification and Analysis
The Project engages multiple stakeholders from government institutions, the private sector, civil society,
international development partners, and the public. As presented in the above section, stakeholders are
grouped into three categories: affected parties, other interested parties, and disadvantaged/vulnerable
groups (see Table 1).


3.1.1 Affected Parties and Other Interested Parties

Affected Parties are those directly impacted by the Project and actively involved in its implementation.
This group includes the GoA, the MLSA and its USS, refugee households eligible for cash assistance and/or
HSP, current beneficiaries of such assistance, PFIs, the NMC, and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The
direct beneficiaries of the Project are the estimated 115,000 refugees who were displaced after 2020 and
in September 2023, whose information was included in the official list of residents as of September 19,
2023. The estimated number of households is about 30,000 (using an average family size of 3.8), out of
which approximately 13,000 – 15,000 households are estimated to be eligible for the refugee state housing
support program. About 103,000 refugees have benefitted from temporary cash assistance. The
Government of Armenia and its agencies directly or indirectly involved in housing will also benefit from
the institutional development activities of the proposed project. Other Interested Parties are individuals,
groups, or entities who may not be directly affected but whose interests could be influenced by the Project,
or who may influence its implementation. These include other government agencies engaged in policy or
oversight roles, CSOs active in refugee response, international organizations and development partners,
the media, and the wider public.


3.1.2. Disadvantaged/vulnerable Individuals or Groups
The existing government cash assistance and housing programs, including HSP targeting refugees,
primarily support housing ownership solutions for vulnerable groups. Currently cash assistance targets
children under 18 years of age or people over 18 years of age receiving compulsory education, people 63
years of age and older, those families who have lost their breadwinner, or people with certain disabilities.
The current cycle of the refugee Social Assistance Program (SAP) support is expected to end by December
2025, after which beneficiaries who qualify for needs-based assistance, such as the poor and vulnerable,
will be transitioned to the relevant national social income-based assistance programs. HSP targets refugee
households in need of housing, who do not own real estate in Armenia, have not received benefits under
the 2020 housing program (N 169-L), and hold Armenian citizenship.
Under HOME Project, disadvantaged and vulnerable groups are those who may face barriers to
participation and therefore require special support or additional engagement channels to ensure their
voices are heard and their needs addressed. This category includes, among others, low-income
households, single-headed households (especially female-headed), persons with disabilities or chronic
illness, elderly refugees without support networks, and refugees living in remote or rural areas with limited
access to information and services.



                                                     13
Table 1. Key Stakeholder Groups
 Stakeholder Group              Interest & Description
 Affected parties
 GoA, MLSA & USS                Responsible for cash assistance, government HSP and project design and
                                implementation. MLSA oversees policy, while USS (49 territorial centers)
                                manages beneficiary registration, eligibility and disbursement.
 Refugee Households             Primary beneficiaries of monthly cash assistance to cover rent, utilities, and
                                basic consumption and government HSP.
 PFIs                           Provide financial products and services linked to housing programs.
 NMC                            Ensures mortgage market development and facilitates access to housing for
                                low- and middle-income families, while promoting green finance and social
                                programs.
 ADB                            Co-financier of the Project through Program-Based Lending (PBL). Supports
                                implementation and safeguards alignment alongside the WB.
 Interested parties
 Other Government Agencies      Contribute through policy alignment, data provision, and oversight. Includes
                                ministries of Finance, Territorial Administration and Infrastructure, Migration
                                and Citizenship Services (MCS) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and CoUD.
 Civil Society &                Complement government support by offering housing repair, livelihoods, social
 Humanitarian/Diaspora          services, and advocacy. Includes NGOs (e.g., UNHCR, Caritas, AGBU, Red Cross).
 Organizations
 Media                          Disseminates program information and shapes public awareness on eligibility,
                                processes, and outcomes.
 International Organizations    Provide funding, technical support, and complementary refugee response
                                initiatives. Includes UNDP, UNICEF, UNHCR, GIZ, KfW, and others, as well as the
                                Agence Française de Développement (AFD), that is preparing to provide
                                additional credit financing to NMC in support of the refugee housing program.
 Local Governments & Host       Facilitate local implementation and act as interface with refugees and host
 Communities                    households at municipal level.
 Construction & Valuation       Deliver technical services such as housing assessments, valuation, and
 Companies                      renovations linked to housing support measures.
 Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups
 Disadvantaged & Vulnerable     At risk of exclusion and requiring tailored engagement: low-income
 Groups                         households, persons with disabilities/elderly, single-headed households (esp.
                                female-headed), those with limited financial literacy, and refugees in remote
                                areas.


A more detailed stakeholder analysis, including specific roles and characteristics of each group, is provided
in Annex 1.
3.2 Stakeholder Engagement Program

3.2.1 Summary of Stakeholder Engagement done During Project Preparation
During project preparation, consultations were carried out with a range of stakeholders to inform the
design of the HSP and to ensure that both institutional perspectives and beneficiary needs were reflected
in the Project design. MLSA and the WB conducted meetings with the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), Armenian General Benevolent Union (AGBU), Ameria Management Advisory, NGO
Forum Armenia on Social Integration, as well as discussions with PFIs on their participation in the refugee
HSP. Consultations have included alignment on targeting, assistance modalities, and protection

                                                       14
considerations. Feedback highlighted gaps in refugee documentation, concerns about exclusion of rural
households, and the need for clear communication on eligibility. The World Bank also coordinated with
the AFD on the potential for additional external financing to NMC in support of the refugee housing
program.
In April-May 2025, A large-scale household survey was implemented among refugees and host
communities by WB, providing an opportunity to systematically capture their views on housing, tenure
security, access to services, and social cohesion. In parallel, focus group discussions and in-depth
interviews were organized in selected communities including diverse stakeholders, including refugees,
host community members, local government representatives, and civil society actors. The results of this
engagement directly informed the housing project’s design, shaping interventions to be more responsive
to refugee needs and priorities. Data revealed limited awareness of the HSP and difficulties in application
processes
Initial public information on the HSP has been also shared through USS territorial centers. Several CSOs
(e.g., Mission Armenia, Armenian Red Cross) have played a role in relaying information to refugees,
especially those in shelters or outside Yerevan. Some NGOs have also collected feedback on barriers to
access, such as lack of documentation or unclear eligibility rules.
3.2.2 Stakeholder Engagement Methods and Approach
Refugee participation will be strengthened by ensuring that refugees and displaced households are
directly engaged in consultation processes and feedback collection activities. MLSA, with support from
UNHCR and CSO partners, will organize information sessions and consultations to ensure that feedback
from diverse refugee groups—women, elderly, youth, and persons with disabilities—is reflected in Project
implementation.
Two general vectors of stakeholder engagement under the project will be carried out as follows:
     ▪   Consultations with stakeholders and feedback collection throughout the entire project cycle
     ▪   Awareness-raising activities on the HSP

Communication and Outreach of HSP: The Government Housing Program targets refugees with housing
needs, with government estimates indicating between 13,000–15,000 households requiring assistance.
General eligibility criteria include: (i) not owning real estate in Armenia, (ii) not having received benefits
under the 2020 housing program (N 169-L), (iii) not having two or more working-age family members
residing abroad, and (iv) holding Armenian citizenship.

A survey of 1,062 refugee households conducted in April–May 2025 found that while just over half of
refugees report a functional understanding of the HSP, nearly half remain underinformed or unaware,
limiting their ability to benefit from available support. Around 20% had little or no knowledge of the
program, and 28% were only superficially informed. Awareness levels vary by household type and socio-
demographic characteristics: female-headed households, older individuals (55+), those with lower
education, and refugees living in rural areas are significantly less familiar with the program compared to
male-headed, middle-aged, more educated, and urban-based households. These gaps highlight the need
for targeted outreach to ensure equitable access and understanding across all refugee groups.

To further support refugee beneficiaries, the SEP includes specific measures to help them understand and
fulfill citizenship requirements, while also addressing potential misconceptions surrounding the process.
The MLSA will provide guidance and assisted access through the USS territorial centers and CSO partners


                                                     15
to inform beneficiaries about citizenship eligibility, documentation, and registration procedures. Outreach
will also include active involvement of refugee representatives and community volunteers to ensure two-
way communication and equitable access to information and services.

Engagement with beneficiaries will combine multiple channels to ensure inclusive, accessible, and two-
way communication (Table 2):

    ▪   Outreach through USS territorial centers and CSOs: Outreach will be carried out through the 49
        branches of the USS network via face-to-face consultations, awareness raising sessions and
        information boards. Printed materials (posters, flyers, leaflets) will be distributed in refugee-
        populated communities through USS territorial centers, municipalities, and CSOs.
    ▪   Targeted outreach to vulnerable groups: CSOs, social workers, and community volunteers will
        provide direct contact with vulnerable and harder-to-reach groups, such as women-headed
        households, the elderly, and rural residents.
    ▪   Mass media campaigns: TV, radio, and social media will be used to expand the program’s reach
        and visibility.
    ▪   Digital engagement: Regular updates will be provided on MLSA’s website and dedicated social
        media pages, using accessible formats such as infographics and video explainers. Some
        information is already available on the MLSA website and will be further expanded.
    ▪   Information sessions: USS territorial centers and partner CSOs will host regular sessions where
        applicants can ask questions and receive tailored guidance.
    ▪   Grievance redress and appeals: Beneficiaries will be able to submit grievances or appeals through
        the Government’s 114 hotline, USS territorial centers, and governmental e-request portal, as well
        as other grievance submission channels specified in Chapter 5 of this SEP.

To complement these ongoing engagement methods, two perception surveys will be carried out among
beneficiaries:

    ▪   Mid-project perception survey: Conducted midway through implementation to assess awareness
        of eligibility and procedures, satisfaction with transparency and fairness, adequacy of
        communication channels, and accessibility of grievance redress. Findings will inform adjustments
        in outreach and grievance handling during implementation.
    ▪   End-of-project perception survey: Conducted at completion to evaluate overall satisfaction with
        housing support, perceptions of fairness and timeliness, and effectiveness of engagement and
        communication activities. The results will generate lessons for strengthening future housing and
        social protection programs.

MLSA, through its 49 USS territorial centers, will lead communication and outreach efforts. Within the first
three months of project implementation, MLSA will prepare a Communication and Outreach Plan (COP)
that will ensure:
    ▪
    ▪ 114 hotline operators are trained to respond effectively to refugee housing and citizenship-related
         queries.
    ▪ Awareness campaigns are implemented via TV, radio and social media.
    ▪ Support to beneficiaries in understanding and addressing citizenship requirements and related
         documentation issues through USS territorial centers and CSO partners, including targeted
         communication to reduce misinformation and assisted access for completing registration
         processes.

                                                    16
    ▪   Strengthen collaboration with UNHCR and CSO partners to enhance communication with refugee
        communities, facilitate their participation in consultations and feedback processes, and build the
        capacity of USS staff on protection-sensitive communication and referral pathways.
    ▪   Dedicated outreach to vulnerable groups (female-headed households, elderly, persons with
        disabilities, rural communities, etc.) through partnerships with CSOs and training of USS of social
        workers.
    ▪   Regular monitoring of outreach effectiveness, with adjustments informed by survey findings,
        consultations, and feedback through the FGRM.

Table 2. Beneficiary engagement methods
                                                                               Frequency /
        Engagement Method                          Target Group(s)                              Responsible Party
                                                                                  Timing
 Face-to-face            consultations,   Refugee households, applicants      Continuous        MLSA, USS centers
 individual outreach, info boards at
 USS territorial centers
 Printed      outreach       materials    Refugee households in urban &       Annual / as       MLSA PR Dept. /
 (posters, flyers, leaflets)              rural areas                         updated           USS / CSOs
 Targeted outreach by CSOs, social        Vulnerable       groups  (women-    Continuous        CSOs / Social
 workers, volunteers                      headed HHs, elderly, persons with                     workers / USS
                                          disabilities, rural HHs)
 Mass media campaigns (TV, radio,         General         public,   refugee   Semi-annual /     MLSA PR Dept. /
 social media)                            communities                         as needed         PIT
 Digital engagement (website, social      Tech-connected refugees, younger    Continuous        MLSA PR Dept.
 media     updates,    infographics,      groups
 videos)
 Information sessions at USS centers      Applicants, community members       Quarterly or as   USS     /     Local
 & municipalities                                                             needed            authorities
 FGRM & appeal mechanisms                 All beneficiaries and applicants    Continuous        MLSA, USS
 (hotline 114, USS reporting
 channels)
 Mid-project perception survey            Beneficiaries of housing program    Year 2            Independent
                                                                                                consultant / MLSA
 End-of-project perception survey         Beneficiaries of housing program    Final year        Independent
                                                                                                consultant / MLSA


Engagement with Host Communities: While the Project primarily targets newly arrived refugees, it is
important to recognize that housing shortages and substandard living conditions are also critical issues for
host communities. Approximately 20,000 households in Armenia remain in temporary or inadequate
housing, many of whom are long-standing vulnerable groups, including families displaced by the 1988
Spitak earthquake, earlier refugee flows from Azerbaijan, Syria, Lebanon, and those affected by the 2020
war.

At the same time, existing housing programs in Armenia (about 14 in total) primarily support ownership
solutions for specific groups. Eligibility criteria are defined by law and often target professional categories
(e.g., sportsmen, artists, civil servants) or specific vulnerable groups (families with children, persons with
disabilities, conflict-displaced households). However, these programs are heavily concentrated in Yerevan,
omit large segments of underhoused populations (such as the elderly and people in need), and are limited
in scale due to high subsidy costs and ad-hoc funding availability.


                                                          17
As a result, host communities facing long-standing housing shortages may feel excluded or disadvantaged
compared to newly arrived refugee households. To address this risk and maintain social cohesion, the SEP
will:

   ▪   Engage host communities in consultations to ensure their concerns about fairness, inclusion, and
       access to housing support are heard and considered.
   ▪   Communicate transparently about the scope and limitations of the Project, clarifying eligibility
       and highlighting that refugee-targeted measures are complementary to, not replacements for,
       national housing programs.
   ▪   Strengthen awareness of existing government housing support schemes for vulnerable host
       groups, while acknowledging their limitations and the need for more inclusive approaches.
   ▪   Provide feedback mechanisms (via the FGRM) that host communities can use to voice grievances
       or propose improvements to ensure equitable access to information and services.
   ▪   Promote dialogue on how lessons learned from the Project can inform the Government’s efforts
       to move from fragmented, ad-hoc housing schemes toward a more comprehensive, harmonized
       Housing Strategy.

Project SE activities with other stakeholders: Beyond beneficiary engagement, the Project will maintain
continuous dialogue and coordination with institutional stakeholders, civil society, and development
partners to ensure effective program implementation, alignment of activities, and transparency.
Engagement will include:
   ▪   Interagency coordination meetings: Regular consultations with the MoF, CoUD, MCS, Cadastre
       Committee, and other relevant agencies to harmonize housing support measures and address
       policy and technical gaps.
   ▪   Financial sector engagement: Ongoing collaboration with the NMC and PFIs to align program
       eligibility, streamline application procedures, and ensure fair treatment of applicants. These
       meetings will also serve to monitor bank-level grievance handling and appeals procedures.
   ▪   CSO and humanitarian partner coordination: Periodic roundtables with NGOs, diaspora
       organizations, and international agencies (e.g., UNHCR, UNICEF, GIZ, KfW) to avoid duplication,
       exchange lessons, and strengthen outreach to vulnerable groups.
   ▪   Collaboration with UNHCR as a technical partner: MLSA will collaborate with UNHCR as a
       technical partner in the implementation of the SEP, supporting communication with refugee
       communities, dissemination of information, and capacity building of USS staff and local partners
       to ensure protection-sensitive and inclusive engagement.
   ▪   Media engagement: Proactive engagement with national and local media outlets to ensure
       accurate reporting on eligibility, procedures, and program achievements, including press briefings
       and provision of media kits.
   ▪   Local government collaboration: Municipalities and community councils will be engaged through
       working meetings to facilitate local outreach and information dissemination.
   ▪   Knowledge-sharing with development partners: Regular technical meetings with the WB, ADB,
       and other partners to share progress, safeguard monitoring findings, and lessons learned for
       future housing programs.


                                                  18
Table 3. Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                            Estimated           Topic of Consultation /
    Project Stage                                                                     Method Used               Target Stakeholders        Responsibilities
                        Date/Time Period               Message
 Project Preparation    Prior         to    Project objectives, eligibility     National      consultation     GoA    (MLSA,    MoF,    MLSA / PIT, WB team
                        effectiveness       criteria for HSP, roles of          meetings,    inter-agency      CoUD, Cadastre), CSOs,
                                            MLSA/USS, scope of refugee          coordination workshops,        UNHCR, development
                                            support                             information     disclosure     partners, media
                                                                                (MLSA website)

 Early                  First 3 months of   Launch of Communication &           Training        workshops,     Refugee households,      MLSA PR Dept., USS,
 Implementation         implementation      Outreach Plan; training of          TV/radio    spots,    social   host communities, USS    CSOs
                                            hotline     114     operators;      media posts, printed flyers,   staff, CSOs, media
                                            dissemination of eligibility and    posters at USS centers         outlets                  Collaboration    with
                                            application       procedures;                                                               UNHCR for advisory
                                            awareness campaigns                                                                         and communication
                                                                                                                                        support, as needed

 Continuous             Throughout          Ongoing awareness-raising,          Face-to-face consultations,    Refugee households,      MLSA, USS, CSOs, local
 Implementation         project     cycle   updates      on      eligibility,   outreach via 49 USS            vulnerable      groups   authorities
                        (2025–2029)         grievance channels, status of       centers, CSO & volunteer       (female-headed HHs,
                                            housing applications                outreach, community info       elderly, rural), host    Collaboration    with
                                                                                sessions, media campaigns,     communities,             UNHCR for advisory
                                                                                digital platforms              municipalities           and communication
                                                                                                                                        support, as needed

 Mid-project Review     Year 2 (2027)       Perception    survey       on       Household survey, focus        Refugee beneficiaries,   Independent
                                            awareness,       satisfaction,      groups,         targeted       host communities         consultant with MLSA
                                            fairness, effectiveness of          consultations                                           oversight
                                            communication and grievance
                                            handling

 Ongoing                Semi-annual / as    Policy alignment, technical         Interagency     meetings,      MoF,    Urban    Dev.    MLSA / PIT
 Coordination with      needed              gaps,     financial  sector         financial          sector      Committee, NMC, PFIs,
 Institutions    &                          cooperation, monitoring of          roundtables,   CSO     &       CSOs, UNHCR, UNICEF,
 Partners                                   bank-level GRM, knowledge-          humanitarian      partner      GIZ, diaspora orgs,
                                            sharing                             roundtables,    technical      development partners
                                                                                meetings with WB/ADB




                                                                                19
Late                 Final year (2029)   Evaluation     of    outreach     End-of-project perception       Refugee households,      Independent
Implementation                           effectiveness,     beneficiary    survey,        consultations,   host communities, GoA,   consultant, MLSA / PIT
                                         satisfaction,   lessons    for    dissemination of survey         CSOs,          media,
                                         Housing Strategy                  results, press briefing         development partners

Project Completion   End of project      Results achieved, lessons         Public       consultations,     Refugees,        host    MLSA, PIT, WB team
/ Closure            (2029–2030)         learned, transition to national   dissemination of final          communities,     GoA
                                         housing strategy                  reports, knowledge-sharing      institutions,  media,
                                                                           events                          development partners




                                                                           20
3.2.3 Information Disclosure
The MLSA is committed to ensuring that all stakeholders, particularly refugee households and other
vulnerable groups, have timely, accurate, and accessible information about the Government HSP and
related project activities.
Information on the HSP is already publicly available on the MLSA’s official website, including eligibility
criteria, application procedures, and relevant policy documents. To complement this, MLSA has also
prepared and disseminated video materials that provide step-by-step guidance to beneficiaries on how to
apply for housing support, ensuring that the process is understandable and accessible for diverse
audiences.
Throughout the Project lifecycle, MLSA will continue to disclose key documents and updates, including but
not limited to:
    ▪   The SEP, Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), Environmental and Social (E&S) risk
        screening and management procedures, and other Project documents.
    ▪   Updates on program implementation, including progress reports and monitoring results.
    ▪   Guidance materials for beneficiaries, including visual, audio, and written formats.
    ▪   Summaries of grievance and appeals procedures, including the role of the Interagency
        Commission on Appeals (see Chapter 5).
Information will be disclosed using multiple channels to maximize outreach and inclusivity:
    ▪   Digital platforms: MLSA’s official website and social media pages will be regularly updated with
        program information, infographics, and video explainers.
    ▪   Mass media: TV, radio, and press releases will disseminate key messages on program eligibility
        and procedures.
    ▪   Local outreach: Posters, flyers, and leaflets will be distributed through USS territorial centers,
        municipalities, and CSO partners.
    ▪   Community engagement: Information sessions and public meetings will be organized at the
        municipal level to provide opportunities for direct interaction, questions, and feedback.
Special attention will be given to tailoring information disclosure for vulnerable groups and their
engagement, such as women-headed households, persons with disabilities, elderly beneficiaries, and
refugees in rural areas, to ensure equitable access to information and program benefits, as follows:
    ▪   Women-headed households: Targeted outreach through women’s NGOs and community groups,
        as well as distribution of simplified written materials and video explainers in accessible formats.
    ▪   Persons with disabilities: Information will be made available in accessible formats (large print,
        easy-to-read, and audio-visual materials with captions and sign-language interpretation where
        possible). Physical accessibility of information boards and USS territorial centers will be ensured.
    ▪   Elderly beneficiaries: Outreach through community meetings, local social workers, and
        volunteers, complemented by printed leaflets and guidance provided directly at USS territorial
        centers and municipalities.


                                                    21
    ▪   Refugees in rural or remote areas: Outreach through USS field visits, partnerships with CSOs, and
        use of local TV, radio and community centers to disseminate program updates and application
        guidance.
MLSA commits to updating its website and social media platforms at least quarterly with program
updates, including data on beneficiaries reached, grievance resolution trends, and any changes to
eligibility rules. Information boards at USS territorial centers will be updated monthly, and printed
outreach materials will be refreshed annually or when eligibility criteria are modified. Media briefings will
be held semi-annually to ensure consistent, accurate coverage.
Note: All public reporting will avoid personal identifiers and follow MLSA data-protection procedures; only
aggregated, anonymized data will be disclosed.




                                                     22
4. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement Activities
4.1 Management Functions and Responsibilities
The MLSA, through the PIT and support of the Public Relations Department and USS, will implement
and oversee stakeholder engagement activities. The MLSA is responsible for implementing this SEP
related to Component 1 and NMC will be responsible for SE activities under Component 2. MLSA will
establish a PIT comprised of civil servants and non-civil servants assigned from within the MLSA. The
Project Coordinator, engaged under PIT, will be responsible for managing and overseeing the
implementation of SE activities, monitoring, and reporting, as well as ensuring the quality of the SEP
activities delegated to respective departments of the MLSA. For SEP implementation, MLSA will hire or
assign a Stakeholder Engagement and Communications Specialist (SECS). As for Component 2, NMC will
use in-house capacities to implement SE activities.
The USS territorial centers will serve as the primary local-level interface with beneficiaries and will ensure
consistent communication, information dissemination, and grievance intake.
Key roles and responsibilities are as follows:

    ▪   MLSA, through PIT– oversees SEP implementation, ensures compliance with ESS10, and
        coordinates with the WB.
    ▪   Stakeholder Engagement and Communications Specialist – plans, manages, and monitors SE
        activities, prepares reports, and maintains records of engagement.
    ▪   Public Relations Department – leads mass media campaigns, digital engagement, and production
        of outreach materials.
    ▪   USS territorial centers – manage day-to-day engagement with beneficiaries, including information
        dissemination, consultations, grievance handling, and outreach to vulnerable groups.
    ▪   PFIs and NMC – engage with beneficiaries on financial services, inform applicants of
        grievance/appeal options, and report grievances to MLSA.
    ▪   Development partners, CSOs and NGOs – support outreach to vulnerable groups and provide
        feedback from the community to MLSA and USS.
Detailed roles and responsibilities of the key actors involved in SE implementation is presented in Annex
2.

The Project Coordinator, based within the PIT of MLSA, will:
    •   Lead and oversee SEP and COP implementation under Component 1, ensuring alignment with
        project objectives and ESS10 requirements.
    •   Manage and coordinate the stakeholder engagement activities carried out by MLSA departments,
        the Public Relations Department, and the USS.
    •   Ensure quality and consistency of all SEP activities, providing guidance to responsible units and
        resolving implementation challenges.
    •   Monitor progress and results, including timely collection of stakeholder feedback and its
        integration into project implementation.

                                                     23
    •   Prepare and submit reports on stakeholder engagement to the WB and other oversight bodies.
    •   Facilitate coordination with NMC, to ensure SEP activities under Component 2 complement and
        align with those under Component 1.
    •   Supervise and support SECS, providing strategic direction and ensuring adequate resources for
        effective communication and engagement.
The SECS, either hired or assigned by MLSA, will:
    •   Operationalize the SEP and COP, ensuring timely planning and implementation of outreach,
        consultation, and communication activities under Component 1.
    •   Develop communication materials (press releases, brochures, website content, social media
        updates) in collaboration with the Public Relations Department.
    •   Organize and facilitate consultations with stakeholders, including vulnerable groups.
    •   Coordinate with USS territorial centers to disseminate project information and collect feedback
        at the local level.
    •   Maintain and update the FGRM communication channels, ensuring visibility and accessibility to
        beneficiaries.
    •   Document and report on consultations, grievances received, and stakeholder feedback, feeding
        results into the project’s monitoring system.
    •   Support capacity building of MLSA staff and USS representatives on stakeholder engagement
        practices.
    •   Work closely with the Project Coordinator to ensure consistency, quality, and responsiveness of
        all SE activities.
The SE activities will be documented through standardized templates and tools, including:

    ▪   Consultation records (meeting notes, attendance sheets, feedback forms) (See Annex 4).
    ▪   Grievance logs and resolution tracking within the MLSA FGRM database (See Annex 3).
    ▪   Biannual SE progress reports prepared by the MLSA.
    ▪   Public updates disclosed through MLSA’s website, social media, and information boards at USS
        territorial centers.


4.2 Resources
The budget for the SEP and COP will be covered under Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring
and Evaluation, which finances overall project management costs, including communications, outreach,
training, and expenditures related to meeting WB E&S requirements.

Indicative SE budget is presented below and is indicative. The actual costs may be adjusted during
implementation based on project needs, scale of outreach, and evolving priorities. This budget covers
salaries of key staff (Project Coordinator and SECS), communication and outreach campaigns, beneficiary
perception surveys, trainings, and consultation events. Adjustments may also be made to reflect additional
engagement with vulnerable groups, unforeseen outreach requirements, or expanded use of digital
platforms. The overall budget for SEP activities is estimated of USD 300,000.



                                                    24
Table 4. Indicative Stakeholder Engagement Budget
Budget Category                            Quantity     Unit Costs      Times/Years Total Costs      Remarks
                                *
1. Estimated staff salaries and related expenses
                                                                                                Estimated at
1a. Stakeholder Engagement &                                                                      mid-level
                                               1       $12,000/year       5 years     $60,000
Communications Specialist                                                                          national
                                                                                               consultant rate
                                                                                                   Share of
                                                       $24,000/year                              salary/time
1b. Project Coordinator – % time on SEP     0.3 FTE                       5 years     $36,000
                                                        (pro-rata)                            dedicated to SEP
                                                                                                  oversight
                                                                                              Travel to regions
1c. Travel costs for staff (Coordinator,
                                           Lump sum    $3,000/year        5 years     $15,000 for consultations
SECS, USS outreach)
                                                                                                & monitoring
2. Communication campaigns
                                                                                              Printed outreach
2a. Posters, flyers, leaflets              Lump sum       $5,000          1 year       $5,000
                                                                                                  materials
                                                                                                 Awareness-
                                                                                              raising, eligibility
2b. Social media & media campaigns         Lump sum      $10,000          2 years     $20,000
                                                                                                 info, FGRM
                                                                                                 promotion
                                                                                                 Awareness-
2c. TV and Radio campaigns                 Lump sum      $40,000          1 year      $40,000 raising, eligibility
                                                                                                     info
3. Trainings
                                                                                                  Strengthen USS
3a. Training of USS staff                      2      $2,000/training     1 year       $4,000        outreach
                                                                                                     capacities
                                                                                                    Specialized
                                                                                                    training for
                                                                                                     providing
                                                                                                  information on
3b. Training of 114 hotline staff              2      $1,000/training     1 year       $2,000
                                                                                                   HSP, handling
                                                                                                      sensitive
                                                                                                  grievances and
                                                                                                      inquiries
                                                                                                    Delivered to
3c. Training on SEA/SH-sensitive                                                                    MLSA, USS,
                                               2          $1,000          1 year       $2,000
grievance handling                                                                                     hotline
                                                                                                     operators
4. Beneficiary surveys
                                                                                                  Capture
                                                                                                 beneficiary
                                                                                                satisfaction|
4a. Mid-project perception survey              1         $30,000          Year 2      $30,000
                                                                                              Conducted by an
                                                                                                independent
                                                                                                 consultant



                                                        25
                                                                                          Assess outcomes
                                                                                           of engagement
                                                                                          and information
4b. End-of-project perception survey      1          $30,000         Year 5       $30,000   campaigns |
                                                                                          Conducted by an
                                                                                            independent
                                                                                             consultant
7. Other expenses
                                                                                             National and
7a. Consultation workshops /                                                                    regional
                                        2/year   $2,500/workshop     4 years      $20,000
roundtables with CSOs & partners                                                              stakeholder
                                                                                             consultations
                                                                                              Includes hall
7b. Public information sessions                                                                  rental,
                                        5/year    $500/session       5 years      $12,500
(municipal/community level)                                                                  refreshments,
                                                                                                materials
                                                                                            Dissemination of
7c. Knowledge-sharing/lessons learned
                                          2          $3,000        Years 3 & 5     $6,000   results and best
events
                                                                                                 practices
                                                                                 ≈$280,000-     Indicative
                    TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET
                                                                                  $300,000        budget
*indicative and subject to revision during implementation




                                                   26
5. Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
5.1 Government Systems on Grievance Resolution
The primary objective of the FGRM is to facilitate the timely, effective, and efficient resolution of
complaints and grievances in a manner that is fair, transparent, and satisfactory to all parties involved. The
project will build on the existing 114-hotline of the MLSA, the network of local territorial centers of the
USS to ensure accessible channels for grievance intake and response, as well as through unified platform
for electronic inquiries (e-request.am) that allows citizens to send electronic requests to state bodies
through a one-window format. The Interagency Commission on Appeals for Housing Support Program
Beneficiaries, established by Government Decree N901-Լ (July 3, 2025) will also act as a key grievance
redress mechanism for refugees and vulnerable groups denied housing assistance.

All grievance resolution procedures will be implemented in line with the Law on Freedom of Information
(2003), which guarantees individuals the right to request and access information from public authorities.
In accordance with the law:
     • Complaints and requests must be registered, classified, and responded to within set timelines (5
         days for standard requests; up to 30 days if additional processing is required, with written notice
         of the delay provided within 5 days).
     • Rejections must be justified in writing, citing the legal basis, and must inform complainants of their
         right to appeal the decision.
     • Authorities are obliged to ensure accessibility, transparency, accuracy, and completeness of
         information provided, while safeguarding confidentiality and personal data.

The Interagency Commission on Appeals for Housing Support Program Beneficiaries provides an
additional grievance redress channel for families whose applications for the Government’s HSP were
rejected, as specified below:
    • Mandate: Review individual appeals, verify supporting documents, and address gaps or
        inaccuracies that may have led to unjust rejections.
    • Composition: Chaired by the Deputy Minister of Labor and Social Affairs, with participation from
        deputy heads or advisors of:
             o MLSA
             o Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure
             o MCS (Ministry of Internal Affairs)
             o National Security Service
             o Cadastre Committee

    •   Functions and Procedures:
           o Appeals must be submitted within two months of rejection.
           o Sessions are held at least every two months, or more frequently if needed.
           o The Commission may request data from relevant state bodies and invite experts for case
               assessments.
           o Decisions granting or denying beneficiary status are issued in writing and delivered to
               applicants within three working days after the session.

PFIs: In accordance with the Law on the Financial System Mediator (June 17, 2008) and supporting
normative acts, all PFIs have established minimum internal procedures for managing customer grievances


                                                     27
including principles, processes, and timelines for grievance handling. Under the Project, these procedures
will be aligned with the overall FGRM to ensure consistency and fairness. In cases where applicants are
not satisfied with the information or decisions provided, the PFIs will be required to:

       •   Inform beneficiaries of their right to appeal through the FGRM or Interagency Commission on
           Appeals;
       •   Provide clear guidance on the steps, timelines, and documentation required for filing an appeal
           both internally and through FGRM;
       •   Refer beneficiaries to the relevant USS office or MLSA for further assistance, including support in
           preparing and submitting appeals.

In addition, in cases where beneficiaries are not satisfied with the resolution provided by the banks, they
may appeal to the Financial System Mediator (FSM)9 as an independent grievance redress mechanism, in
accordance with the Law on the FSM.

The PFIs will be required to report to MLSA on the number, type, and status of grievances received and
handled, including the number of cases referred to the USS or the Appeals Commission or the FSM.

National Mortgage Company: As an implementing agency for Component 2, the NMC will follow its
internal Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to be established under its ESMS. This includes registering
and addressing grievances in line with the ESMS manual, that has been developed and is pending internal
approval. According to the ESMS manual, within the scope of its activities, NMC will establish and
implement a transparent, fair and accessible GRM for the resolution of complaints submitted by
beneficiaries of programs jointly implemented with the PFIs. NMC receives grievances through multiple
channels, including an e-mail address or other official written means of communication. NMC will establish
a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) to respond proactively and promptly to stakeholder complaints10.

Though NMC’s GRM is mostly oriented to PFIs, Project beneficiaries may also apply to NMC for loan-
related issues that are beyond NMCs mandate or jurisdiction to address. For such cases NMC will register
the grievances in their GRM log and provide beneficiaries with information on Project FGRM, including
their rights to appeal. NMC will report data on grievances to MLSA on a quarterly basis for MLSA to
consolidate all grievance in a single log.

NMC’s GRM will be equipped to receive, register, and facilitate the resolution of SEA/SH complaints,
including through the referral of survivors to relevant gender-based violence service providers, all in a safe,
confidential, and survivor-centered manner.
5.1. Key Elements of FGRM under the Project
The table below outlines the key elements of the FGRM that will be applied under the Project.

Table 5. FGRM Elements
                                                                                         Time
           Step                           Description of Process                                        Responsibility
                                                                                        Frame



9
    More details on FSM can be found here https://fsm.am/
10 Detailed procedure on NMC GRM will be disclosed in the updated version of SEP once those are internally approved as part

of the NMC’s ESMS.

                                                             28
 FGRM                The FGRM will function at national and local levels.     Continuous   MLSA and USS
 implementation      Designated focal points in USS local territorial
 structure           centers will serve as the first point of contact, with
                     oversight and coordination at the MLSA level.
                     Complaints may be submitted through:                     Continuous   MLSA and USS
                          ▪ 114 toll-free hotline / SMS
                          ▪ www.e-request portal
                          ▪ Email: info@mlsa.am
                          ▪ Written letter to the Ministry or USSs:
 Grievance uptake
                               Government Bld. 3
                          ▪ Walk-ins recorded in logbooks or
                               suggestion boxes at MLSA and USS local
                               territorial centers
                          ▪ MLSA social media pages
 Sorting and         Complaints are forwarded to the relevant                 Upon         MLSA and USS
 processing          departments, logged into the central database, and       receipt
                     categorized by type (eligibility, exclusion, service
                     quality, SEA/SH, etc.).
 Acknowledgment      Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged in writing      Within 5     MLSA and USS
 and follow-up       or verbally to the complainant. In line with the Law     days
                     on Freedom of Information (2003),
                     acknowledgment and/or response are provided
                     within 5 days.
 Verification,       Complaints are investigated by the responsible unit      5–30 days    MLSA/USS and
 investigation,      or Interagency Commission on Appeals, depending                       other relevant
 action              on the nature of the complaint. Proposed                              agencies,
                     resolutions are formulated and communicated to                        Interagency
                     the complainant. If additional processing is                          Commission on
                     required, the complainant is notified within 5 days,                  Appeals, PFIs, NMC,
                     and resolution is provided within 30 days as per the                  FSM
                     Law on Freedom of Information (2003).
 Monitoring and      Data on grievances are consolidated in a central         Quarterly    MLSA, Project
 evaluation          database and reported quarterly to MLSA higher                        Coordinator, SECS
                     management and the WB. Trends are analyzed to
                     improve responsiveness and service delivery.
 Provision of        Complainants’ feedback on satisfaction with              After        MLSA, Project
 feedback            complaint resolution is systematically collected to      resolution   Coordinator, SECS /
                     strengthen accountability.                                            USS focal points
 Training            Regular capacity-building for USS staff, call center     Annual,      MLSA and USS
                     staff on grievance management, with emphasis on          upon need    Project Coordinator,
                     handling SEA/SH cases.                                                SECS

Handling of Sensitive Complaints: Grievances related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment
(SEA/SH) will be registered, tracked, and addressed with due attention to confidentiality and sensitivity.
While grievance resolution procedures generally follow the Law on Freedom of Information (2003) to
ensure transparency and accountability, complaints related to SEA/SH will be managed under a survivor-
centered and confidential protocol. Such cases will not be disclosed through public reporting mechanisms
and will instead be referred to specialized service providers in line with WB’s Good Practice Note on
SEA/SH.




                                                       29
The MLSA is responsible for managing SEA/SH cases and will ensure coordination with specialized local
NGOs that provide survivor support services. One of the key referral partners is the Women’s Support
Center (WSC), which operates Armenia’s first confidential domestic violence shelter. WSC offers 24/7
emergency shelter, psychological counseling, legal support, and reintegration assistance to women and
children at risk, accessible via hotline 099 88 78 08. The shelter maintains strict confidentiality of its
location and provides a safe environment managed by trained female staff. Referrals from the Project
FGRM to WSC and other specialized providers will always respect survivor consent and confidentiality
protocols, ensuring protection, dignity, and access to appropriate services.

Appeals and Legal Recourse: If a complainant is not satisfied with the resolution provided through the
FGRM, they may file an appeal. Once all possible project-level solutions are exhausted, complainants will
be informed of their right to legal recourse under Armenian legislation.

Non-Retaliation Commitment: The WB and the Borrower maintain a strict zero-tolerance policy for
reprisals or retaliation against individuals or groups who raise grievances, provide feedback, or express
their views about Bank-financed projects.

Communicating FGRM and appeal procedures to beneficiaries: The MLSA 114 hotline and the e-request
portal are already well publicized and will be further strengthened under the Project. In addition, the
beneficiary outreach and awareness-raising campaign will ensure that affected populations are informed
of their right to appeal in cases of rejection from the HSP. Information on the role and procedures of the
Interagency Commission on Appeals will be integrated into the broader project communication and
outreach activities, including public information materials, information sessions, and the MLSA/USS
communication channels.
    • Coordination: Communication efforts will be closely coordinated with the grievance mechanisms
         of MLSA and USS to avoid duplication, ensure consistency of messages, and provide beneficiaries
         with clear and reliable information.
    • USS: Local USS territorial centers’ staff working directly with beneficiaries will also disseminate
         information on appeal procedures during their interactions, ensuring that beneficiaries are aware
         of available redress channels and receive assistance in preparing and submitting appeals where
         needed.
    • Sensitization: Gender-sensitive messaging and survivor-centered referral training will be
         integrated into communication and outreach capacity-building for USS and hotline staff.




                                                   30
6. Monitoring and Reporting

6.1. Monitoring of SEP
Implementation of the SEP will be systematically monitored to ensure that stakeholder engagement
activities are inclusive, effective, and responsive to community needs. Monitoring will focus on both the
quantity and quality of engagement, as well as the accessibility and performance of the FGRM.
Key indicators to be monitored during the SEP implementation will include:
    •   Stakeholder engagement activities: number of consultations and outreach campaigns carried out
        through USS territorial centers, municipalities, CSOs, MLSA and digital platforms.
    •   Information dissemination: number of outreach materials distributed (posters, leaflets, social
        media posts), media campaigns implemented, and information sessions held.
    •   FGRM performance: number of grievances and appeals submitted to USS territorial centers, the
        114 hotline, the Interagency Commission and other channels; proportion of grievances accepted,
        resolved, and addressed within agreed timelines.
    •   Beneficiary feedback: results of mid-project and end-of-project perception surveys, capturing
        satisfaction with transparency, fairness, access to information, and responsiveness of grievance
        mechanisms, as well as tracking of citizenship-related feedback and awareness
    •   Inclusion of vulnerable groups: proportion of engagement activities specifically targeting women-
        headed households, elderly beneficiaries, and refugees in rural areas.
    •   Tracking feedback from host communities: tracking feedback from host communities to assess
        perceptions of fairness, access to information, and satisfaction with communication and grievance
        mechanisms.
Sample of indicators to be tracked in biannual progress reports on SE implementation are listed below.
MLSA will elaborate the list of indicators to be reported aligned with Project Result Framework and
incorporate into Communication and Outreach Plan:

    ▪   Number of consultations and outreach campaigns carried out annually.
    ▪   Percentage of grievances resolved within 30 days.
    ▪   Percentage of women-headed households participating in consultations.
    ▪   Number of outreach materials distributed (posters, leaflets, videos).
    ▪   Frequency of website and social media updates (minimum quarterly).
    ▪   Beneficiary satisfaction levels from mid-term and end-of-project perception surveys.

Biannual progress reports will be prepared by the MLSA, summarizing engagement activities, grievance
trends, and key lessons learned. These reports will be shared with WB and disclosed publicly through
MLSA’s website.
6.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups
Stakeholders will be regularly informed about the progress of the HSP, including updates on E&S
performance, implementation of the SEP and FGRM, as well as overall program achievements.



                                                   31
Quarterly summaries on grievances, enquiries, and feedback received through the 114 hotline, USS
territorial centers, and other channels will be prepared by the MLSA and shared with the public. Results
from perception surveys and consultations will be publicly summarized to show how feedback informed
project design or adjustments. These reports will track both the number and type of complaints, as well
as the timeliness and effectiveness of responses, enabling management to monitor trends and identify
areas requiring corrective or preventive measures.

To ensure transparency and accountability, results of engagement activities and grievance management
will be reported back to stakeholders through multiple channels, including:
     • Public updates on MLSA’s website and social media platforms, summarizing key progress,
         outreach activities, and frequently asked questions.
     • Information boards at USS territorial centers and municipalities, displaying summaries of
         program updates, common enquiries, and grievance redress outcomes.
     • Annual public meetings and community information sessions in selected municipalities,
         providing opportunities for beneficiaries to hear updates and directly raise questions.
     • Targeted communication to vulnerable groups (via CSOs and social workers), ensuring that
         underinformed or harder-to-reach households also receive feedback on program progress and
         grievance outcomes.
     • Inclusion of survey results (mid-project and end-of-project perception surveys) in public reporting
         to demonstrate how beneficiary feedback has shaped program implementation.




                                                   32
Annex 1: Key Stakeholder Groups
  Name of Stakeholder                         Interest                                 Details / Estimated Number

Affected Parties

Government of Armenia      GoA is the main beneficiary of the Project.            49   territorial USS territorial
(GoA), MLSA and USS        MLSA oversees policy and program design and            centers across Armenia; central
                           has overall responsibility for implementation.         MLSA and interagency bodies
                           USS      manages      registration,  eligibility
                           verification, disbursement, and acts as local
                           interface.

Refugee Households         Primary beneficiaries of cash assistance and/or        ~13,000–15,000             refugee
                           housing support.                                       households eligible; currently
                                                                                  receiving cash assistance for rent,
                                                                                  utilities, and consumption

PFIs                       Administer housing-related loans and financial         5 participating commercial banks
                           services.

NMC                        Ensures mortgage market development and                CBA-owned financial institution
                           facilitates access to housing for low- and             managing mortgage finance
                           middle-income families, while promoting
                           green finance and social programs

ADB                        Co-financier of the Project; supports                  Partner agency, uses PBL and PSSA
                           safeguards and financing modalities.                   instruments

Other Interested Parties

Other    Governmental      Provide policy alignment, oversight, and               Ministries of Finance, Territorial
Agencies                   technical data.                                        Administration and Infrastructure,
                                                                                  CoUD

CSOs,    NGOs,      and    Complement government efforts with service             Mission Armenia, Armenian Red
Diaspora Organizations     delivery, advocacy, outreach, and feedback             Cross, Caritas, AGBU, Tufenkian
                           collection.                                            Foundation, Fund for Armenian
                                                                                  Relief, etc.

International              Provide funding, technical support, and                UNDP, UNICEF, UNHCR, GIZ, KfW,
Organizations         &    complementary refugee response activities.             IOM,             and            other
Programs                                                                          bilateral/multilateral agencies

Media                      Disseminate information            on   eligibility,   National and local media outlets,
                           procedures, and outcomes.                              TV, radio, and online channels

Local Governments &        Facilitate local-level implementation          and     Municipalities and community
Host Communities           engagement with refugee households.                    councils in affected regions

Construction        &      Provide technical services for housing                 Private sector actors contracted
Valuation Companies        assessments, valuation, and renovations.               under HSP

Disadvantaged and Vulnerable Groups




                                                         33
Low-income                  May face affordability gaps despite assistance,     Particularly large households and
households, households      at risk of exclusion, may struggle with             those with unstable incomes, risk of
with limited financial      mortgage-related processes and requirements.        exclusion due to banking and
literacy                                                                        documentation barriers

Female-headed               At higher risk of economic vulnerability and        Significant share of refugee HHs,
households,     single-     exclusion; especially in geographically             includes widowed or single mothers
headed      households      challenging regions, require targeted outreach.
with children (esp.
women)

Persons with disabilities   Face barriers to access due to medical, mobility,   Includes households requiring
/ chronic illness           or care needs.                                      special assistance and accessible
                                                                                communication

Elderly refugees without    At risk of being left out due to isolation or       Especially older refugees in rural
support networks            mobility limitations.                               areas

Refugees in     rural   /   Have limited access to information and              Households      in     isolated
remote areas                services.                                           communities      with     weak
                                                                                connectivity and fewer service
                                                                                points




                                                        34
Annex 2. Roles and Responsibilities of the Key Actors involved in SE Implementation
 Actor                                 Roles and Responsibilities
 MLSA (overall)                        - Oversight of SEP implementation under Component 1.
                                       - Ensure compliance with ESS10 and WB requirements.
                                       - Coordinate across departments (PIT, PR Department, USS).
                                       - Consolidate and report stakeholder engagement results to WB.
 Project Implementation Team (PIT)     - Manage day-to-day implementation of SEP activities.
                                       - Coordinate inputs from PR Department, USS, and CSOs.
                                       - Supervise SECS and ensure adequate resources for engagement.
                                       - Integrate feedback from SEP into project management.
 Project Coordinator                   - Lead and oversee SEP implementation within MLSA.
                                       - Monitor and ensure quality of SEP activities.
                                       - Supervise SECS and provide guidance. - Coordinate with NMC to align SEP
                                       under Component 1 and 2.
                                       - Prepare periodic SEP reports for WB.
 Stakeholder  Engagement       and     - Operationalize SEP activities (planning, outreach, consultations,
 Communications Specialist (SECS)      disclosure).
                                       - Develop communication materials (print, media, digital).
                                       - Organize and facilitate consultations, including with vulnerable groups.
                                       - Manage FGRM communication and visibility.
                                       - Document engagement and report to PIT.
 Public   Relations     Department     - Lead mass media, TV/radio, and digital campaigns.
 (MLSA)                                - Support design of brochures, flyers, infographics, and video explainers.
                                       - Coordinate with SECS on consistent messaging.
 USS                                   - Act as primary local interface with beneficiaries.
                                       - Disseminate information, conduct consultations, and collect feedback.
                                       - Manage grievance intake at community level and refer cases to MLSA.
                                       - Ensure outreach to vulnerable groups through 49 territorial centers.
 NMC (Component 2)                     - Implement SEP activities under Component 2.
                                        - Disclose information on financial services.
                                       - Operate internal GRM per ESMS manual.
                                       - Report grievance data to MLSA for consolidation.
 PFIs                                  - Inform applicants of loan eligibility and grievance/appeal procedures.
                                       - Maintain internal GRM and report to MLSA/NMC.
                                       - Provide data on grievances received and resolved.
 Civil   Society       Organizations   - Support outreach to vulnerable groups (women-headed HHs, elderly,
 (CSOs)/NGOs                           disabled, rural refugees).
                                       - Relay beneficiary feedback to MLSA/USS.
                                       - Partner on community-level consultations and awareness campaigns.
 UNHCR
                                       - Provide technical and advisory support to MLSA and USS on
                                       communication with refugee communities and protection-sensitive
                                       engagement, as needed.
                                       - Support outreach and information dissemination activities, as needed,
                                       in coordination with MLSA and CSO partners.
                                       - Contribute to staff capacity building and coordination with other
                                       refugee-related initiatives, as needed.




                                                      35
Annex 3. Sample Grievance Log Template


 ID  Date     Name &              Location /    Type of       Description Responsible Date          Action     Date                 Status Remarks
 No. Received Contact (if         Channel of    Grievance of              Unit / Focal Acknowledged Taken /    Resolved             (Open
              not                 Submission    (Eligibility, Complaint Point                       Resolution                      /
              anonymous)          (Hotline,     Exclusion,                                                                          Closed)
                                  USS, Email,   Service
                                  etc.)         Quality,
                                                SEA/SH,
                                                Other)




Notes:

   •     SEA/SH-related complaints must be recorded using codes only, without personal identifiers, and handled under confidential, survivor-
         centered protocols.

   •     The log will be maintained by the SECS at MLSA and consolidated quarterly for reporting to WB.




                                                                       36
Annex 4. Sample Consultation Record Template


 Consultation       Date &      Stakeholder        Number of Participants        Key        Feedback /       Response / How   Follow-up
 Title / Topic      Location    Group(s)           (disaggregated by sex,        Issues     Suggestions      Feedback Was     Actions &
                                Engaged            age, other relevant           Raised                      Addressed        Responsible
                                                   categories)                                                                Party




Notes:

   •     This template should be used for all public meetings, focus groups, and workshops.

   •     Attendance sheets and photos (if consent is given) should be attached to the record (not subject to disclosure).

   •     Results will be summarized in biannual SEP progress reports and disclosed on MLSA’s website (no personal data disclosed).




                                                                         37
Annex 5․ Summary of stakeholder feedback and how it was addressed


         Minutes of Stakeholder Consultation on Draft Environmental and Social Instruments

Project: Armenia – Housing Response and Mortgage Market Enhancement (HOME) Project
Date of Environmental and Social (E&S) Instruments’ disclosure: September 15, 2025
Consultation period: September 27– October 15, 2025
Format: Written consultation (official correspondence)
Organized by: Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MLSA)

1. Purpose

The draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and
Environmental and Social Risk Screening Form were shared with key stakeholders, including governmental
institutions, international organizations and civil society organizations (CSOs) for review and written
feedback as part of the consultation process. The stakeholders were provided with the draft E&S
instruments and allocated a consultation period from September 27 to October 15, 2025, to review the
documents and submit their feedback. The objective of the consultation was to gather comments and
recommendations to ensure that stakeholder engagement, environmental and social risk management,
and commitment measures are comprehensive, context-appropriate, and aligned with national
frameworks and the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).
2. Stakeholders Consulted

 Category                                              Institutions / Organizations
                                                       - Ministry of Finance
 Governmental Institutions                             - Ministry of Environment
                                                       - Central Bank of Armenia (CBA)
                                                       - UNICEF Armenia
                                                       - UNDP Armenia
 International Development Partners                    - UNHCR Armenia
                                                       - IOM Armenia
                                                       - World Health Organization (WHO)
                                                       - Mission Armenia NGO
                                                        - Armenian Caritas
                                                       - Armenian Association of Social Workers
                                                       - “Fight Against Hunger” NGO
                                                       - Armenian General Benevolent Union (AGBU)
                                                       - World Vision Armenia
 Civil Society Organizations (CSOs)
                                                       - OxyGen Foundation
                                                       - Armenian Relief Fund
                                                       - KASA Swiss Humanitarian Foundation
                                                       - People in Need Armenia
                                                       - Women’s Support Center NGO
                                                       - Armenian Red Cross Society


                                                  38
3. Feedback Received

Written feedback was received from three institutions — the Ministry of Environment, UNHCR Armenia,
and the Central Bank of Armenia. Other invited stakeholders acknowledged receipt but did not provide
additional comments within the consultation period. The table below summarizes the feedback received:
 Institution /
                       Summary of Comments / Recommendations                        Action / Response by MLSA
 Organization
                       The Ministry reviewed the ESCP, SEP, and ESRF and
 Ministry of           confirmed having no comments or recommendations,
                                                                                    Noted. No action required.
 Environment           noting the documents are consistent with
                       environmental and social requirements.
                       Welcomed the inclusiveness of the Project and its
                       alignment with the Global Compact on Refugees and            MLSA welcomed UNHCR’s
                       the Global Refugee Forum commitments.                        recommendations. The SEP will
                       Recommended to: Further strengthen references to             be updated to: Explicitly
                       refugee participation within outreach, consultation,         reference engagement activities
 UNHCR Armenia         and grievance mechanisms. Ensure equal access of             targeting both refugees and host
                       refugees and host communities to information,                communities and highlight
                       services, and grievance channels. Consider                   cooperation with UNHCR for
                       opportunities for cooperation with UNHCR on                  outreach, awareness, and
                       outreach, technical support, and staff capacity              capacity building where feasible.
                       building of Unified Social Service officers.
                                                                                 The feedback has been reflected
                       Provided input on NMC’s mandate and clarification of
                                                                                 in the SEP through enhanced
                       its role, raised questions regarding eligibility criteria—
                                                                                 description of eligibility
                       specifically the requirement on the presence of family
                                                                                 communication measures,
                       members in the country—and the feasibility of
                                                                                 inclusion of the FSM under
 CBA                   monitoring such criteria. Recommended further
                                                                                 grievance redress pathways and
                       clarification of the scope of eligible beneficiaries. Also
                                                                                 reference to the Law on the
                       confirmed GRM requirements for participating banks
                                                                                 Financial System Mediator (June
                       and access to the Financial System Mediator as an
                                                                                 17, 2008). NMC role and
                       independent grievance redress mechanism.
                                                                                 mandate has been clarified.
                       As of the consultation closing date, no additional written feedback was received. Any
                       comments submitted by stakeholders after the completion of the consultation period will
 Other stakeholders
                       be reviewed and, as relevant, incorporated into the updated versions of the E&S
                       instruments to be finalized following Project effectiveness.


4. Summary of Key Takeaways and next steps

Stakeholders confirmed alignment of draft instruments with national frameworks and ESF requirements.
UNHCR emphasized enhancing inclusion measures for refugees in engagement and grievance processes.
CBA stressed the importance of inter-institutional coordination with financial intermediaries.
The MLSA integrated all relevant feedback received during the consultation period into the final versions
of the SEP. No changes have been made to E&S Risk Screening Form following the consultation process.
The updated versions of E&S instruments were re-disclosed on the official websites of MLSA on October
24, 2025.




                                                         39
