Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 11/28/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04633




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 10, 2024                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P508310                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       HOME Project                2025

                     Operation Name            Housing response and Mortgage market Enhancement (HOME) Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Armenia                   Armenia                                  EUROPE AND CENTRAL          Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                        ASIA                        Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs     27-Mar-2025                 29-May-2025


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     20-Nov-2024               250,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve access of local and refugee families to adequate long-term housing solutions and improve sustainability of
                     the housing and mortgage market.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Proposed Project seeks to improve access of local and refugee families to adequate long-term housing solutions and
                     improve sustainability of the housing and mortgage market. The project will introduce a harmonized approach for
                     housing subsidies to directly benefit refugees. The broad categories of activities will include: (i) cash support (CS) for
                     eligible beneficiaries to cover rent, utilities, and consumption (ii) provision of long-term housing solutions to eligible
                     households through the Housing Support Program (HSP); (iii) housing finance market development through support to
                     National Mortgage Company (NMC) to expand a sustainable housing finance system by providing longer-term local
                     currency funding, essential for affordable mortgage markets; (iv) Institutional development and strengthening

                    Dec 10, 2024                                                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)



                     capacities which will include technical assistance, analytical work, and capacity building activities for designing,
                     implementing, and managing housing programs and enhancing the overall housing and mortgage sector. The HPS will
                     support five types of housing solutions: (i) buying an existing housing unit; (ii) buying a new apartment under
                     construction; (iii) building a new standalone house; (iv) renovation of an existing structure; and (v) partial repayment of
                     an existing mortgage loan.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Project activities will be implemented nationwide, targeting refugees from Karabakh residing in Armenia, estimated at
                     13,000 households (HHs). Across the country, refugees, that comprise almost 4% of locals, currently access cash
                     assistance (CA) through online systems and bank transfers provided by the government since Dec. 2023.
                     Sub-component 1.2 (SC) will provide long-term housing to eligible HHs through the Government’s demand-driven and
                     beneficiary-led Housing Support Program (HSP), with beneficiaries having the choice to locate anywhere in the country,
                     except central Yerevan. The HSP defines a minimum standard apartment size of 12 m² per capita, and incentivizes
                     housing in border regions, where communities are more vulnerable and face limited job opportunities/infrastructure.
                     Armenia’s aging housing stock, primarily privately owned, includes over 460,000 apartments and 427,000 private
                     houses, most built before 1988 under outdated Soviet building codes. Approximately 60% of the housing is in urban,
                     with 30% concentrated in Yerevan, where infrastructure and social services are more accessible, while rural and border
                     areas often face limitations. Some rural locations, given the nationwide scope, may be near protected zones. However,
                     the construction of single-family houses and reliance on existing housing are expected to use current infrastructure and
                     take place in developed settings, minimizing proximity to natural protected zones and excluding greenfield



Public Disclosure
                     development, and developer-financed housing investments. The aging housing stock may include buildings of historical
                     significance. None of the activities will be implemented in conflict affected/disputed territories.
                     Currently, most refugees are located in Yerevan and nearby towns/villages. Due to capped maximum benefit, refugees
                     are likely to afford housing in rural areas or less adequate urban housing near Yerevan, both not densely populated,
                     with some job opportunities for them and linked to Yerevan.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will involve multiple actors, with the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MLSA) serving as the main
                     counterpart for implementation. The MLSA has experience with WB-financed projects that triggered Safeguard Policies
                     and Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)․ However, its capacity in terms of supporting financial intermediaries
                     (FIs) and implementation of Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMSs) is limited. The MLSA will establish
                     a housing unit for advancing housing strategy. A project team, including E&S staff will be also hired within the MLSA to
                     advance Project preparation and implementation. The Project will include the Unified Social Services (USSs) of the
                     MLSA, with its 49 territorial centers, responsible for the HSP/CA. The capacities of USS and 114-hotline of the MLSA, for
                     additional project-related grievances will be assessed prior to Appraisal and further adapted to handle SEA/SH
                     grievances, ensure data disaggregation and reporting. Before Appraisal, the Bank team will assess and advise on further
                     strengthening of the institutional capacity to better manage the system, minimize exclusion risks, and achieve effective
                     outreach and engagement.
                     The Armenia’ experience of developing and operating ESMSs is limited. The interested banks’ capacity varies; some
                     have established ESMSs with adeqaute staffing and designated units, while others lack them. The adequacy of their
                     respective systems will be assessed as part of the selection of the partner banks, with additional strengthening


                    Dec 10, 2024                                                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)



                     measures/actions, specified in Environmental and Social Commitment (ESCP), to align with the ESF requirements. The
                     WB team will assess, and consider the risk level of the activities, covering E&S risk screening, assessment and
                     management tools of the FIs, stakeholder engagement, labor relations, SEA/SH risk management and GRM. The exact
                     roles and responsibilities of MLSA and FIs in managing E&S risks will be determined and established before Appraisal.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Moderate
                     The environmental risk is assessed as moderate, considering the risks and impacts related to financing activities under
                     SC 1.2 while no environmental risks are anticipated for the other SCs. Key risks include: 1) moderate Occupational
                     Health and Safety (OHS) risks are associated with the renovation of existing buildings constructed under Soviet-era
                     building codes due to limited seismic design and provisions, which may not meet current seismic safety standards and
                     nessaciate OHS screening; 2) potential exposure to hazardous materials such as Asbestos Containing Materials (ACM),
                     lead-based paints in old buildings; 3) generation of non-hazardous and hazardous waste from renovations, and new
                     constructions; 4) dust and noise generation during construction and renovation of old buildings, and vibration
                     assessed to be low and localized due to small-scale construction activities. For new single-family housing construction
                     under SC 1.2, activities are expected to be small in scale, with no support for greenfield projects, as all works will
                     utilize existing infrastructure within already developed settings. Despite the MLSA's limited capacity, it will engage



Public Disclosure
                     E&S specialists and enhance its ESMSs, ensuring effective management of project-related environmental risks,
                     justifying the Project's moderate risk while also considering MLSA’s experience in implementing WB’s financed
                     projects. The adequacy of participating banks’ capacity will be assessed and gap filling measures will be implemented
                     to strengthen ESMSs within MLSA and participating banks, including clear roles and responsibilities will be defined.
                     The ESMSs will be tailored to the level of risks and impacts, incorporate relevant risk screening, assessment and
                     management procedures, and the exclusion criteria for housing conditions, type, naturally protected areas, sensitive
                     receptors, historical buildings, and large-scale construction. Mechanisms for monitoring and reporting will be set up
                     as part of the ESMS.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Project's social risk is assessed as moderate and is mostly linked to Component 1, associated with 1) potential
                     shortcomings in outreach and engagement, hindering eligible beneficiaries from fully accessing long-term housing; 2)
                     gradual phase-out of CA that can have livelihood implications; 3) potential over-borrowing beyond the grant amount,
                     which could lead to debt trap and financial strain for beneficiaries; and 4) heightened potential for SEA/SH, threats, or
                     extortion targeting vulnerable refugees. For housing, eligibility criteria include having citizenship for all family
                     members which might limit access for those facing difficulties obtaining citizenship. The risk of social tension or
                     conflict is low, given widespread solidarity with refugees’ situation and the Project’s goal to harmonize support
                     programs provided to refugees with those available to other vulnerable groups. Under SC 1.2, refugees may acquire
                     private lands on the open market under a willing buyer-willing seller principle. The project’s physical footprint is not
                     expected to cause involuntary resettlement or have adverse impacts on assets or livelihoods, as those activities will
                     be screened and eliminated. The risks linked to gradual phase out of the CA and risk of overborrowing will be


                    Dec 10, 2024                                                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)



                     assessed prior to Appraisal and appropriate safeguards will be identified to protect refugees from financial strain.
                     Eviction risks may arise if beneficiaries violate terms of housing, after which assistance will be halted and purchased
                     houses converted into social ones. Though refugees will be allowed to continue to live in social houses, current
                     regulations lack clarity on protection measures for such cases. Further details will be known before Appraisal, and
                     mechanisms will be identified as part of the design development to establish safeguards to regulate property
                     transfers and prevent evictions. Mitigation measures will aim to create a safe, inclusive environment for beneficiaries
                     with effective outreach.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      Project activities are not expected to cause significant environmental risks or adverse impacts, given small-scale
                      construction, minor renovations, and exclusion criteria for eligible housing under SC 1.2, associated with generation
                      of waste, dust, noise, and vibration. Soviet-era buildings may have low seismic resistance, exposure to ACM and lead-
                      based paints during renovations. These risks and impacts can be mitigated through ESMSs and management
                      measures, such as waste procedures, dust suppression, noise and vibration control. The Project is expected to bring
                      social benefits to refugee HHs by addressing their needs through cash support and improved access to long-term
                      housing. Social risks under ESS1 may be associated with overborrowing, gradual phase-out of CA and inadequate
                      regulations for protection of HHs who violate HSP conditions. Some modalities of the Project are yet to be defined



Public Disclosure
                      and the scope of the risks and relevant mitigation will be determined prior to Appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      Project beneficiaries include refugees from Karabakh, with UNHCR reporting 115,366 as of Sep. 2024. The Project
                      targets around 13,000–15,000 HHs, providing housing assistance those meeting government criteria, while CA
                      reaches a broader groups. Key stakeholders include other refugees, private banks, development banks, UN agencies
                      and NGOs involved in housing support. The MLSA, through USSs, conducts outreach among refugees on government
                      support programs, with USAID providing TA for developing and implementing an outreach strategy. Engagement risks
                      include challenges in reaching vulnerable groups, such as HHs living in remote areas, elderly, poor HHs, and clearly
                      communicating the HSP and phase-out of CA. The MLSA will prepare an SEP before Appraisal, building on ongoing
                      efforts and including additional communication and consultations. SEP will outline engagement activities, address
                      gaps in current strategies, and detail survivor-centered GRM, capacitated to handle SEA/SH compliants.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      ESS2 applies to direct and contracted workers. Direct workers include MLSA, USS, and NMC employees, who are civil
                      servants with their labor terms governed by national laws. Contracted workers may include MLSA-recruited
                      consultants. Regulations require to use pre-approved designs and involve licensed contractors (contracting
                      arrangements yet to be determined) for the construction of single-family houses. Workers of those contractors will
                      be considered contracted workers. No community workers will be involved; primary supply worker involvement will
                      be limited. The MLSA will prepare LMP as part of the POM before Effectiveness, outlining requirements for OHS for


                    Dec 10, 2024                                                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)



                      direct and contracted workers, types of obligations of parties, GRM and SEA/SH sensitization, including code of
                      conduct for government workers. The OHS requirements will address key risks, such as works at heights, exposure to
                      hazardous materials, machinery hazards, noise and vibration, all of which are regulated by existing norms.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      Financing under SC 1.2 may involve generation of both non-hazardous construction and hazardous waste (ACM and
                      lead-based paints), particularly the latter is associated with possible refurbishments in Soviet-era apartments.
                      International best practices, such as the WB Group Environmental Social Health Safety (ESHS) guidelines or the EU
                      guidelines on ACM and lead-based paints management, will be followed. Due to the relatively small scale of the
                      physical works, these activities will not undergo national Environmental Impact Assessments. However, all new
                      constructions will be governed by national building regulations, which will address requirements for resource and
                      energy efficiency, water usage, discharge, and waste management. The established ESMSs will ensure proper E&S
                      management, monitoring, and reporting, as well as raising awareness among beneficiaries who may be involved in
                      smaller renovation/construction works.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      Potential community health and safety (HS) concerns may arise from the construction of new houses or the
                      renovation of old ones undertaken by beneficiary families. Risks to community are associated with new constructions
                      including noise, dust, and poorly regulated construction sites. These impacts are temporary and limited in scale, and
                      will be addressed through established/strengthened ESMSs. Community HS risks may also arise if the houses




Public Disclosure
                      purchased under the government housing program do not provide a safe environment for vulnerable refugee
                      families. Concerns include seismic safety of old buildings, vulnerability to natural hazards, extreme weather events.
                      Bank regulations, as part of mortgage process, would require an assessment of seismic integrity by a licensed firm in
                      line with national requirements. Pre-screening criteria for the eligible buildings will be determined during project
                      preparation and by Appraisal.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                     Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant as the Project does not involve involuntary land acquisition, restrictions on land use, or
                      resettlement. Under SC 1.2, beneficiaries have the option to purchase an existing house, buy a land and construct a
                      new single-family house, purchase new apartments under construction from developers, or receive assistance for
                      repaying an existing mortgage loan. All transactions for purchasing apartments, houses, and land will follow a willing
                      buyer-willing seller approach in the open market. While beneficiaries may buy homes from new constructions, the
                      Project will not directly finance those by developers. The absence of third-party claims or informal users for such
                      assets will be confirmed during the screening, prepared according to ESS1. If any resettlement impacts and/or
                      buildings with legacy of land issues that invoke the application of ESS5 are identified in the screening process, those
                      activities will be deemed ineligible under the project and eliminated.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                      Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is not relevant. The Project will not finance any activities in areas that are designated as natural habitats
                      of protected areas or in buffer zone areas. While ESS6 is not relevant, adequate measures to ensure impacts on


                    Dec 10, 2024                                                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)



                      biodiversity and natural habitats will be managed by putting in place defined exclusion criteria to ensure no new
                      housing units will be situated in proximity to such areas.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                  Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This ESS is not relevant to the Project. No indigenous groups are known to reside in the Republic of Armenia.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      Risks to cultural heritage may arise if activities occur near cultural heritage sites or if financing supports the purchase
                      of apartments located in buildings of cultural significance. Exclusion criteria will be applied to prevent construction
                      near heritage sites, while renovations of properties in culturally significant buildings will comply with national
                      legislation, governed by the Law on the Preservation and Use of Immovable Monuments of History and Culture and
                      Historical Environment (1998), and the permitting process from relevant authority. The exclusion criteria will also
                      include a scenario where the project could induce new developments compromising or demolishing and
                      rehabilitating buildings with cultural heritage value to ensure no impacts on historical buldings. The ESMSs will also
                      establish procedures for monitoring and safeguarding cultural heritage throughout the Project, including chance-find
                      criteria for small-scale constructions.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                                   Relevant

                      Under SC 1.2, 5 commercial banks expressed interest to provide mortgage to the beneficiaries holding housing



Public Disclosure
                      purchase certificates.The financing will direcly flow from the MLSA to the banks. The banks will be required to put in
                      place and maintain an ESMS to identify, assess, manage, and monitor the E&S risks and impacts of their portfolios,
                      commensurate to the risk profiles and types of financing and the overall risk aggregated at the portfolio level. Where
                      these banks can demonstrate of having an ESMS in place, they will be required to provide adequate documented
                      evidence of such an ESMS, indicating which elements (if any) will be enhanced or modified to meet ESS9
                      requirements. The Project will seek to enhance the current business process on the housing loans in view of the E&S
                      management and align the ESMS to the extent feasible to enable a streamlined procedure. WB will review at least the
                      first loans being disbursed by the banks to the end borrowers to ascertain ESMS functioning.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                             No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            In Part
                       The Borrower’s framework will be partially used for the Project. Specifically, for ESS 10 requirements, the Project will
                       rely on the existing GRM systems, with additional capacity strengthening and SEA/SH sensitization measures. These
                       systems include a unified platform for electronic inquiries (e-request.am), which enables citizens to submit electronic



                    Dec 10, 2024                                                                                                          Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)



                       requests to state bodies through a one-window format, well-publicized and capacitied 114 hotline operated by the
                       MLSA, as well as grievance mechanisms established at the local level through the USSs. For ESS 2, 3, 4, and 8, national
                       legislation will apply. While ACM/lead paints will be managed by WBG ESHS/EU guidelines, a screening form will be
                       developed to exclude activities that might be classified as substantial or high risk. For moderate and low risk activities,
                       ESMSs of participating FIs and MLSA will be reviewed, and gap-filling measures will be implemented to make sure that
                       their practices are aligned with ESF requirements.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 Yes
                       The Bank will partner with Asian Development Bank (ADB) to finance the Project. The Bank plans to use Investment
                       Project Financing (IPF) instrument, while the ADB intends to use Program-Based Lending (PBL) instrument, which is
                       equivalent of Bank’s Program for Results (PforR). The ADB Program will likely start earlier and will utilize Program
                       Safeguards System Assessment (PSSA). The Bank may decide to rely on ADB’s E&S requirements. In such case,
                       common action plan will be developed before Appraasal and referenced in the ESCP.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     ESCP will be prepared and disclosed before Appraisal. The ESCP will include provisions related to the following aspects
                     for E&S risk assessment and management of the Project:




Public Disclosure
                     -Maintaining institutional capacity/staff for addressing E&S aspects for Project implementation
                     -Establishment and/or strengthening of ESMS of the participating banks
                     -Developing and conducting E&S risk screening and management procedures for activities under SC 1.2
                     -Preparing of LMP as part of POM
                     -Consulting, finalizing, re-disclosing and implementing of SEP
                     -Maintenance of functioning GRM sensitized for SEA/SH grievances.

                     Draft SEP will be developed and disclosed prior to Appraisal. Draft SEP will be consulted, finalized and re-disclosed
                     before Project Effectiveness.

                     The POM will include LMP and Project GRM consistent with SEP and sensitized for SEA/SH grievances to be prepared
                     before Project Effectiveness.

                     ESMSs of the participating FIs will be assessed prior to Appraisal, and relevant gap-filling measures will be developed.
                     Each FI will be able to join the Project, subject to the fulfillment of the gap-filling measures.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank


                    Dec 10, 2024                                                                                                        Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Housing Response And Mortgage Market Enhancement (home) Project (P508310)



                      Task Team Leader:       Tafadzwa Irvine Dube             Title:          Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                               Specialist

                      Email:                  tdube1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Bujana Perolli                   Job Title:      Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  bperolli@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Tafadzwa Irvine Dube, Bujana Perolli

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                        Lusine Gevorgyan


Public Disclosure
                     ADM Social Specialist:                               Sonya Msryan




                    Dec 10, 2024                                                                                                    Page 9 of 9
