Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Housing response and Mortgage market Enhancement Project (P508310)



                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



            _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01301




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Housing response and Mortgage market Enhancement Project (P508310)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                                                  Housing response and
                                                         EUROPE AND CENTRAL
                          Armenia                                                   P508310                       Mortgage market
                                                         ASIA
                                                                                                                  Enhancement Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         10-Oct-2025                26-Nov-2025                   Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          Ministry of Finance,           National Mortgage
                          National Mortgage              Company, Ministry of
                          Company                        Labor and Social Affairs




_For Official Use Only_
                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve refugees' access to housing solutions and enable
                          deepening of the mortgage market.

                          Components
                          Housing Subsidies and Support for Institutional Development
                          Housing Finance Market Development
                          Project Management, Communications, Monitoring and Evaluation

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                         439.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                              439.00
                                       of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             250.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


                                                                                                                                            Page 1



                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                   The World Bank
                                   Housing response and Mortgage market Enhancement Project (P508310)



                            DETAILS
                              World Bank Group Financing
                                 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                   250.00
                              Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                 Commercial Financing                                                                                           189.00
                                    Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                           189.00




                            @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Moderate


                            Decision




_For Official Use Only_
                            The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                           Other Decision (as needed)

                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Country Context
                           1.      Armenia’s economy remains resilient despite moderating growth and rising fiscal pressures. Following
                           exceptional growth averaging 10.5 percent in 2022–2023, GDP expanded by 8 percent in 2024, driven by robust private
                           consumption and investment supported by rising real wages and credit growth. Inflation declined to 3.4 percent by mid-
                           2025, aided by effective monetary policy and exchange rate management. However, fiscal pressures, including increased
                           social spending, are expected to widen the fiscal deficit to 5.1 percent in 2025 and reverse the declining debt trend.
                           Meanwhile, the financial sector remains sound, with strong asset growth, high capitalization, and stable loan quality.
                           Sectoral and Institutional Context
                           2.      In late September 2023, after the renewed conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan, Armenia experienced the
                           influx of approximately 115,000 refugees,1 constituting about a 4 percent increase in the country's total population.
                           The Government of Armenia (GoA), in coordination with international partners, has been supporting the economic and
                           social integration of the refugees with different programs. One of the pressing challenges arising from this situation has
                           been the need for housing. In response, the state housing support program (HSP) was introduced in May 2024 to provide
                           the opportunity for eligible refugees to acquire permanent housing in Armenia. Nevertheless, the HSP entails substantial
                           fiscal costs and poses liquidity challenges for the banking sector, requiring coordinated policy and institutional support
                           to ensure effective implementation.

                          1 Data from the Migration and Citizenship Service of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Armenia




                                                                                                                                                     Page 2



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Housing response and Mortgage market Enhancement Project (P508310)


                          3.     Moreover, the housing market in Armenia remains constrained by structural inefficiencies, including
                          accessibility issues, limited mortgage availability, and the absence of a comprehensive national housing policy. While
                          there is no universal solution for addressing all the complex challenges across the housing sector, a key step would be
                          moving from ad-hoc support to an integrated national system of targeted, coordinated housing programs. With a clear
                          housing strategy, this approach could improve the housing market and ensure adequate options for all, especially
                          vulnerable groups who require tailored solutions.

                          C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

                           4.     The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve refugees’ access to housing solutions and
                           enable deepening of the housing and mortgage market.
                          Key Results
                           5.       The project will measure the progress towards the PDO through the following indicators:
                                    •     Beneficiary households provided with down payments and mortgage subsidies under the project (Number)
                                    •     Beneficiaries provided with cash transfers for rental assistance under the project (Number), of which
                                          female (%)




_For Official Use Only_
                                    •     Private capital mobilized in USD millions (Amount (USD))
                          D. Project Description

                           6.   The proposed Word Bank project is designed as an Investment Project Financing with Performance-Based
                           Conditions (IPF-PBC) and comprises three components:

                                •       Component 1: Housing Subsidies and Support for Institutional Development (US$238 million) focuses on
                                        providing housing solutions to eligible beneficiaries. Direct cash transfers will be provided to cover rent, utilities,
                                        and other living costs. Downpayment and mortgage subsidies will be provided to eligible households for the
                                        acquisition of housing solutions using commercial banks. The component will also seek to enhance the
                                        institutional capacities of the GoA and its relevant agencies for designing, implementing, and managing future
                                        national housing sector policy and programs.

                                •       Component 2: Housing Finance Market Development (US$10 million) provides liquidity to NMC to enhance its
                                        ability to refinance affordable mortgages under the HSP. This component is designed to catalyze private sector
                                        participation, helping expand access to affordable housing finance more broadly.

                                •       Component 3: Project Management, Communications, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2 million) will finance
                                        project management costs, communications and outreach activities, institutional strengthening and capacity
                                        building of the MLSA, and monitoring and evaluation activities.

                          7. The World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) are aligning efforts through parallel financing. The World
                             Bank’s US$250 million IPF-PBC loan will be complemented by the ADB’s US$250 million Transformative Housing
                             Reforms for Improved Vitality and Empowerment (THRIVE) results-based loan. Both institutions will pursue a
                             common development objective and align on core areas of support for the GoA.

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate


                                                                                                                                                          Page 3



                                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Housing response and Mortgage market Enhancement Project (P508310)


                           Legal Operational Policies                                                         Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                        No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                  No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



                            8. The Project’s overall environmental and social (E&S) risk is rated moderate. Environmental risks primarily stem
                            from small-scale construction and potential renovation activities, including occupational health and safety concerns
                            related to older buildings, potential exposure to hazardous materials, localized dust and noise, and waste generation.
                            Social risks include potential gaps in outreach and engagement, particularly affecting vulnerable groups. Mitigation
                            measures include E&S risk screening and exclusion procedures, along with the development and adoption of an ESMS
                            within the MLSA, tailored to the level of risks and impacts, incorporating relevant E&S procedures, including
                            mechanisms for monitoring and reporting. The MLSA and NMC will work with participating banks to align and
                            strengthen their ESMSs. Social risk management will include adaptation of codes of conduct, feedback and grievance
                            redress mechanisms, targeted stakeholder engagement and communication plans, all aligned with the Environmental




_For Official Use Only_
                            and Social Standards (ESSs) under the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).

                            E. Implementation
                            Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                            9. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MLSA) is the lead government agency responsible for coordinating and
                            evaluating the result indicators for this operation. MLSA will share this role with the National Mortgage Company
                            (NMC), particularly on activities related to Component 2 of the project. Moreover, a Steering Committee, chaired by
                            the Deputy Prime Minister and comprising relevant ministries and agencies involved in the implementation of the HSP
                            and housing sector reforms, will be established to oversee implementation of the project.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                            Tafadzwa Irvine Dube
                            Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                            Patricia Caraballo
                            Senior Financial Sector Economist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient




                                                                                                                                              Page 4



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Housing response and Mortgage market Enhancement Project (P508310)


                           Ministry of Finance

                           National Mortgage Company

                          Implementing Agencies
                           National Mortgage Company

                           Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




_For Official Use Only_
                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Tafadzwa Irvine Dube, Patricia Caraballo

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Peter D. Ellis                             23-Sep-2025

                          Country Director:                       Rolande Simone Pryce                       10-Oct-2025




                                                                                                                                   Page 5



                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
