Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Stakeholder Engagement Plan




                               Housing Response and Mortgage Market Enhancement (HOME) Project
                                                             (P508310)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                               Draft




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                         September 2025




                                   Prepared by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs of the Republic of Armenia
                                Complemented by inputs from the National Mortgage Company Refinancing Credit
                                                                                                 Organization CJSC
Contents



List of Acronyms ............................................................................................................................................ 3
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 5
1. Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 7
    1.1 Project context .................................................................................................................................... 7
    1.2 Project Description ............................................................................................................................. 7
    1.4 Purpose of the SEP.............................................................................................................................. 9
2. Objective of SEP and Methodology......................................................................................................... 10
    2.1 SEP Objectives and Principles ........................................................................................................... 10
    2.2 Key Definitions .................................................................................................................................. 11
3. Stakeholder Identification, Analysis and Engagement Methods............................................................. 12
    3.1 Stakeholder Identification and Analysis............................................................................................ 12
        3.1.1 Affected Parties and Other Interested Parties........................................................................... 12
        3.1.2. Disadvantaged/vulnerable Individuals or Groups .................................................................... 12
    3.2 Stakeholder Engagement Program ................................................................................................... 13
        3.2.1 Summary of Stakeholder Engagement done During Project Preparation ................................. 13
        3.2.2 Stakeholder Engagement Methods and Approach ................................................................... 14
        3.2.3 Information Disclosure .............................................................................................................. 20
4. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement Activities ......................... 22
    4.1 Management Functions and Responsibilities ................................................................................... 22
    4.2 Resources .......................................................................................................................................... 23
5. Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism ........................................................................................ 26
    5.1 Government Systems on Grievance Resolution................................................................................ 26
    5.1. Key Elements of FGRM under the Project ....................................................................................... 28
6. Monitoring and Reporting....................................................................................................................... 30
    6.1. Monitoring of SEP ............................................................................................................................ 30
    6.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups ............................................................................................. 30
Annex 1: Key Stakeholder Groups ............................................................................................................... 32
Annex 2. Roles and Responsibilities of the Key Actors involved in SE Implementation .............................. 34
Annex 3. Sample Grievance Log Template .................................................................................................. 35
Annex 4. Sample Consultation Record Template ........................................................................................ 36
List of Acronyms
ADB                Asian Development Bank
AFD                Agence Française de Développement
CA                 Commission on Appeals
CBA                Central Bank of Armenia
CSO                Civil Society Organization
COP                Communication and Outreach Plan
CoUD               Committee of Urban Development
DPM                Deputy Prime Minister
e-request.am       Unified government e-request platform
ESCP               Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF                Environmental and Social Framework
ESS                Environmental and Social Standard
FGRM               Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
                   Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
GIZ
                   Zusammenarbeit
GoA                Government of Armenia
GRS                Grievance Redress Service (WB)
ISC                Inter-ministerial Steering Committee
HH                 Household
HPC                Housing Purchase Certificate
HSP                Housing Support Program
                   Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (German
KfW
                   Development Bank)
LOC                Line of Credit
MCS                Migration and Citizenship Service
M&E                Monitoring and Evaluation
MLSA               Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
MoF                Ministry of Finance
NMC                National Mortgage Company
NGO                Non-Governmental Organization
NSS                National Security Service
PBL                Program-Based Lending
PFI                Participating Financial Institution
PIT                Project Implementation Team
PSSA               Program Safeguards System Assessment
SAP                Social Assistance Program
SE                 Stakeholder Engagement
SEP                Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                   Stakeholder Engagement and Communications
SECS
                   Specialist
UNDP     United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF   United Nations Children’s Fund
UNHCR    United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
USS      Unified Social Services
WB       World Bank
Executive Summary


Context: Armenia faces pressing challenges in providing adequate and affordable housing, with the influx
of refugees adding further strain to an already limited housing market and underdeveloped mortgage
sector. The Housing Response and Mortgage Market Enhancement (HOME) Project seeks to address these
challenges by improving access to housing for refugee households, while also strengthening the long-term
sustainability of the mortgage finance market.
Introduction to HOME Project: The HOME Project, implemented by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
(MLSA) with support from the World Bank (WB) and other partners, provides a combination of immediate
assistance and institutional capacity-building. It supports upfront payments and mortgage installments for
eligible households, cash support to cover rent and utilities, and liquidity to the National Mortgage
Company (NMC) to ensure the continued availability of affordable housing finance. The HOME project is
comprised of three components as follows: (i) Housing subsidies and support for institutional
development, (ii) Housing finance market development, and (iii) Project management, monitoring, and
evaluation.
Purpose and Objectives of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): This SEP has been prepared in line
with the WB Environmental and Social Standard 10 (ESS10) to guide meaningful, inclusive, and transparent
engagement with stakeholders throughout the Project cycle. Its objectives are to ensure that information
on the Project is accessible, that stakeholder feedback is considered in decision-making, and that effective
feedback and grievance redress mechanism (FGRM) is in place.
Stakeholder Identification, Analysis and Engagement Methods: This SEP identifies refugee households,
host communities, government institutions, financial intermediaries, CSOs, and development partners as
key stakeholders. Beneficiaries will be engaged primarily through the Unified Social Services (USS)
network, CSOs, and mass/digital media, with special measures to reach vulnerable groups such as female-
headed households, persons with disabilities, elderly refugees, and those in rural areas. Engagement will
be continuous, combining consultations, outreach campaigns, and perception surveys.
The SEP outlines methods for both stakeholder engagement and beneficiary outreach and communication.
Beneficiary-facing activities include outreach through USS offices and CSOs, mass media and digital
campaigns, targeted support for vulnerable groups, and periodic perception surveys. Engagement with
other stakeholders will involve interagency coordination meetings, collaboration with partner banks and
NMC, roundtables with CSOs and development partners, and structured media engagement.
Information disclosure: Information on the Government Housing Support Program (HSP) is already
available on the MLSA website, including eligibility criteria and application procedures, complemented by
video explainers to guide beneficiaries. Throughout implementation, MLSA will continue to disclose key
project documents, updates, and guidance materials through digital, print, media, and community-level
channels, ensuring tailored formats for women-headed households, persons with disabilities, elderly
beneficiaries, and refugees in rural areas.
Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanisms: For Component 1, the Project will build on the MLSA’s
existing 114 hotline and USS offices to ensure accessible grievance channels, with the newly established
Interagency Commission on Appeals serving as an additional mechanism for rejected applicants. Grievance
handling will follow the Law on Freedom of Information (2003), ensuring fairness, transparency, and
accountability, while sensitive cases such as SEA/SH will be managed under survivor-centered protocols.
For Component 2, NMC will rely on its internal grievance redress mechanism (GRM) as outlined in the
organizations’ Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) manual1.
Management resources and responsibilities for SEP implementation: The MLSA is responsible for
implementing this SEP related to Component 1 and NMC will be responsible for stakeholder engagement
(SE) activities under Component 2. MLSA will establish a project Implementing team (PIT) comprised of
civil servants and non-civil servants assigned from within the MLSA. The Project Coordinator is responsible
for managing and overseeing the implementation of stakeholder engagement activities, monitoring, and
reporting, as well as ensuring the quality of the SEP activities delegated to respective departments of the
MLSA. For SEP implementation, MLSA will hire or assign a Stakeholder Engagement and Communications
Specialist (SECS). As for Component 2, NMC will use in-house capacities to implement SE activities.
Monitoring and Reporting on the SEP: Monitoring and reporting will be carried out through biannual
progress reports, mid-term and end-of-project perception surveys, and regular updates to stakeholders.
Feedback will be incorporated into adaptive engagement strategies, ensuring that the SEP remains
responsive to community needs and program realities.
Final Notes: This SEP will be disclosed and open to feedback and consultation. Feedback from stakeholders
will be incorporated in the final version of SEP.
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project supported by the
World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance
Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to
address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their
complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection
Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with
its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and
borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be
submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank
Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS.
For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit
https://accountability.worldbank.org.




1 In the SEP, Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism (FGRM) will be used to refer to Project grievance mechanism

established and operated by MLSA while Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be used to refer to internal grievance
mechanism of the NMC
1. Introduction
1.1 Project context
Housing is one of the most pressing challenges in Armenia, with the recent influx of refugees adding
further strain to an already limited housing supply, while also putting pressure on labor markets and social
services. The country’s housing stock is largely aging and privately owned, with low vacant rates and
limited availability outside Yerevan. An estimated 20,000 households remain without long-term housing,
including families affected by the 1988 Spitak earthquake and successive refugee waves, while many
others live in overcrowded or inadequate conditions. Existing housing programs are fragmented, narrowly
targeted, and often costly, limiting both their reach and long-term impact.
To address these challenges, the Government of Armenia (GoA), with support from the WB and other
development partners, is implementing the Housing Response and Mortgage Market Enhancement
(HOME) Project. The Project provides immediate and medium-term support to refugee and vulnerable
households through cash assistance, housing solutions, and improved access to financial services.
1.2 Project Description
Project Development Objective is to improve access of refugee families to adequate long-term housing
solutions and improve sustainability of the housing and mortgage market.
The HOME project is comprised of three components as follows: (i) Housing subsidies and support for
institutional development, (ii) Housing finance market development, and (iii) Project management,
monitoring, and evaluation.
Component 1: Housing Subsidies and Support for Institutional Development
This component will focus on the provision of short- and long-term housing solutions to eligible refugees.
Short-term housing (rental) support will be provided in the form of direct cash transfers to about 103,000
eligible refugees to cover rent, utilities, and other living costs. Subsidies will be provided to eligible refugee
households for the acquisition of adequate long-term housing solutions using commercial banks. The
component will also seek to enhance the institutional capacities for designing, establishing, implementing,
and managing future national housing sector policy and programs.
Subcomponent 1.1: Temporary rental subsidies through cash assistance
 This subcomponent will finance the provision of cash assistance to eligible refugees supported by the
 ongoing refugee SAP. In accordance with Government Decree N 1833-L and subsequent amendments,
 eligible beneficiaries receive up to AMD 50,000 (about US$ 125) per person per month for rent subsidies
 and utilities, as well as other household-related expenses and consumption needs. The sub-component
 will support already incurred expenditures in 2025 under the ongoing refugee SAP. The rental subsidy
 assistance plays a critical role in enabling the freedom of mobility of refugee households to locate and
 settle in suitable areas for jobs and for acquiring long-term housing financed under sub-component 1.2.


Subcomponent 1.2: Subsidies for the acquisition of Long-term housing solutions
 This subcomponent will finance direct subsidies to eligible refugee households for the acquisition of
 housing solutions through participating financial institutions. In accordance with Government Decree N
 710-L, this subcomponent will support the provision of: (a) up-front downpayment assistance of up to 30
 percent of the housing purchase price, and (b) assistance for full monthly mortgage payments for up to
    the first five years of 10-year mortgage loans. The subcomponent will support eligible households to: (a)
    acquire a new or existing individual residential house or apartment; (b) acquire the right to purchase an
    apartment in a building under construction; and (c) construct an individual residential house. The
    subcomponent will also provide subsidy assistance for the repayment of an existing mortgage loan for
    refugee households who already had property in Armenia. As part of the mortgage origination process,
    participating banks will assess the technical condition of housing units, their suitability for occupation,
    and will screen for seismic risks. Additionally, all new construction of apartments and individual
    residential homes will be performed by licensed contractors, will be screened for exposure to seismic and
    climate-related risks,2 and will adhere to relevant energy efficiency norms.
Subcomponent 1.3: Institutional Development in Housing
The subcomponent will finance procurement of goods, consulting, and non-consulting services for
technical assistance, advisory, and capacity building to support institutional strengthening and policy
reforms in the housing sector as well as improvements to the refugee HSP’s management information
system managed by the MLSA.
Component 2: Housing Finance Market Development

This component aims to support the National Mortgage Company (NMC) operations by enhancing
long-term liquidity for mortgage-originating financial institutions. A line of credit (LOC) of US$ 10
million to NMC seeks to increase access to mortgage loans by providing refinancing for
participating financial institutions (PFIs) i.e., commercial banks with signed agreements with the
GoA to provide mortgage loans under the refugee HSP.
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation

This component will finance the procurement of consulting and non-consulting services, goods,
training, and overall operating costs to support the implementing entity in project management,
communications, and implementation activities, including for, but not limited to, monitoring and
evaluation, reporting, audits, procurement, financial management, environmental and social
management, feedback and grievance redress mechanism, citizen engagement activities
including beneficiary surveys, and project communication outreach services. The component will
also finance the operating costs for maintaining a fully staffed and equipped project implementing
team housed within the MLSA.

1.3 Implementing Agency
The Project will have two implementing agencies: MLSA will be in charge of implementing Component 1
and Component 3 activities3 and NMC will be in charge of implementing Component 2. The PIT under
MLSA will utilize project management, monitoring and evaluation support provided under Component 3
for its activities.




2
 For single family homes, the CoUD makes freely available standardized template designs that are code compliant and can be customized
for specific site conditions by a licensed technical design firm and subsequently approved by an independent expert review.
3
  The MLSA is responsible for the implementation of the both the Government Decree N 1763-L, December
2023 governing the implementation of the cash assistance program and the State Assistance Program for Housing
for Displaced Families (N 710-L, 16 May 2024) and its subsequent regulation (N 989-L, 14 June 2024).
An inter-ministerial steering committee (ISC) will be established by Decision of the Deputy Prime Minister
(DPM) prior to loan effectiveness. The ISC will be chaired by the DPM. It will comprise relevant ministries
and agencies that are directly involved, or with delegated responsibilities, in the implementation of the
refugee HSP and housing sector activities overall including the Ministry of Finance (MoF), MLSA, Central
Bank of Armenia (CBA), NMC, and Committee of Urban Development (CoUD), among others. The ISC’s
main purpose will be to provide strategic oversight over project implementation, provide high-level
decision-making and guidance, and facilitate inter-ministerial and interagency cooperation considering the
complex nature of the refugee HSP and housing sector in general. The SC will also be expected to serve as
the platform for obtaining decisions on setting housing and finance policy priorities, and providing overall
guidance to the MLSA and other stakeholders on the future development of appropriate institutional
arrangements for the formulation and administration of future national housing sector policy.
The MLSA will establish a PIT by Ministerial Decree prior to loan effectiveness. The PIT will be responsible
for the implementation of Components 1 and 3 of the Project. The PIT will be comprised of civil servants
and non-civil servants assigned from within the MLSA. The MLSA staff will undertake project activities
alongside their regular responsibilities, including financial management, procurement, and environmental
and social risk management. The coordinator of the Project, who will serve as the focal point for activities
during implementation, will be a high-level staff member of the MLSA, and will be part of the PIT. The PIT
will be maintained with technical specialists with adequate capacity in project management, FM,
procurement, and E&S risk management. The capacities of the PIT will be supplemented with additional
technical expertise (e.g., in housing sector policy) through the competitive hiring of consultants, as
needed. Finally, the PIT will coordinate and work closely with relevant staff of the USS in charge of
processing and channeling the refugee HSP funds.

The NMC will assign a dedicated team in support of Component 2 activities prior to loan effectiveness.
The team will comprise of assigned NMC senior staff with appropriate technical expertise in financial
management, environmental and social risk management, and monitoring and evaluation. The team will
be responsible for implementing Component 2 project activities and ensuring effective coordination with
the PIT at MLSA in support of overall project supervision, reporting and evaluation activities. The team will
also participate in implementation support missions to be held every six months.
1.4 Purpose of the SEP
The HOME Project is being prepared under the WB’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF). Per ESS10
on Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure, the implementing agencies should provide
stakeholders with timely, relevant, understandable, and accessible information, and consult with them in
a culturally appropriate manner, which is free of manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination, or
intimidation.

This SEP prepared under the Project will be consulted on and disclosed. This SEP will be periodically
reviewed, updated and improved to ensure that the information presented herein is consistent and is the
most recent, as well as to ensure that the identified methods of stakeholder engagement are efficient and
appropriate to the existing situation and context. The SEP will be updated to reflect on any major changes
to the project-related activities and to its schedule, if any.
2. Objective of SEP and Methodology


2.1 SEP Objectives and Principles
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public
information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP outlines the ways in
which the project team will communicate with stakeholders and includes a mechanism by which people
can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project activities.

SEP serves the following objectives:


    (i)         identify and analyze project stakeholders, including disadvantaged and vulnerable groups;
    (ii)        design inclusive engagement processes that allow their views to be considered in project
                decision-making;
    (iii)       (iii) ensure timely and accessible disclosure of project information;
    (iv)        (iv) define clear roles and responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities;
                (v) establish a robust FGRM; and
    (v)         (vi) monitor, evaluate, and report on the effectiveness of engagement throughout the project
                cycle.

To meet best practice approaches, the project will apply the following principles for stakeholder
engagement:

    ▪       Openness and life-cycle approach: Public consultations for the Project will be arranged during the
            whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference,
            coercion, or intimidation.
    ▪       Informed participation and feedback: Information will be provided to and widely distributed
            among all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for communicating
            stakeholder feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns.
    ▪       Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
            communications and build effective relationships. The participation process for the projects is
            inclusive. All stakeholders always are encouraged to be involved in the consultation process. Equal
            access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is the key
            principle underlying the selection of engagement methods. Special attention is given to vulnerable
            groups that may be at risk of being left out of project benefits, particularly women, the elderly,
            persons with disabilities, low income HHs.
    ▪       Closing the Loop - Providing Feedback to Stakeholders: As the Project will use the time and
            knowledge of its stakeholders, providing meaningful feedback to stakeholders on how their
            participation and feedback contributed to Project evolvement is crucial. The provision of feedback
            will help the stakeholders to understand how they influenced the Project decisions and outputs
            and will encourage their future participation in its activities. The record of all questions and
            feedback provided will be properly maintained.
2.2 Key Definitions
Project stakeholders are defined as individuals, formal or informal groups and organizations, governmental
entities whose interests or rights will be affected, directly or indirectly, by the HOME project, both
positively and negatively, and/or who may have an interest in Project implementation and who have the
potential to influence the Project outcomes in any way.
For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project can be
divided into the following core categories:

      ▪   Affected Parties: Persons, groups, and other entities within the Project Area of Influence (PAI)
          that are directly influenced (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified
          as most susceptible to change associated with the project, and who need to be closely engaged
          in identifying impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-making on mitigation and
          management measures.
      ▪   Other Interested Parties: Individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct impacts
          from the Project but who consider or perceive their interests as being affected by the project
          and/or who could affect the project and the process of its implementation in some way.
      ▪   Vulnerable Groups: Persons or groups who may be disproportionately impacted or further
          disadvantaged by the project(s) compared with any other groups due to their vulnerable status,
          and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure their equal representation in the
          consultation and decision-making process associated with the project.
3. Stakeholder Identification, Analysis and Engagement Methods


3.1 Stakeholder Identification and Analysis
The Project engages multiple stakeholders from government institutions, the private sector, civil society,
international development partners, and the public. As presented in the above section, stakeholders are
grouped into three categories: affected parties, other interested parties, and disadvantaged/vulnerable
groups (see Table 1).


3.1.1 Affected Parties and Other Interested Parties

Affected Parties are those directly impacted by the Project and actively involved in its implementation.
This group includes the GoA, the MLSA and its Unified Social Services (USS), refugee households eligible
for cash assistance and/or HSP, current beneficiaries of such assistance, partner banks, the NMC, and the
ADB. The direct beneficiaries of the Project are the estimated 115,000 refugees who were displaced after
2020 and in September 2023, whose information was included in the official list of residents as of
September 19, 2023. The estimated number of households is about 30,000 (using an average family size
of 3.8), out of which approximately 13,000 – 15,000 households are estimated to be eligible for the refugee
state housing support program. About 103,000 refugees have benefitted from temporary cash assistance.
The Government of Armenia and its agencies directly or indirectly involved in housing will also benefit
from the institutional development activities of the proposed project. Other Interested Parties are
individuals, groups, or entities who may not be directly affected but whose interests could be influenced
by the Project, or who may influence its implementation. These include other government agencies
engaged in policy or oversight roles, civil society organizations (CSOs) active in refugee response,
international organizations and development partners, the media, and the wider public.


3.1.2. Disadvantaged/vulnerable Individuals or Groups
The existing government cash assistance and housing programs, including HSP targeting refugees,
primarily support housing ownership solutions for vulnerable groups. Currently cash assistance targets
children under 18 years of age or people over 18 years of age receiving compulsory education, people 63
years of age and older, those families who have lost their breadwinner, or people with certain disabilities.
The current cycle of the refugee Social Assistance Program (SAP) support is expected to end by December
2025, after which beneficiaries who qualify for needs-based assistance, such as the poor and vulnerable,
will be transitioned to the relevant national social income-based assistance programs. HSP targets refugee
households in need of housing, who do not own real estate in Armenia, have not received benefits under
the 2020 housing program (N 169-L), and hold Armenian citizenship.
Under HOME Project, disadvantaged and vulnerable groups are those who may face barriers to
participation and therefore require special support or additional engagement channels to ensure their
voices are heard and their needs addressed. This category includes, among others, low-income
households, single-headed households (especially female-headed), persons with disabilities or chronic
illness, elderly refugees without support networks, and refugees living in remote or rural areas with limited
access to information and services.
Table 1. Key Stakeholder Groups
 Stakeholder Group              Interest & Description
 Affected parties
 GoA, MLSA & Unified Social     Responsible for cash assistance, government HSP and project design and
 Services USS                   implementation. MLSA oversees policy, while USS (49 local offices) manages
                                beneficiary registration, eligibility and disbursement.
 Refugee Households             Primary beneficiaries of monthly cash assistance to cover rent, utilities, and
                                basic consumption and government HSP.
 Partner Banks & NMC            Provide financial products and services linked to housing programs. NMC
                                manages mortgage financing.
 ADB                            Co-financier of the Project through Program-Based Lending (PBL). Supports
                                implementation and safeguards alignment alongside the WB.
 Interested parties
 Other Government Agencies      Contribute through policy alignment, data provision, and oversight. Includes
                                ministries of Finance, Territorial Administration and Infrastructure, Migration
                                and Citizenship Services (MCS) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and Urban
                                Development Committee.
 Civil Society &                Complement government support by offering housing repair, livelihoods, social
 Humanitarian/Diaspora          services, and advocacy. Includes NGOs (e.g., UNHCR, Caritas, AGBU, Red Cross).
 Organizations
 Media                          Disseminates program information and shapes public awareness on eligibility,
                                processes, and outcomes.
 International Organizations    Provide funding, technical support, and complementary refugee response
                                initiatives. Includes UNDP, UNICEF, UNHCR, GIZ, KfW, and others, as well as the
                                Agence Française de Développement (AFD), that is preparing to provide
                                additional credit financing to NMC in support of the refugee housing program.
 Local Governments & Host       Facilitate local implementation and act as interface with refugees and host
 Communities                    households at municipal level.
 Construction & Valuation       Deliver technical services such as housing assessments, valuation, and
 Companies                      renovations linked to housing support measures.
 Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups
 Disadvantaged & Vulnerable     At risk of exclusion and requiring tailored engagement: low-income
 Groups                         households, persons with disabilities/elderly, single-headed households (esp.
                                female-headed), those with limited financial literacy, and refugees in remote
                                areas.


A more detailed stakeholder analysis, including specific roles and characteristics of each group, is provided
in Annex 1.
3.2 Stakeholder Engagement Program

3.2.1 Summary of Stakeholder Engagement done During Project Preparation
During project preparation, consultations were carried out with a range of stakeholders to inform the
design of the HSP and to ensure that both institutional perspectives and beneficiary needs were reflected
in the Project design. MLSA and the WB conducted meetings with the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), Armenian General Benevolent Union (AGBU), Ameria Management Advisory, NGO
Forum Armenia on Social Integration, as well as discussions with commercial banks on their participation
in the refugee HSP.. Consultations have included alignment on targeting, assistance modalities, and
protection considerations. Feedback highlighted gaps in refugee documentation, concerns about exclusion
of rural households, and the need for clear communication on eligibility. The World Bank also coordinated
with the AFD on the potential for additional external financing to NMC in support of the refugee housing
program.
In April-May 2025, A large-scale household survey was implemented among refugees and host
communities by WB, providing an opportunity to systematically capture their views on housing, tenure
security, access to services, and social cohesion. In parallel, focus group discussions and in-depth
interviews were organized in selected communities including diverse stakeholders, including refugees,
host community members, local government representatives, and civil society actors. The results of this
engagement directly informed the housing project’s design, shaping interventions to be more responsive
to refugee needs and priorities. Data revealed limited awareness of the HSP and difficulties in application
processes
Initial public information on the HSP has been also shared through USS offices. Several CSOs (e.g., Mission
Armenia, Armenian Red Cross) have played a role in relaying information to refugees, especially those in
shelters or outside Yerevan. Some NGOs have also collected feedback on barriers to access, such as lack
of documentation or unclear eligibility rules.
3.2.2 Stakeholder Engagement Methods and Approach

Two general vectors of stakeholder engagement under the project will be carried out as follows:
     ▪    Consultations with stakeholders and feedback collection throughout the entire project cycle
     ▪    Awareness-raising activities on the HSP

Communication and Outreach of HSP: The Government Housing Program targets refugees with housing
needs, with government estimates indicating between 13,000–15,000 households requiring assistance.
General eligibility criteria include: (i) not owning real estate in Armenia, (ii) not having received benefits
under the 2020 housing program (N 169-L), (iii) not having two or more working-age family members
residing abroad, and (iv) holding Armenian citizenship.

A survey of 1,062 refugee households conducted in April–May 2025 found that while just over half of
refugees report a functional understanding of the HSP, nearly half remain underinformed or unaware,
limiting their ability to benefit from available support. Around 20% had little or no knowledge of the
program, and 28% were only superficially informed. Awareness levels vary by household type and socio-
demographic characteristics: female-headed households, older individuals (55+), those with lower
education, and refugees living in rural areas are significantly less familiar with the program compared to
male-headed, middle-aged, more educated, and urban-based households. These gaps highlight the need
for targeted outreach to ensure equitable access and understanding across all refugee groups.

Engagement with beneficiaries will combine multiple channels to ensure inclusive, accessible, and two-
way communication (Table 2):

    ▪    Outreach through USS offices and CSOs: Outreach will be carried out through the 49 branches of
         the Unified Social Services (USS) network via face-to-face consultations, awareness raising
         sessions and information boards. Printed materials (posters, flyers, leaflets) will be distributed in
         refugee-populated communities through USS offices, municipalities, and CSOs.
    ▪    Targeted outreach to vulnerable groups: CSOs, social workers, and community volunteers will
         provide direct contact with vulnerable and harder-to-reach groups, such as women-headed
         households, the elderly, and rural residents.
    ▪    Mass media campaigns: TV, radio, and social media will be used to expand the program’s reach
         and visibility.
    ▪    Digital engagement: Regular updates will be provided on MLSA’s website and dedicated social
         media pages, using accessible formats such as infographics and video explainers. Some
         information is already available on the MLSA website and will be further expanded.
    ▪    Information sessions: USS offices and partner CSOs will host regular sessions where applicants
         can ask questions and receive tailored guidance.
    ▪    Grievance redress and appeals: Beneficiaries will be able to submit grievances or appeals through
         the Government’s 114 hotline, USS offices, and governmental e-request portal, as well as other
         grievance submission channels specified in Chapter 5 of this SEP.

To complement these ongoing engagement methods, two perception surveys will be carried out among
beneficiaries:

    ▪    Mid-project perception survey: Conducted midway through implementation to assess awareness
         of eligibility and procedures, satisfaction with transparency and fairness, adequacy of
         communication channels, and accessibility of grievance redress. Findings will inform adjustments
         in outreach and grievance handling during implementation.
    ▪    End-of-project perception survey: Conducted at completion to evaluate overall satisfaction with
         housing support, perceptions of fairness and timeliness, and effectiveness of engagement and
         communication activities. The results will generate lessons for strengthening future housing and
         social protection programs.

MLSA, through its 49 USS offices, will lead communication and outreach efforts. Within the first three
months of project implementation, MLSA will prepare a Communication and Outreach Plan (COP) that
will ensure:
     ▪ 114 hotline operators are trained to respond effectively to refugee housing queries.
     ▪ Awareness campaigns are implemented via TV, radio and social media.
     ▪ Dedicated outreach to vulnerable groups (female-headed households, elderly, persons with
        disabilities, rural communities, etc.) through partnerships with CSOs and training of USS of social
        workers.
     ▪ Regular monitoring of outreach effectiveness, with adjustments informed by survey findings,
        consultations, and feedback through the FGRM.

Table 2. Beneficiary engagement methods
                                                                               Frequency /
        Engagement Method                        Target Group(s)                             Responsible Party
                                                                                  Timing
 Face-to-face         consultations,    Refugee households, applicants        Continuous     MLSA, USS offices
 individual outreach, info boards
 at USS offices
 Printed     outreach       materials   Refugee households in urban & rural   Annual / as    MLSA PR Dept. /
 (posters, flyers, leaflets)            areas                                 updated        USS / CSOs
 Targeted outreach by CSOs, social      Vulnerable groups (women-headed       Continuous     CSOs / Social
 workers, volunteers                    HHs,      elderly,    persons with                   workers / USS
                                        disabilities, rural HHs)
 Mass media campaigns (TV,           General      public,     refugee    Semi-annual /     MLSA PR Dept. /
 radio, social media)                communities                         as needed         PIT
 Digital engagement (website,        Tech-connected refugees, younger    Continuous        MLSA PR Dept.
 social       media       updates,   groups
 infographics, videos)
 Information sessions at USS         Applicants, community members       Quarterly or as   USS     /     Local
 offices & municipalities                                                needed            authorities
 FGRM & appeal mechanisms            All beneficiaries and applicants    Continuous        MLSA, USS
 (hotline 114, USS reporting
 channels)
 Mid-project perception survey       Beneficiaries of housing program    Year 2            Independent
                                                                                           consultant / MLSA
 End-of-project perception survey    Beneficiaries of housing program    Final year        Independent
                                                                                           consultant / MLSA




Engagement with Host Communities: While the Project primarily targets newly arrived refugees, it is
important to recognize that housing shortages and substandard living conditions are also critical issues for
host communities. Approximately 20,000 households in Armenia remain in temporary or inadequate
housing, many of whom are long-standing vulnerable groups, including families displaced by the 1988
Spitak earthquake, earlier refugee flows from Azerbaijan, Syria, Lebanon, and those affected by the 2020
war.

At the same time, existing housing programs in Armenia (about 14 in total) primarily support ownership
solutions for specific groups. Eligibility criteria are defined by law and often target professional categories
(e.g., sportsmen, artists, civil servants) or specific vulnerable groups (families with children, persons with
disabilities, conflict-displaced households). However, these programs are heavily concentrated in Yerevan,
omit large segments of underhoused populations (such as the elderly and people in need), and are limited
in scale due to high subsidy costs and ad-hoc funding availability.

As a result, host communities facing long-standing housing shortages may feel excluded or disadvantaged
compared to newly arrived refugee households. To address this risk and maintain social cohesion, the SEP
will:

    ▪   Engage host communities in consultations to ensure their concerns about fairness, inclusion, and
        access to housing support are heard and considered.
    ▪   Communicate transparently about the scope and limitations of the Project, clarifying eligibility
        and highlighting that refugee-targeted measures are complementary to, not replacements for,
        national housing programs.
    ▪   Strengthen awareness of existing government housing support schemes for vulnerable host
        groups, while acknowledging their limitations and the need for more inclusive approaches.
    ▪   Provide feedback mechanisms (via the FGRM) that host communities can use to voice grievances
        or propose improvements to ensure equitable access to information and services.
    ▪   Promote dialogue on how lessons learned from the Project can inform the Government’s efforts
        to move from fragmented, ad-hoc housing schemes toward a more comprehensive, harmonized
        Housing Strategy.
Project SE activities with other stakeholders: Beyond beneficiary engagement, the Project will maintain
continuous dialogue and coordination with institutional stakeholders, civil society, and development
partners to ensure effective program implementation, alignment of activities, and transparency.
Engagement will include:
   ▪   Interagency coordination meetings: Regular consultations with the MoF, Urban Development
       Committee, MCS, Cadastre Committee, and other relevant agencies to harmonize housing support
       measures and address policy and technical gaps.
   ▪   Financial sector engagement: Ongoing collaboration with the NMC and participating banks to
       align program eligibility, streamline application procedures, and ensure fair treatment of
       applicants. These meetings will also serve to monitor bank-level grievance handling and appeals
       procedures.
   ▪   CSO and humanitarian partner coordination: Periodic roundtables with NGOs, diaspora
       organizations, and international agencies (e.g., UNHCR, UNICEF, GIZ, KfW) to avoid duplication,
       exchange lessons, and strengthen outreach to vulnerable groups.
   ▪   Media engagement: Proactive engagement with national and local media outlets to ensure
       accurate reporting on eligibility, procedures, and program achievements, including press briefings
       and provision of media kits.
   ▪   Local government collaboration: Municipalities and community councils will be engaged through
       working meetings to facilitate local outreach and information dissemination.
   ▪   Knowledge-sharing with development partners: Regular technical meetings with the WB, ADB,
       and other partners to share progress, safeguard monitoring findings, and lessons learned for
       future housing programs.
Table 3. Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                            Estimated            Topic of Consultation /
    Project Stage                                                                      Method Used                 Target Stakeholders          Responsibilities
                        Date/Time Period                Message
 Project Preparation    Prior          to   Project objectives, eligibility     National       consultation      GoA (MLSA, MoF, Urban         MLSA / PIT, WB
                        effectiveness       criteria for HSP, roles of          meetings,      inter-agency      Development                   team
                                            MLSA/USS, scope of refugee          coordination    workshops,       Committee,     Cadastre),
                                            support                             information       disclosure     CSOs,       development
                                                                                (MLSA website)                   partners, media

 Early                  First 3 months of   Launch of Communication &           Training          workshops,     Refugee households, host      MLSA PR Dept.,
 Implementation         implementation      Outreach Plan; training of          TV/radio spots, social media     communities, USS staff,       USS, CSOs
                                            hotline     114      operators;     posts, printed flyers, posters   CSOs, media outlets
                                            dissemination of eligibility and    at USS offices
                                            application        procedures;
                                            awareness campaigns

 Continuous             Throughout          Ongoing      awareness-raising,     Face-to-face consultations,      Refugee       households,     MLSA, USS, CSOs,
 Implementation         project     cycle   updates on eligibility, grievance   outreach via 49 USS offices,     vulnerable         groups     local authorities
                        (2025–2029)         channels, status of housing         CSO & volunteer outreach,        (female-headed       HHs,
                                            applications                        community info sessions,         elderly,   rural),   host
                                                                                media campaigns, digital         communities,
                                                                                platforms                        municipalities

 Mid-project Review     Year 2 (2027)       Perception     survey        on     Household survey, focus          Refugee   beneficiaries,      Independent
                                            awareness,         satisfaction,    groups,         targeted         host communities              consultant   with
                                            fairness,  effectiveness      of    consultations                                                  MLSA oversight
                                            communication and grievance
                                            handling

 Ongoing                Semi-annual / as    Policy alignment, technical         Interagency         meetings,    MoF,       Urban      Dev.    MLSA / PIT
 Coordination with      needed              gaps,     financial   sector        financial sector roundtables,    Committee,           NMC,
 Institutions   &                           cooperation, monitoring of          CSO & humanitarian partner       participating banks, CSOs,
 Partners                                   bank-level GRM, knowledge-          roundtables,        technical    UNHCR, UNICEF, GIZ,
                                            sharing                             meetings with WB/ADB             diaspora              orgs,
                                                                                                                 development partners

 Late                   Final year (2029)   Evaluation     of      outreach     End-of-project perception        Refugee households, host      Independent
 Implementation                             effectiveness,       beneficiary    survey,       consultations,     communities, GoA, CSOs,       consultant, MLSA /
                                                                                                                                               PIT
                                      satisfaction,   lessons     for   dissemination of survey         media,     development
                                      Housing Strategy                  results, press briefing         partners

Project Completion   End of project   Results achieved, lessons         Public        consultations,    Refugees,          host   MLSA,   PIT,   WB
/ Closure            (2029–2030)      learned, transition to national   dissemination    of     final   communities,       GoA    team
                                      housing strategy                  reports, knowledge-sharing      institutions,    media,
                                                                        events                          development partners
3.2.3 Information Disclosure
The MLSA is committed to ensuring that all stakeholders, particularly refugee households and other
vulnerable groups, have timely, accurate, and accessible information about the Government HSP and
related project activities.
Information on the HSP is already publicly available on the MLSA’s official website, including eligibility
criteria, application procedures, and relevant policy documents. To complement this, MLSA has also
prepared and disseminated video materials that provide step-by-step guidance to beneficiaries on how to
apply for housing support, ensuring that the process is understandable and accessible for diverse
audiences.
Throughout the Project lifecycle, MLSA will continue to disclose key documents and updates, including but
not limited to:
    ▪   The SEP, Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), Environmental and Social (E&S) risk
        screening and management procedures, and other Project documents.
    ▪   Updates on program implementation, including progress reports and monitoring results.
    ▪   Guidance materials for beneficiaries, including visual, audio, and written formats.
    ▪   Summaries of grievance and appeals procedures, including the role of the Interagency
        Commission on Appeals (see Chapter 5).
Information will be disclosed using multiple channels to maximize outreach and inclusivity:
    ▪   Digital platforms: MLSA’s official website and social media pages will be regularly updated with
        program information, infographics, and video explainers;
    ▪   Mass media: TV, radio, and press releases will disseminate key messages on program eligibility
        and procedures;
    ▪   Local outreach: Posters, flyers, and leaflets will be distributed through USS offices, municipalities,
        and CSO partners;
    ▪   Community engagement: Information sessions and public meetings will be organized at the
        municipal level to provide opportunities for direct interaction, questions, and feedback.
Special attention will be given to tailoring information disclosure for vulnerable groups and their
engagement, such as women-headed households, persons with disabilities, elderly beneficiaries, and
refugees in rural areas, to ensure equitable access to information and program benefits, as follows:
    ▪   Women-headed households: Targeted outreach through women’s NGOs and community groups,
        as well as distribution of simplified written materials and video explainers in accessible formats.
    ▪   Persons with disabilities: Information will be made available in accessible formats (large print,
        easy-to-read, and audio-visual materials with captions and sign-language interpretation where
        possible). Physical accessibility of information boards and USS offices will be ensured.
    ▪   Elderly beneficiaries: Outreach through community meetings, local social workers, and
        volunteers, complemented by printed leaflets and guidance provided directly at USS offices and
        municipalities.
    ▪   Refugees in rural or remote areas: Outreach through USS field visits, partnerships with CSOs, and
        use of local TV, radio and community centers to disseminate program updates and application
        guidance.
MLSA commits to updating its website and social media platforms at least quarterly with program
updates, including data on beneficiaries reached, grievance resolution trends, and any changes to
eligibility rules. Information boards at USS offices will be updated monthly, and printed outreach materials
will be refreshed annually or when eligibility criteria are modified. Media briefings will be held semi-
annually to ensure consistent, accurate coverage.
4. Resources and Responsibilities for Implementing Stakeholder Engagement Activities
4.1 Management Functions and Responsibilities
The MLSA, through the PIT and support of the Public Relations Department and USS, will implement
and oversee stakeholder engagement activities. The MLSA is responsible for implementing this SEP
related to Component 1 and NMC will be responsible for SE activities under Component 2. MLSA will
establish a PIT comprised of civil servants and non-civil servants assigned from within the MLSA. The
Project Coordinator, engaged under PIT, will be responsible for managing and overseeing the
implementation of SE activities, monitoring, and reporting, as well as ensuring the quality of the SEP
activities delegated to respective departments of the MLSA. For SEP implementation, MLSA will hire or
assign a Stakeholder Engagement and Communications Specialist (SECS). As for Component 2, NMC will
use in-house capacities to implement SE activities.
The USS offices will serve as the primary local-level interface with beneficiaries and will ensure consistent
communication, information dissemination, and grievance intake.
Key roles and responsibilities are as follows:

    ▪   MLSA, through PIT– oversees SEP implementation, ensures compliance with ESS10, and
        coordinates with the WB.
    ▪   Stakeholder Engagement and Communications Specialist – plans, manages, and monitors SE
        activities, prepares reports, and maintains records of engagement.
    ▪   Public Relations Department – leads mass media campaigns, digital engagement, and production
        of outreach materials.
    ▪   USS offices – manage day-to-day engagement with beneficiaries, including information
        dissemination, consultations, grievance handling, and outreach to vulnerable groups.
    ▪   Partner Banks and National NMC – engage with beneficiaries on financial services, inform
        applicants of grievance/appeal options, and report grievances to MLSA.
    ▪   CSOs and NGOs – support outreach to vulnerable groups and provide feedback from the
        community to MLSA and USS.
Detailed roles and responsibilities of the key actors involved in SE implementation is presented in Annex
2.

The Project Coordinator, based within the PIT of MLSA, will:
    •   Lead and oversee SEP and COP implementation under Component 1, ensuring alignment with
        project objectives and ESS10 requirements.
    •   Manage and coordinate the stakeholder engagement activities carried out by MLSA departments,
        the Public Relations Department, and the USS.
    •   Ensure quality and consistency of all SEP activities, providing guidance to responsible units and
        resolving implementation challenges.
    •   Monitor progress and results, including timely collection of stakeholder feedback and its
        integration into project implementation.
    •   Prepare and submit reports on stakeholder engagement to the WB and other oversight bodies.
    •   Facilitate coordination with NMC, to ensure SEP activities under Component 2 complement and
        align with those under Component 1.
    •   Supervise and support SECS, providing strategic direction and ensuring adequate resources for
        effective communication and engagement.
The SECS, either hired or assigned by MLSA, will:
    •   Operationalize the SEP and COP, ensuring timely planning and implementation of outreach,
        consultation, and communication activities under Component 1.
    •   Develop communication materials (press releases, brochures, website content, social media
        updates) in collaboration with the Public Relations Department.
    •   Organize and facilitate consultations with stakeholders, including vulnerable groups.
    •   Coordinate with USS offices to disseminate project information and collect feedback at the local
        level.
    •   Maintain and update the FGRM communication channels, ensuring visibility and accessibility to
        beneficiaries.
    •   Document and report on consultations, grievances received, and stakeholder feedback, feeding
        results into the project’s monitoring system.
    •   Support capacity building of MLSA staff and USS representatives on stakeholder engagement
        practices.
    •   Work closely with the Project Coordinator to ensure consistency, quality, and responsiveness of
        all SE activities.
The SE activities will be documented through standardized templates and tools, including:

    ▪   Consultation records (meeting notes, attendance sheets, feedback forms) (See Annex 4).
    ▪   Grievance logs and resolution tracking within the MLSA FGRM database (See Annex 3).
    ▪   Biannual SE progress reports prepared by the PIU.
    ▪   Public updates disclosed through MLSA’s website, social media, and information boards at USS
        offices.


4.2 Resources
The budget for the SEP and COP will be covered under Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring
and Evaluation, which finances overall project management costs, including communications, outreach,
training, and expenditures related to meeting WB E&S requirements.

Indicative SE budget is presented below and is indicative. The actual costs may be adjusted during
implementation based on project needs, scale of outreach, and evolving priorities. This budget covers
salaries of key staff (Project Coordinator and SECS), communication and outreach campaigns, beneficiary
perception surveys, trainings, and consultation events. Adjustments may also be made to reflect additional
engagement with vulnerable groups, unforeseen outreach requirements, or expanded use of digital
platforms. The overall budget for SEP activities is estimated of USD 300,000.
Table 4. Indicative Stakeholder Engagement Budget
Budget Category                            Quantity     Unit Costs      Times/Years Total Costs      Remarks
                                *
1. Estimated staff salaries and related expenses
                                                                                                Estimated at
1a. Stakeholder Engagement &                                                                      mid-level
                                               1       $12,000/year       5 years     $60,000
Communications Specialist                                                                          national
                                                                                               consultant rate
                                                                                                   Share of
                                                       $24,000/year                              salary/time
1b. Project Coordinator – % time on SEP     0.3 FTE                       5 years     $36,000
                                                        (pro-rata)                            dedicated to SEP
                                                                                                  oversight
                                                                                              Travel to regions
1c. Travel costs for staff (Coordinator,
                                           Lump sum    $3,000/year        5 years     $15,000 for consultations
SECS, USS outreach)
                                                                                                & monitoring
2. Communication campaigns
                                                                                              Printed outreach
2a. Posters, flyers, leaflets              Lump sum       $5,000          1 year       $5,000
                                                                                                  materials
                                                                                                 Awareness-
                                                                                              raising, eligibility
2b. Social media & media campaigns         Lump sum      $10,000          2 years     $20,000
                                                                                                 info, FGRM
                                                                                                 promotion
                                                                                                 Awareness-
2c. TV and Radio campaigns                 Lump sum      $40,000          1 year      $40,000 raising, eligibility
                                                                                                     info
3. Trainings
                                                                                                  Strengthen USS
3a. Training of USS staff                      2      $2,000/training     1 year       $4,000        outreach
                                                                                                     capacities
                                                                                                    Specialized
                                                                                                    training for
                                                                                                     providing
                                                                                                  information on
3b. Training of 144 hotline staff              2      $1,000/training     1 year       $2,000
                                                                                                   HSP, handling
                                                                                                      sensitive
                                                                                                  grievances and
                                                                                                      inquiries
                                                                                                    Delivered to
3c. Training on SEA/SH-sensitive                                                                    MLSA, USS,
                                               2          $1,000          1 year       $2,000
grievance handling                                                                                     hotline
                                                                                                     operators
4. Beneficiary surveys
                                                                                                  Capture
                                                                                                 beneficiary
                                                                                                satisfaction|
4a. Mid-project perception survey              1         $30,000          Year 2      $30,000
                                                                                              Conducted by an
                                                                                                independent
                                                                                                 consultant
                                                                                          Assess outcomes
                                                                                           of engagement
                                                                                          and information
4b. End-of-project perception survey      1          $30,000         Year 5       $30,000   campaigns |
                                                                                          Conducted by an
                                                                                            independent
                                                                                             consultant
7. Other expenses
                                                                                             National and
7a. Consultation workshops /                                                                    regional
                                        2/year   $2,500/workshop     4 years      $20,000
roundtables with CSOs & partners                                                              stakeholder
                                                                                             consultations
                                                                                              Includes hall
7b. Public information sessions                                                                  rental,
                                        5/year    $500/session       5 years      $12,500
(municipal/community level)                                                                  refreshments,
                                                                                                materials
                                                                                            Dissemination of
7c. Knowledge-sharing/lessons learned
                                          2          $3,000        Years 3 & 5     $6,000   results and best
events
                                                                                                 practices
                                                                                 ≈$280,000-     Indicative
                    TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET
                                                                                  $300,000        budget
*indicative and subject to revision during implementation
5. Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism
5.1 Government Systems on Grievance Resolution
The primary objective of the FGRM is to facilitate the timely, effective, and efficient resolution of
complaints and grievances in a manner that is fair, transparent, and satisfactory to all parties involved. The
project will build on the existing 114-hotline of the MLSA, the network of local offices of the USSs to ensure
accessible channels for grievance intake and response, as well as through unified platform for electronic
inquiries (e-request.am) that allows citizens to send electronic requests to state bodies through a one-
window format. The Interagency Commission on Appeals for Housing Support Program Beneficiaries,
established by Government Decree N901-Լ (July 3, 2025) will also act as a key grievance redress
mechanism for refugees and vulnerable groups denied housing assistance.

All grievance resolution procedures will be implemented in line with the Law on Freedom of Information
(2003), which guarantees individuals the right to request and access information from public authorities.
In accordance with the law:
     • Complaints and requests must be registered, classified, and responded to within set timelines (5
         days for standard requests; up to 30 days if additional processing is required, with written notice
         of the delay provided within 5 days).
     • Rejections must be justified in writing, citing the legal basis, and must inform complainants of their
         right to appeal the decision.
     • Authorities are obliged to ensure accessibility, transparency, accuracy, and completeness of
         information provided, while safeguarding confidentiality and personal data.

The Interagency Commission on Appeals for Housing Support Program Beneficiaries provides an
additional grievance redress channel for families whose applications for the Government’s HSP were
rejected, as specified below:
    • Mandate: Review individual appeals, verify supporting documents, and address gaps or
        inaccuracies that may have led to unjust rejections.
    • Composition: Chaired by the Deputy Minister of Labor and Social Affairs, with participation from
        deputy heads or advisors of:
             o MLSA
             o Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure
             o MCS (Ministry of Internal Affairs)
             o National Security Service
             o Cadastre Committee

    •   Functions and Procedures:
           o Appeals must be submitted within two months of rejection.
           o Sessions are held at least every two months, or more frequently if needed.
           o The Commission may request data from relevant state bodies and invite experts for case
               assessments.
           o Decisions granting or denying beneficiary status are issued in writing and delivered to
               applicants within three working days after the session.

Participating banks: All five participating banks have established internal procedures for managing
customer grievances. Under the Project, these procedures will be aligned with the overall FGRM to ensure
consistency and fairness. In cases where applicants are not satisfied with the information or decisions
provided, the banks will be required to:

    •   Inform beneficiaries of their right to appeal through the FGRM or Interagency Commission on
        Appeals;
    •   Provide clear guidance on the steps, timelines, and documentation required for filing an appeal
        both internally and through FGRM;
    •   Refer beneficiaries to the relevant USS office or MLSA for further assistance, including support in
        preparing and submitting appeals.

The Participating Bank will be required to report to MLSA on the number, type, and status of grievances
received and handled, including the number of cases referred to the USS or the Appeals Commission.

National Mortgage Company: As an implementing agency for Component 2, the NMC will follow its
internal Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to be established under its ESMS. This includes registering
and addressing grievances in line with the ESMS manual, that has been developed and is pending internal
approval. According to the ESMS manual, within the scope of its activities, NMC will establish and
implement a transparent, fair and accessible GRM for the resolution of complaints submitted by
beneficiaries of programs jointly implemented with the PFIs. NMC receives grievances through multiple
channels, including an e-mail address or other official written means of communication. NMC will establish
a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) to respond proactively and promptly to Stakeholder Complaints.
GRC meetings are convened within 15 working days of receiving a Complaint, in accordance with the
procedure established by NMC. GRC decisions are made by a simple majority of votes.

The GRM includes the following stages:
    •   In case of receiving a Complaint via NMC's e-mail or any other written communication channel
        NMC registers the relevant Complaint in the "Electronic Complaint Register" and submits it for
        review by the GRC.
    •   Receiving the Complaint, the GRC examines the factual and legal circumstances underlying it,
        contacting the Beneficiary and the PFI, if necessary, to clarify them.
    •   Within 15 days of receiving the complaint, the Chairman of the GRC convenes a GRC meeting,
        during which, because of the decision made, the GRC makes a proposal for resolving the
        Complaint, which is presented to the Executive Director of NMC.
    •   If the proposal is accepted by NMC's executive director, a response letter is prepared, which is sent
        to the Beneficiary via e-mail.

Though NMC’s GRM is mostly oriented to PFIs, Project beneficiaries may also apply to NMC for loan-
related issues that are beyond NMCs mandate or jurisdiction to address. For such cases NMC will register
the grievances in their GRM log and provide beneficiaries with information on Project FGRM, including
their rights to appeal. NMC will report data on grievances to MLSA on a quarterly basis for MLSA to
consolidate all grievance in a single log.

NMC’s GRM will be equipped to receive, register, and facilitate the resolution of SEA/SH complaints,
including through the referral of survivors to relevant gender-based violence service providers, all in a safe,
confidential, and survivor-centered manner.
5.1. Key Elements of FGRM under the Project
The table below outlines the key elements of the FGRM that will be applied under the Project.

Table 5. FGRM Elements
                                                                                      Time
        Step                            Description of Process                                    Responsibility
                                                                                     Frame
 FGRM                    The FGRM will function at national and local levels.      Continuous   MLSA and USSs
 implementation          Designated focal points in USS local offices will serve
 structure               as the first point of contact, with oversight and
                         coordination at the MLSA level.
                         Complaints may be submitted through:                      Continuous   MLSA and USSs
                              ▪ 114 toll-free hotline / SMS
                              ▪ www.e-request portal
                              ▪ Email: info@mlsa.am
                              ▪ Written letter to the Ministry or USSs:
 Grievance uptake
                                   Government Bld. 3
                              ▪ Walk-ins recorded in logbooks or
                                   suggestion boxes at MLSA and USS local
                                   offices
                              ▪ MLSA social media pages
 Sorting and             Complaints are forwarded to the relevant                  Upon         MLSA and USSs
 processing              departments, logged into the central database, and        receipt
                         categorized by type (eligibility, exclusion, service
                         quality, SEA/SH, etc.).
 Acknowledgment          Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged in writing       Within 5     MLSA and USSs
 and follow-up           or verbally to the complainant. In line with the Law      days
                         on Freedom of Information (2003), acknowledgment
                         and/or response are provided within 5 days.
 Verification,           Complaints are investigated by the responsible unit       5–30 days    MLSA/USSs and
 investigation,          or Interagency Commission on Appeals, depending                        other relevant
 action                  on the nature of the complaint. Proposed                               agencies,
                         resolutions are formulated and communicated to                         Interagency
                         the complainant. If additional processing is required,                 Commission on
                         the complainant is notified within 5 days, and                         Appeals, PFIs, NMC
                         resolution is provided within 30 days as per the Law
                         on Freedom of Information (2003).
 Monitoring and          Data on grievances are consolidated in a central          Quarterly    MLSA, Project
 evaluation              database and reported quarterly to MLSA higher                         Coordinator, SECS
                         management and the WB. Trends are analyzed to
                         improve responsiveness and service delivery.
 Provision of            Complainants’ feedback on satisfaction with               After        MLSA, Project
 feedback                complaint resolution is systematically collected to       resolution   Coordinator, SECS /
                         strengthen accountability.                                             USSs focal points
 Training                Regular capacity-building for USS staff, call center      Annual,      MLSA and USSs
                         staff on grievance management, with emphasis on           upon need    Project Coordinator,
                         handling SEA/SH cases.                                                 SECS

Handling of Sensitive Complaints: Grievances related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment
(SEA/SH) will be registered, tracked, and addressed with due attention to confidentiality and sensitivity.
While grievance resolution procedures generally follow the Law on Freedom of Information (2003) to
ensure transparency and accountability, complaints related to SEA/SH will be managed under a survivor-
centered and confidential protocol. Such cases will not be disclosed through public reporting mechanisms
and will instead be referred to specialized service providers in line with WB’s Good Practice Note on
SEA/SH.

The MLSA is responsible for managing SEA/SH cases and will ensure coordination with specialized local
NGOs that provide survivor support services. One of the key referral partners is the Women’s Support
Center (WSC), which operates Armenia’s first confidential domestic violence shelter. WSC offers 24/7
emergency shelter, psychological counseling, legal support, and reintegration assistance to women and
children at risk, accessible via hotline 099 88 78 08. The shelter maintains strict confidentiality of its
location and provides a safe environment managed by trained female staff. Referrals from the Project
FGRM to WSC and other specialized providers will always respect survivor consent and confidentiality
protocols, ensuring protection, dignity, and access to appropriate services.
Appeals and Legal Recourse: If a complainant is not satisfied with the resolution provided through the
FGRM, they may file an appeal. Once all possible project-level solutions are exhausted, complainants will
be informed of their right to legal recourse under Armenian legislation.

Non-Retaliation Commitment: The WB and the Borrower maintain a strict zero-tolerance policy for
reprisals or retaliation against individuals or groups who raise grievances, provide feedback, or express
their views about Bank-financed projects.

Communicating FGRM and appeal procedures to beneficiaries: The MLSA 114 hotline and the e-request
portal are already well publicized and will be further strengthened under the Project. In addition, the
beneficiary outreach and awareness-raising campaign will ensure that affected populations are informed
of their right to appeal in cases of rejection from the HSP. Information on the role and procedures of the
Interagency Commission on Appeals will be integrated into the broader project communication and
outreach activities, including public information materials, information sessions, and the MLSA/USS
communication channels.
    • Coordination: Communication efforts will be closely coordinated with the grievance mechanisms
         of MLSA and USS to avoid duplication, ensure consistency of messages, and provide beneficiaries
         with clear and reliable information.
    • Unified Social Services (USS): Local USS office staff working directly with beneficiaries will also
         disseminate information on appeal procedures during their interactions, ensuring that
         beneficiaries are aware of available redress channels and receive assistance in preparing and
         submitting appeals where needed.
6. Monitoring and Reporting

6.1. Monitoring of SEP
Implementation of the SEP will be systematically monitored to ensure that stakeholder engagement
activities are inclusive, effective, and responsive to community needs. Monitoring will focus on both the
quantity and quality of engagement, as well as the accessibility and performance of the FGRM.
Key indicators to be monitored during the SEP implementation will include:
    •   Stakeholder engagement activities: number of consultations and outreach campaigns carried out
        through USS offices, municipalities, CSOs, MLSA and digital platforms.
    •   Information dissemination: number of outreach materials distributed (posters, leaflets, social
        media posts), media campaigns implemented, and information sessions held.
    •   FGRM performance: number of grievances and appeals submitted to USS offices, the 114 hotline,
        the Interagency Commission and other channels; proportion of grievances accepted, resolved, and
        addressed within agreed timelines.
    •   Beneficiary feedback: results of mid-project and end-of-project perception surveys, capturing
        satisfaction with transparency, fairness, access to information, and responsiveness of grievance
        mechanisms.
    •   Inclusion of vulnerable groups: proportion of engagement activities specifically targeting women-
        headed households, elderly beneficiaries, and refugees in rural areas.
Sampe of indicators to be tracked in biannual progress reports on SE implementation are listed below.
MLSA will elaborate the list of indicators to be reported aligned with Project Result Framework and
incorporate into Communication and Outreach Plan:

    ▪   Number of consultations and outreach campaigns carried out annually.
    ▪   Percentage of grievances resolved within 30 days.
    ▪   Percentage of women-headed households participating in consultations.
    ▪   Number of outreach materials distributed (posters, leaflets, videos).
    ▪   Frequency of website and social media updates (minimum quarterly).
    ▪   Beneficiary satisfaction levels from mid-term and end-of-project perception surveys.

Biannual progress reports will be prepared by the MLSA, summarizing engagement activities, grievance
trends, and key lessons learned. These reports will be shared with WB and disclosed publicly through
MLSA’s website.
6.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups
Stakeholders will be regularly informed about the progress of the HSP, including updates on E&S
performance, implementation of the SEP and FGRM, as well as overall program achievements.

Quarterly summaries on grievances, enquiries, and feedback received through the 114 hotline, USS offices,
and other channels will be prepared by the MLSA and shared with the public. These reports will track both
the number and type of complaints, as well as the timeliness and effectiveness of responses, enabling
management to monitor trends and identify areas requiring corrective or preventive measures.

To ensure transparency and accountability, results of engagement activities and grievance management
will be reported back to stakeholders through multiple channels, including:
     • Public updates on MLSA’s website and social media platforms, summarizing key progress,
         outreach activities, and frequently asked questions.
     • Information boards at USS offices and municipalities, displaying summaries of program updates,
         common enquiries, and grievance redress outcomes.
     • Annual public meetings and community information sessions in selected municipalities,
         providing opportunities for beneficiaries to hear updates and directly raise questions.
     • Targeted communication to vulnerable groups (via CSOs and social workers), ensuring that
         underinformed or harder-to-reach households also receive feedback on program progress and
         grievance outcomes.
     • Inclusion of survey results (mid-project and end-of-project perception surveys) in public reporting
         to demonstrate how beneficiary feedback has shaped program implementation.
Annex 1: Key Stakeholder Groups
  Name of Stakeholder                         Interest                             Details / Estimated Number

Affected Parties

Government of Armenia      GoA is the main beneficiary of the Project.          49 territorial USS offices across
(GoA), MLSA and USS        MLSA oversees policy and program design and          Armenia; central MLSA and
                           has overall responsibility for implementation.       interagency bodies
                           USS      manages      registration,  eligibility
                           verification, disbursement, and acts as local
                           interface.

Refugee Households         Primary beneficiaries of cash assistance and/or      ~13,000–15,000             refugee
                           housing support.                                     households eligible; currently
                                                                                receiving cash assistance for rent,
                                                                                utilities, and consumption

Partner Banks              Administer housing-related loans and financial       5 participating commercial banks
                           services.

National   Mortgage        Ensures availability and refinancing of housing      CBA-owned financial institution
Company (NMC)                           finance instruments.                    managing mortgage finance

Asian    Development       Co-financier of the Project; supports                Partner agency, uses PBL and PSSA
Bank (ADB)                 safeguards and financing modalities.                 instruments

Other Interested Parties

Other    Governmental      Provide policy alignment, oversight, and             Ministries of Finance, Territorial
Agencies                   technical data.                                      Administration and Infrastructure,
                                                                                Urban Development Committee

Civil         Society      Complement government efforts with service           Mission Armenia, Armenian Red
Organizations (CSOs),      delivery, advocacy, outreach, and feedback           Cross, Caritas, AGBU, Tufenkian
NGOs, and Diaspora         collection.                                          Foundation, Fund for Armenian
Organizations                                                                   Relief, etc.

International              Provide funding, technical support, and              UNDP, UNICEF, UNHCR, GIZ, KfW,
Organizations         &    complementary refugee response activities.           IOM,             and            other
Programs                                                                        bilateral/multilateral agencies

Media                      Disseminate information         on    eligibility,   National and local media outlets,
                           procedures, and outcomes.                            TV, radio, and online channels

Local Governments &        Facilitate local-level implementation        and     Municipalities and community
Host Communities           engagement with refugee households.                  councils in affected regions

Construction        &      Provide technical services for housing               Private sector actors contracted
Valuation Companies        assessments, valuation, and renovations.             under HSP

Disadvantaged and Vulnerable Groups

Low-income                 May face affordability gaps despite assistance,      Particularly large households and
households, households     at risk of exclusion, may struggle with              those with unstable incomes, risk of
                           mortgage-related processes and requirements.
with limited financial                                                          exclusion due to banking and
literacy                                                                        documentation barriers

Female-headed               At higher risk of economic vulnerability and        Significant share of refugee HHs,
households,     single-     exclusion; especially in geographically             includes widowed or single mothers
headed      households      challenging regions, require targeted outreach.
with children (esp.
women)

Persons with disabilities   Face barriers to access due to medical, mobility,   Includes households requiring
/ chronic illness           or care needs.                                      special assistance and accessible
                                                                                communication

Elderly refugees without    At risk of being left out due to isolation or       Especially older refugees in rural
support networks            mobility limitations.                               areas

Refugees in     rural   /   Have limited access to information and              Households      in     isolated
remote areas                services.                                           communities      with     weak
                                                                                connectivity and fewer service
                                                                                points
Annex 2. Roles and Responsibilities of the Key Actors involved in SE Implementation
 Actor                                       Roles and Responsibilities
 MLSA (overall)                              - Oversight of SEP implementation under Component 1.
                                             - Ensure compliance with ESS10 and WB requirements.
                                             - Coordinate across departments (PIT, PR Department, USS).
                                             - Consolidate and report stakeholder engagement results to WB.
 Project Implementation Team (PIT)           - Manage day-to-day implementation of SEP activities.
                                             - Coordinate inputs from PR Department, USS, and CSOs.
                                             - Supervise SECS and ensure adequate resources for engagement.
                                             - Integrate feedback from SEP into project management.
 Project Coordinator                         - Lead and oversee SEP implementation within MLSA.
                                             - Monitor and ensure quality of SEP activities.
                                             - Supervise SECS and provide guidance. - Coordinate with NMC to
                                             align SEP under Component 1 and 2.
                                             - Prepare periodic SEP reports for WB.
 Stakeholder      Engagement           and   - Operationalize SEP activities (planning, outreach, consultations,
 Communications Specialist (SECS)            disclosure).
                                             - Develop communication materials (print, media, digital).
                                             - Organize and facilitate consultations, including with vulnerable
                                             groups.
                                             - Manage FGRM communication and visibility.
                                             - Document engagement and report to PIT.
 Public Relations Department (MLSA)          - Lead mass media, TV/radio, and digital campaigns.
                                             - Support design of brochures, flyers, infographics, and video
                                             explainers.
                                             - Coordinate with SECS on consistent messaging.
 Unified Social Services (USS)               - Act as primary local interface with beneficiaries.
                                             - Disseminate information, conduct consultations, and collect
                                             feedback.
                                             - Manage grievance intake at community level and refer cases to
                                             MLSA.
                                             - Ensure outreach to vulnerable groups through 49 offices.
 NMC (Component 2)                           - Implement SEP activities under Component 2.
                                              - Disclose information on financial services.
                                             - Operate internal GRM per ESMS manual.
                                             - Report grievance data to MLSA for consolidation.
 PFIs                                        - Inform applicants of loan eligibility and grievance/appeal
                                             procedures.
                                             - Maintain internal GRM and report to MLSA/NMC.
                                             - Provide data on grievances received and resolved.
 Civil Society Organizations (CSOs)/NGOs     - Support outreach to vulnerable groups (women-headed HHs,
                                             elderly, disabled, rural refugees).
                                             - Relay beneficiary feedback to MLSA/USS.
                                             - Partner on community-level consultations and awareness
                                             campaigns.
Annex 3. Sample Grievance Log Template


 ID  Date     Name &              Location /    Type of       Description Responsible Date          Action     Date                 Status Remarks
 No. Received Contact (if         Channel of    Grievance of              Unit / Focal Acknowledged Taken /    Resolved             (Open
              not                 Submission    (Eligibility, Complaint Point                       Resolution                      /
              anonymous)          (Hotline,     Exclusion,                                                                          Closed)
                                  USS, Email,   Service
                                  etc.)         Quality,
                                                SEA/SH,
                                                Other)




Notes:

   •     SEA/SH-related complaints must be recorded using codes only, without personal identifiers, and handled under confidential, survivor-
         centered protocols.

   •     The log will be maintained by the SECS at MLSA and consolidated quarterly for reporting to WB.
Annex 4. Sample Consultation Record Template


 Consultation       Date &      Stakeholder        Number of Participants        Key        Feedback /       Response / How   Follow-up
 Title / Topic      Location    Group(s)           (disaggregated by sex,        Issues     Suggestions      Feedback Was     Actions &
                                Engaged            age, other relevant           Raised                      Addressed        Responsible
                                                   categories)                                                                Party




Notes:

   •     This template should be used for all public meetings, focus groups, and workshops.

   •     Attendance sheets and photos (if consent is given) should be attached to the record (not subject to disclosure).

   •     Results will be summarized in biannual SEP progress reports and disclosed on MLSA’s website (no personal data disclosed).
