Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 04/30/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04212




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 06, 2025                                                                               Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P510584                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       M-REBUILD                  2025

                     Operation Name            Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Maldives                  Maldives                                SOUTH ASIA                  Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                                                   Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance       Ministry of Construction, Housing and   30-Apr-2025                 12-Jun-2025
                     and Planning              Infrastructure

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     15-Apr-2025               15,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objective (PDO) is to reconstruct a government office building following internationally
                     recognized fire safety, climate and natural hazard resilience standards.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     Yes


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     A devastating fire on December 12, 2024, caused extensive damage to the office buildings of three government
                     ministries – Ministry of Construction and Infrastructure; Ministry of Housing, Land and Urban Development; the
                     Ministry of Climate Change, Environment, and Energy. While there were no casualties from the incident, the staff from
                     the three ministries were displaced, with the majority currently working from temporary offices. The proposed
                     operation responds to a letter from the Government of Maldives (GoM) dated February 2, 2025 requesting the World
                     Bank’s support for the reconstruction of the office building. The proposed Emergency project accordingly aims to
                     support the reconstruction of the government office building, consisting of two components: Components 1: Resilient

                    May 06, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                     and Green Government Office Building. Thereby, the design and construction process shall serve as model for fire,
                     climate and multi-hazard resilience, and energy and cost efficiency in the Maldivian context. Component 2: Project
                     Management Support and Capacity Building


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project involves constructing a fire safe, climate resilient and energy efficient multi-story building for the Ministries
                     displaced from the fire in December 2024. The proposed building construction will take place in a government owned
                     plot of land in Male which is currently used as a public parking space. Capacity building on building resilience will have
                     nation wide benefits as Maldives being a land limited country, its urban centers, especially Male, are densely built with a
                     high risk of hazard from fire. Male is a one of the most congested cities in the world, with narrow streets lined with
                     multi-story buildings, and is home to nearly 1/3rd of its population. While the country has some of the most diverse and
                     sensitive coral reefs in the world, the Greater Male region has lost most of its natural pristine marine biodiversity due to
                     decades of urbanization, land reclamation and, pollution etc. The Other than the three trees that grow in the building
                     site has a couple of trees which may require removal, there are no other sensitive biodiversity issues of concern. Also, .
                     As such, the project site is not set in a important bio-diverse area, nor has Male got does not have any indigenous
                     people or culturally important sites other than an ancient mosque (, the oldest in Maldives) dating from the 17th
                     century which is well preserved.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Construction, Housing, and Infrastructure, the implementing agency for this project, has experience with



Public Disclosure
                     implementing World Bank projects and following the Bank’s environment and social due diligence procedures under
                     safeguards. The proposed project is utilizing staff currently working with the ongoing Maldives Urban Development
                     Project (MUDRP) in preparation activties, who has been effectively implementing environmental and social due
                     diligence actions required by the World Bank, including stakeholder engagement, establishing and maintaining a GRM
                     system, preparing of ESIAs, and managing labor management. While MUDRP is under the safeguards policies, the E&S
                     staff is observed to have good capacity and have been part of ESF training roll outs in the country since 2019. While they
                     are quite adept in applying ESSs to the proposed new project, any capacity gaps will be addressed with ESF oriented
                     trainings and guidance from the Bank team during project implementation.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                               Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                        Moderate
                     Male is one of the most densely built cities in the world, with narrow streets lined with high-rises and continuous
                     traffic flows. The risk of fire in the city is high, owing to the high density of buildings, high population, lack of
                     enforcement of a fire safe building code and unsafe construction. The project will support the construction of a new
                     multi-story building to house the ministries displaced from the December 2024 fire in a new plot of land
                     approximately 1000m2 in extent. The land is located at a road intersection and is surrounded by several important
                     buildings. The environmental risks of the project are related to the civil works of the proposed building. The building
                     itself , which will be designed as a multi-story, fire safe, climate resilient and energy efficient one. The civil works will


                    May 06, 2025                                                                                                            Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                     result in environmental risks such as air pollution from dust, excessive noise and vibration, traffic disruptions and
                     occupational as well as public health and safety. All material needed for the civil works will be imported as is the usual
                     practice in Maldives. Being a low-lying island, construction of the building foundation, which will include a basement,
                     will require dewatering which can lower the groundwater table risking the safety of surrounding building foundations.
                     However, dewatering is regulated and is allowed only with prior permission. Groundwater in Male is not used for any
                     specific human use. One of the main risks of the building will be the safety of the public who will continue to use the
                     the adjacent road network for motor and pedestrian traffic. Multi-story building construction is a common occurrence
                     in Male at any given time, and it is observed that standard practices regarding construction safety is reasonably well
                     implemented as part of civil works management causing minimum harm and danger to the public. Mitigation
                     measures such as sign boards, safety nets on the building, temporary and prior announced road closures during
                     dangerous civil works activity etc can effectively minimize the risk. Occupational health and safety for workers will be
                     mitigated through a site specific OHS plan. Disruptions to traffic on already congested roads is another risk that could
                     take place inconveniencing the public with travel delays etc. However, the practice in Male is to use nighttime to
                     transport construction goods given narrow roads and daytime public activity. All identified environmental risks are
                     short-term, localized and mitigatable, as such, the environmental risk of the project is considered moderate.
                                                                                                                                         Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Male is one of the most densely populated cities in the world, with a population of nearly 212,000 people residing on
                     an island area of less than 2 km2. The central island is heavily urbanized, with the built-up area taking up essentially
                     its entire landmass and served by a network of paved roads utilized by small cargo trucks, cars, motor-scooters,
                     bicycles, and pedestrians. Male’ is sub-divided into 4 divisions: Henveiru (Hen.), Galolhu (Gal.), Maafannu (Maa.), and




Public Disclosure
                     Macchan Goalhi (Mac.). The project site is a government-owned parking lot located within the Maafannu district. The
                     site is fully paved and currently used for parking by both government staff and private individuals. The ESIA will
                     confirm legal tenure and clarify whether the current use generates any private income, in line with ESS5
                     requirements. Understanding the site’s existing use is critical to identifying any potential impact on livelihoods or
                     individuals due to the project. Most of the residents live in small houses or apartment complexes, often shared with
                     external family or roommates. Fire is one of the highest risks encountered for any densely built urban area. Due to
                     the congested network of buildings, a fire emergency has the potential of quickly escalating into uncontainable
                     proportions which would have significant negative impacts. The risk to fire impacts on human life increases in
                     buildings with a higher occupancy such as offices, government buildings, multi-storied residential accommodation,
                     schools, hotels, etc.. The social risks of the project are primarily short-term and relate to the influx of labor, as well as
                     worker and community safety during construction. Construction risks include health and safety risks to the
                     community, disruptions to access for buildings and parking areas, child safety, disruption of ongoing activities,
                     increased noise levels, dust, and traffic congestion. Beyond these construction-related risks, the displacement of
                     government staff following the fire has already disrupted public service delivery. Any delay in reconstruction may
                     prolong this disruption, potentially affecting institutional efficiency and public perception. An influx of labor,
                     consisting of foreign nationals, is expected during construction. The hiring of foreign nationals is common practice
                     throughout the Maldives. In order to mitigate labor risks, the project will prepare Labor Management Procedures
                     (LMP). (see ESS 2). The environmental and social risks are localized to the site of the new building, the adjacent
                     residential and commercial buildings, transportation routes, and areas designated for worker accommodation. The
                     project will implement targeted stakeholder engagement activities throughout planning and implementation, as
                     outlined in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP, see ESS10). Universal accessibility considerations are being
                     incorporated into the design of the new building to ensure inclusivity. The design will comply with local and


                    May 06, 2025                                                                                                           Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                     international accessibility standards, ensuring access for all, including persons with disabilities. The island of Malé is
                     expected to experience long-term benefits from the project, including fire-smart building construction, increased fire
                     safety awareness, improved emergency response capacity, enhanced climate resilience, and more efficient public
                     sector operations. The project's design incorporates accessibility guidelines, fire safety best practices, and training
                     programs to strengthen long-term resilience. Given these mitigation measures and the localized nature of impacts,
                     the social risk rating for the project is classified as moderate.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      The project is expected to have net positive environmental outcomes with the proposed new building leading as a
                      model for fire and multi-hazard safety and climate resilient building construction, that will house the three ministries
                      displaced from the devastating fire in December 2024. Male is one of the most densely built cities in the world, with
                      narrow streets lined with high-rises and continuous traffic flows. The risk of fire in the city is high, owing to the high
                      population, lack of enforcement of a fire safe building code and unsafe construction. The project will support the
                      construction of a new multi-story building to house the ministries displaced from the December 2024 fire in a new
                      plot of land approximately 1000m2 in extent. The land for the new building is located at a road intersection and is
                      currently used as a public parking space. The adverse environmental risks of the project is expected to be short-term
                      & localized and to last only during civil works, and can be mitigated with good construction planning and



Public Disclosure
                      management. They are related to the construction of the building such as air pollution from construction dust,
                      generation of noise and vibration, traffic disruption, waste disposal and worker/community safety aspects. Male
                      being a busy urban center has multiple construction sites ongoing at a given time and has standard work methods to
                      facilitating civil works with minimum inconvenience and risks to public life. The use of sign boards, safety nets
                      covering the entire building, erecting dust/noise barriers, nighttime material/debris transport, temporary and prior
                      announced road closure during high risk construction work and adherence to other identified safety precautions are
                      some of the standard practices followed in Male and can effectively address the anticipated risks from the new
                      construction. Dewatering will be required for the construction of the building foundation & basement which can pose
                      risks to the surrounding buildings by lowering the groundwater table and polluting the neighborhood through
                      disposal. However, this has typically not been a problem as dewatering is strictly regulated by the government
                      through a permit system that will require the contractor to manage de-watering including disposal directly at sea via
                      temporary drain pipes. The contractor will be required to monitor structural damage such as cracks in the
                      surrounding buildings during dewatering and building construction, and either compensated or managed with
                      amended construction methods. While there will be no demolition of existing structures on the selected land, there
                      are 3 trees that may require removal depending on the building footprint. Construction of the building will produce
                      large quantities of waste which will be collected and handed over to WAMCO who has a regular waste collection
                      system in Male. Waste is eventually disposed at Thilafushi which is a designated waste island. Thilafushi, which is
                      currently a open dump, is being rehabilitated under ADB funding with a sanitary landfill and a waste-to-energy plant.
                      The building is expected to be a design and build contract, and once the concept design is available an ESIA will need
                      to be carried out as per the EIA regulations of the Maldives, which will include an ESMP, OHS and other required
                      plans. The ESIA will need EPA clearance. While an ESIA is not considered required under the World Bank’s ESF given


                    May 06, 2025                                                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                      the moderate risk rating, adoption of the borrower framework will be applied and as such the Bank will also review
                      and clear the ESIA, with particular focus on the ESMP and OHS plans. There are no clear plans regarding the clearing
                      of the previous Ministry building as investigations are ongoing. While the project will have no responsibility in this
                      regard, if the clearing of the burnt sites by the Government takes place in parallel to the project, it will be considered
                      as an associated facility and as such the Bank’s ESF will apply. The ESIA will need EPA and WB clearance. Component 2
                      activities aim to strengthen Government capacity related to fire and life safety within the building regulatory
                      framework and will prepare a fire-safety road map for key government buildings complemented with awareness
                      creation around existing fire hazards. This work will build on previous work supported by the World Bank through a
                      CAT-DDO and MUDRP. The PMU of the ongoing WB financed MUDRP with additional support, as needed, will be
                      responsible for project implementation and as such will benefit from the environment and social risk management
                      already existing within the PMU.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      The project has prepared a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) describing actions to strengthen citizen engagement
                      (CE), communication, and grievance handling throughout the life-cycle of the project, and it will be implemented by
                      the project. To improve project benefits, multiple stakeholder engagements will be conducted throughout project
                      planning and implementation. Special efforts will be made to engage vulnerable or marginalized groups (e.g., women,
                      children, elderly, persons with disabilities) and ensure their concerns are prioritized. Stakeholders currently identified
                      include government institutions, the private sector, and the general public. Direct beneficiary stakeholders include:
                      Ministry of Construction, Housing, and Infrastructure (MoCHI), Ministry of Finance (MoF), and Ministry of Tourism
                      and Environment (MoTE), as well as the Maldives National Defense Force in their role as fire safety and response, and



Public Disclosure
                      island/city councils. Other interested parties include construction companies, design and supervision consulting
                      companies, nearby businesses (private sector), nearby government offices (public sector), Maldives Police Service in
                      their role as first responders to fire emergencies, Environmental Protection Agency, the general public who use the
                      existing parking space, and nearby residents. The SEP establishes a 3-tier Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
                      system consisting of: 1) Contractor Focal Point; 2) Ministry of Construction, Housing, and Infrastructure (MoCHI), who
                      will forward the grievance to the staff member within the PMU assigned GRM responsibility; and 3) the Maldivian
                      judicial system. A separate workers’/labor GRM will be established under the Labor Management Procedures (LMP).
                      Additionally, a monitoring system will track grievances and feedback to ensure timely resolution, with regular updates
                      shared with stakeholders regarding how their concerns are being addressed. During project preparation, a series of
                      stakeholder engagement activities were carried out by MoCHI. The inputs from these consultations were used to
                      identify the needs and concerns of different stakeholders. These needs and concerns were utilized to inform project
                      activities. Furthermore, the SEP now clearly defines disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and includes strategies to
                      engage these groups effectively. The project will also establish a Feedback Mechanism that will document how issues
                      raised by stakeholders are addressed by the project, disclose all meeting minutes, and ensure that issues identified
                      are listed with mechanisms/strategies to address them communicated back to the respective stakeholders. The
                      following mechanisms will be used to report back to the stakeholders: 1) Email communication; 2) Official letter
                      where required; and 3) Follow-up meetings to determine the acceptability of proposed solutions. The SEP will be
                      periodically revised and updated as necessary during project implementation. Quarterly summaries and internal
                      reports on public grievances, inquiries, and related incidents, along with the status of associated
                      corrective/preventive actions, will be compiled by responsible staff and referred to senior management. These
                      quarterly summaries will assess the number and nature of complaints and requests for information and the Project’s


                    May 06, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                      ability to address them timely and effectively. Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project
                      will be conveyed to stakeholders through email communication, official notifications, and community meetings.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                 Relevant

                      It is expected that construction of the new building will involve an influx of labor consisting of foreign nationals. The
                      presence of foreign nationals in the labor force is common throughout the Maldives. A Labor Management
                      Procedures (LMP) will be prepared. The LMP will include workers' GRM procedures and a Code of Conduct which all
                      workers will sign, and expected to follow. The Code of Conduct will include measures to prevent SEA/SH, inform
                      workers of a zero-tolerance for SEA/SH behaviors, and ensure child protection protocols are followed. Additionally,
                      age verification measures will be put in place to ensure no child labor is used. The construction site will be monitored
                      by PMU to ensure there is no forced labor. Contractors will be expected to follow non-discrimination measures. Types
                      of workers include: 1) direct – PMU and staff directly involved in project preparation and implementation, 2)
                      contracted workers, 3) primary supply workers – who will supply the construction material. The Ministry will appoint
                      current government staff to work in project PMU. The government staff will remain subject to the terms and
                      conditions of their existing employment agreement.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                  Relevant

                      The proposed new building will be designed and constructed to be fire safe, climate resilient and energy efficient. The
                      work will be carried out by a contractor who will be responsible for the design and construction. As such, no design
                      details are available as of now. The building will include energy efficient features that will maximize natural lighting




Public Disclosure
                      and ventilation. In addition, the possibility to include roof top solar will be explored. Similarly, the building will include
                      water efficient features within washrooms and toilets, and explore the possibility of installing water recycling
                      systems. Hazardous waste, other than paint, is not expected to be a serious issue. However, in the case hazardous
                      waste is generated, disposal will be done at Thilafushi through WAMCO. Pollution resulting from dust and dewatering
                      will be addressed as appropriate through the ESMP. During the operations stage, the building will generate sewage
                      and waste water which will be connected to the Male sewage and wastewater collection network and disposed at sea
                      via a long outfall. Solid waste generated during the functioning of the building will be primarily food waste, paper and
                      plastics which will be collected by WAMCO for disposal at Thilafushi. The TOR for the D&B contract will include
                      necessary specifications to promote resource efficiency and pollution prevention to the extent practical.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                  Relevant

                      The location of the proposed building which is within the Male city poses certain risks to the public who will continue
                      to use the area while the construction is on. The building construction site is at the corner of cross roads and is
                      surrounded by a neighborhood of key private and government offices that are functional including the country’s
                      supreme court. The building will be designed with multiple floors (maximum allowed as per building regulations in
                      Male is 14 floors) and as such during construction risks to public safety from dust, noise and vibration, slips, trips and
                      falls within pedestrian areas, accidental exposure to hazardous substances, exposure to electricity and other energy
                      sources, falling objects, road accidents due to transport and storage of material etc will be present. These risks can be
                      effectively addressed with good construction planning and the robust implementation of a site-specific ESMP and
                      occupational /public safety plan. Measures such as safety netting the building, erecting dust barriers, monitoring
                      structural damage in neighboring buildings, ensuring construction lifts, scaffoldings and construction equipment are


                    May 06, 2025                                                                                                           Page 7 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                      in good conditions through routine checks, planning road closures temporarily when activties that pose particular
                      hazards to the public are carried out, nighttime material transport etc can minimize the risk of accidents and injury as
                      well as inconvenience to passer-by pedestrians and motorists. The project will carry out an ESIA as per Maldives EIA
                      regulations and the ESIA will essentially include ESMPs, OHS plans and any other site specific plan that may be
                      needed.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                    Not Currently Relevant

                      The new building site, plot of land legally belongs to the government, this standard is rated as Not Relevant.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                     Not Currently Relevant
                      Resources

                      The construction will take place within a completely built up area and there are no biodiversity issues.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard does not apply to the Maldives.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                          Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant as all sites of cultural heritage in the island of Male are known and documented and the




Public Disclosure
                      identified site is not situated in such an area.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant as there is no financial intermediary involved under the project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         In Part
                       The ESIA for the new construction will follow follow EPA guidelines, relying on the Maldives EIA system. Given the
                       moderate risk, from an ESF point of view a comprehensive site specific ESMP and a OHS plan will suffice. However, in
                       order to be in harmony with the borrower framework both the ESIA TOR and the ESIA will be reviewed and cleared by
                       the EPA and the Bank. In addition, the project will apply national labour laws which are very compatible with that of
                       ESS2.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No


                    May 06, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Maldives Fire Reconstruction And Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                       There are no other financing partners in the project.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The borrower will prepare an ESIA for the new building construction as per national EIA requirements, once the concept
                     design is available. The ESIA findings will provide the basis for a comprehensive ESMP, occupational health and safety
                     plan and any other plan deemed required by the ESIA to mitigate any specific issues. The ESIA will also carry a E&S
                     Monitoring Plan, along with institutional responsibilities, costs, timelines and specific parameters.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Natsuko Kikutake                        Title:        Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                    Specialist

                     Email:                   nkikutake@worldbank.org

                     TTL Contact:             Phoram Shah                             Job Title:    Senior Urban Specialist




Public Disclosure
                     Email:                   pshah5@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                      Natsuko Kikutake, Phoram Shah

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                             Kaluhath Nadeera De Abrew Rajapakse

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                    Kristine Schwebach




                    May 06, 2025                                                                                                  Page 9 of 9
