Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01381




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                          Maldives Fire
                                                                                          Reconstruction and
Maldives                       SOUTH ASIA                   P510584
                                                                                          Building Resilience
                                                                                          Emergency Project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               28-Apr-2025                  12-Jun-2025                   Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Ministry of Finance and        Ministry of Construction,
Planning                       Housing and Infrastructure

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The project development objective (PDO) is to reconstruct a government office building following internationally
recognized fire safety, climate and natural hazard resilience standards.

Components
Resilient and Green Government Office Building
Project Management Support and Capacity Building

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           15.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                15.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   15.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00



                                                                                                                    Page 1
       The World Bank
       Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)


 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   15.00
          of which IDA Recommitted                                                                                 15.00
       IDA Credit                                                                                                  15.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Moderate


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




 Other Decision (as needed)



 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.       Maldives’ small size, dispersion and isolation constrain its socio-economic potential. The Republic of Maldives,
an archipelago of 26 natural atolls with 1,200 coral reef islands, faces socio-economic constraints due to its small size,
dispersion, and isolation. Despite these challenges, the Maldives has achieved upper-middle-income status, with annual
real GDP growth averaging 5.7 percent from 2000 to 2019 and real GDP per capita rising to US$12,520 in 2023. The
country's progress, driven largely by tourism, has significantly reduced poverty, although its heavy reliance on tourism
makes it vulnerable to external shocks, as seen during the Covid-19 pandemic.
2.      Economic growth is expected to remain robust over the medium term, driven by strong performance in the
tourism sector. After a collapse of 32.9 percent during the pandemic in 2020, the GDP bounced by 37.7 percent and 13.8
percent in 2021 and 2022, respectively. The pace of real GDP growth normalized to 4.7 percent in 2023 and 5.5 percent
in 2024 while tourist arrivals reached an all-time high of 2.05 million in 2024. The economy is estimated to grow at an
annual average of 5.2 percent over the medium term.
3.      Large fiscal and external imbalances, combined with external financing gaps have led to rising liquidity and
solvency pressures, with Maldives remaining at a high risk of debt distress. Substantial increases in government spending
and reliance on non-concessional borrowing for infrastructure projects have intensified these vulnerabilities, resulting in
elevated public debt. Fiscal and current account deficits are estimated to remain in double digits over the medium term,


                                                                                                                       Page 2
        The World Bank
        Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)


further depleting already limited foreign reserves, which stood at US$791 million or 1.7 months of import coverage as of
March 2025. The country is projected to pay about US$1.1 billion annually of external debt servicing over the 2025-26
period. To restore fiscal and debt sustainability, a multi-year fiscal reform program with a strong fiscal adjustment path
and solid financing strategy is urgently required. This entails an immediate implementation of the homegrown fiscal
reform agenda, including: (i) phasing out existing blanket subsidies and replacing them with a targeted cash transfer
scheme; (ii) improving health spending efficiency by changing the coverage policy of health services and expanding bulk
procurement of medicines to reduce drug costs; and (iii) prioritizing the public sector investment program envelope and
rationalizing capital expenditure. Given the size of external debt service needs, a credible financing strategy is needed to
ensure debt service obligations are readjusted.
4.       The proposed operation focuses on the reconstruction of a government office building that was destroyed in a
fire. A devastating fire on December 12, 2024, caused extensive damage to three office buildings, housing the Malé City
Council (MCC) and three government ministries – Ministry of Construction and Infrastructure (now Ministry of
Construction, Housing and Infrastructure - MoCHI1); Ministry of Housing, Land and Urban Development (now restructured
to MoCHI and Ministry of Finance and Planning (MoFP)); and Ministry of Climate Change, Environment, and Energy
(MoCCEE, now restructured to Ministry of Tourism and Environment (MoTE)). While there were no casualties from the
incident, approximately 552 staff from the three ministries were displaced, the majority of whom are currently working
from temporary offices set up in the Dharubaaruge Convention Center located in south-east Malé. However, limited desk
space, the open floor plan in the large halls resulting in high levels of noise, limited meeting space availability, lack of any
staff facilities for breaks etc. prevent staff from efficiently carrying out their tasks and has also implications for the
community which is not able to use Malé’s largest venue for exams, gatherings and events. The proposed project responds
to a letter dated February 2, 2025 from GoM requesting support with the reconstruction of the office building. In addition
to ensuring adequate fire and life safety of the new construction, it will also comply with multi-hazard resilience2 and
green building certification to contribute to climate adaptation and mitigation. Considering the Maldives’ macro-economic
situation and past experience where ministries often stayed for many years in buildings that were considered temporary
solutions, the World Bank’s support is critical to ensure a timely and permanent solution for the three affected ministries.
5.      The operation is in line with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Republic of Maldives FY23-FY27,
the Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR 2024) as well as government priorities. This project is particularly
relevant for CPF Objective 2: Building Climate Resilience under the High-Level Outcome 1: Improved Resilience to Shocks,
which specifically mentions the strengthening of resilient urban infrastructure. Furthermore, this project is directly aligned
with the CCDR High-Level Objective 3: Enhance the climate resilience of islands and infrastructure. The activity is
furthermore in line with the 2025 National Determined Contributions and the Strategic Action Plan 2019-2023 which
emphasizes the importance of climate resilient infrastructure.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context

6.      Maldives is exposed to several natural hazards, including cyclones and related wind, rain and storm surge, coastal
flooding, tsunamis and earthquakes. Cyclonic wind hazard, captured as probable maximum wind speed, is highest in the
northern part of the archipelago (about 96 knots) and very low in the south, with about 84 knots in Malé. Similarly, storm

1 Following the fire incident, President Muizzu renamed the Ministry of Construction and Infrastructure to the Ministry of Construction, Housing and

Infrastructure (MoCHI).
2 The Maldives building code is a performance-based code which can only be implemented through code compliance documents. However, as these

documents have not been finalized nor published, thus there are currently no official guidelines for fire safety, hazard considerations etc.

                                                                                                                                               Page 3
        The World Bank
        Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)


surge hazard is very high in the north, particularly along the north-eastern coastline of the islands, moderate to low in the
middle and south of the country, including Malé. Earthquake hazard follows an opposite pattern with highest peak ground
acceleration values for 475 years return period of 0.18-0.32, while for the middle and north, including Malé, the value lies
below 0.4. Tsunami risk is highest along the eastern coastline of the islands and higher for the eastern islands vs. the
western islands, which receive protection from their neighbors.
7.        Maldives is highly vulnerable to climate change. The downscaled projected climate shows a warmer and wetter
Maldives in the future3, and stronger storms, while also including longer periods without rain. The country also
experiences heat waves which are expected to be exacerbated by climate change4. About 80 percent of the land surface
is less than 1m above sea level, more than 44 percent of human settlement and 80 percent of critical infrastructure within
100m of coast. Between 1992 and 2015, annual sea level rise averaged just under 4 mm. However, projections carried out
under the Maldives CCDR suggest the rate could increase to between 6 and 12 mm per year, under severe warming
scenarios, potentially leading to a rise of anywhere from 0.5 to 0.9 m by 2100. Without adaptation, coastal flooding could
damage up to 3.3 percent of total assets by 2050 during typical 10-year floods. Furthermore, as coastal erosion and
pressures on scarce land increase, the physical vulnerability of island populations, infrastructure, and livelihood assets are
expected to increase.
8.      Since 2000, the urban population has doubled in Greater Malé, from 73,000 inhabitants to 160,000 inhabitants
in 2022, and severe overcrowding is aggravating vulnerabilities of inhabitants. Maldives has experienced rapid
urbanization since the 1960’s, which initially concentrated on Malé and then diffused towards its neighboring reclaimed
island of Hulhumalé since the 2000’s. In 2022, approximately 41 percent of the nation’s population resided in Greater
Malé, with more than 60 percent of Greater Malé’s population concentrated on the island of Malé, making it one of the
densest cities in the World. While urban development in Malé has not adapted to the rapid growth of the city or for
climate resilience, the development of Hulhumalé has absorbed some of the pressures of overcrowding in Malé and
meeting development demands.
9.       Despite the rapid urban growth and construction, the building regulatory framework and adequate tools for
implementation and enforcement are insufficient. In 2008, the Ministry of Construction and Public Infrastructure
developed a handbook for the Maldives National Building Code5 to provide recommended best practices in the absence
of building regulations to facilitate the implementation of the Building Code. In 2017, the Ministry of National Planning,
Housing and Infrastructure issued the Construction Act to strengthen the building regulatory framework in the Maldives,
providing a much-needed institutional mechanism for legally binding building construction regulations, standards, and
procedures. In 2019 the Building Code was gazetted, however, the accompanying code compliance documents are still
under development and have not yet to be enacted. Currently architects and engineers refer to building codes from other
developed countries which are not specifically tailored to the overall conditions and disaster risk profile of the Maldives.
Furthermore, there is no mechanism to monitor construction quality and capacity for inspections is lacking. Technical
capacity is missing to assess structural damages of disaster-damaged and/or aging buildings, mostly 2-3 story buildings
from the 1970/80s, to determine required interventions to ensure the safety of the population, such as retrofitting or
demolition.


3 Asia Development Bank (2020): Multihazard Risk Atlas of Maldives. https://www.environment.gov.mv/v2/en/news/10466
4  WB & ADB (2021) Climate Risk Country Profile. https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2021-08/15649-
WB_Maldives%20Country%20Profile-WEB.pdf
5 Ministry of Construction and Public Infrastructure (2008) Maldives National Building Code – Handbook.

http://ndl.ethernet.edu.et/bitstream/123456789/41312/1/82.pdf

                                                                                                                           Page 4
        The World Bank
        Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)


10.       The high density of high-rise buildings, narrow roads and traffic congestion in Malé, in combination with
limitations of the building regulatory framework and lack of enforcement of those regulations results in an increased
fire risk. There have been several major fire outbreaks in the past years including in Malé’s only desalination plant (2014)6,
at a hardware store which spread to several blocks (2016)7, in a public housing flat (2016)8, at the largest secondhand
market (2023)9 and at a warehouse (2025)10. 119 incidents were reported to have occurred in 2017, 105 incidents in 2018
and according to the National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA)11, in 2022 fire was the most frequently occurring
hazard with 53 incidences (35 in Malé), adding up to 41 percent of all reported hazard events. The building regulatory
authority lies with MoCHI. The Maldives National Defense Force (MNDF) is responsible for defending the security of the
Maldives and the main responder in the case of emergencies, including fires. MNDF also plays a key role in the fire safety
regulation of buildings, as the Constitution entrusts MNDF with authority to prescribe fire standards for public buildings.
The 2019 performance-based building code makes explicit reference to fire in the clauses ’means of escape’, ‘spread of
fire’, ‘structural stability during a fire’, ‘access and facilities for the fire services’, ‘warning systems’, ‘electricity’ and ‘gas
as an energy source’, however, the code compliance documents are not in place to enable its implementation. Due to the
lack of guidance from the national regulatory framework, for most larger constructions one of the internationally
recognized building codes is chosen, such as the British, Euro or Hongkong codes.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
 The project development objective (PDO) is to reconstruct a government office building following internationally
 recognized fire safety, climate and natural hazard resilience standards.

  Key Results

11.      The achievement of the PDO will be monitored and measured through the following key results indicators which
will be disaggregated by gender, where applicable:
    (a) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure [Number of people]
    (b) Green certification received for design and construction [Text]
    (c) Government office building design and construction completed, following fire safety and multi-hazard standards
        as laid out in selected building code [Text]




6 https://www.downtoearth.org.in/environment/maldives-faces-water-crisis-after-fire-at-its-sole-desalination-plant-47757
7 https://maldivesindependent.com/society/massive-fire-breaks-out-in-male-123645
8 https://maldivesindependent.com/society/sinamale-fire-prompts-building-safety-concerns-122984
9 https://en.sun.mv/80193
10 https://en.sun.mv/94606
11 National Disaster Management Authority (2022) Disaster Statistics of Maldives 2022.

https://ndma.gov.mv/storage/uploads/Z7wz7vYW/rues1zux.pdf

                                                                                                                                Page 5
       The World Bank
       Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)


  D. Project Description

12.     The project responds to the critical need for reconstruction of the destroyed buildings due to the fire incident in
December 2024, in an Economic Recovery Loan (ERL) framework. It aims at enabling the effective operation of the affected
Ministries in a fire safe, climate and multi-hazard resilient building.
13.      Component 1 – Resilient government building that serves as model (USD 14 million): This component focuses
on the timely reconstruction (design, construction, and supervision) of the destroyed government office building to
provide a permanent work environment for the currently displaced staff, and potentially the inclusion of additional staff
that are currently located in rented spaces in private office buildings. The building shall serve as model for resilient building
design and construction in the Maldives, following a building-back-better approach and considering Malé’s high-density,
high-rise urban environment. First, the design will ensure fire and multi-hazard resilience in line with the relevant
Maldives’ legal framework, draft code compliance documents and global good practices. Second, the design will be climate
resilient and energy efficient to ensure the building is adapted to heat, humidity and durability, compliant with a green
certification. Third, a cost-efficient approach tailored to the Maldivian context including locally available materials and
straightforward construction techniques for ease of implementation will be sought.
14.     Component 2 – Project Management Support and Capacity Building (USD 1 million): The component aims at
supporting the effective implementation of the project. It will finance project management staff and consultants,
monitoring and evaluation, communications and relevant trainings. Project preparation has been supported by the
Maldives Urban Development and Resilience Project (MUDRP) Project Management Unit (PMU) which will, after project
effectiveness, also carry out the implementation, with the support of additional members as required.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




15.     The project is expected to have net positive environmental outcomes with the proposed new building leading as
a good example for government owned, energy efficient, climate resilient and fire safe building that will house the three
ministries displaced from the devastating fire in December 2024. Malé is one of the most densely built cities in the world,
with narrow streets lined with high-rises and continuous traffic flows. The risk of fire in the city is high, owing to the high
population, lack of enforcement of a fire safe building code and unsafe construction.
16.     The project will support the construction of a new multi-story building to house the ministries displaced from the
December 2024 fire in a new plot of land. The land is located at a road intersection and is currently used as a parking
space. The adverse environmental risks of the project will be short-term and related to the construction of the building
such as dust, noise and vibration generation, traffic disruption and worker/community safety aspects. Malé being a busy
urban center has multiple construction sites ongoing at a given time and has developed standard methods to facilitate

                                                                                                                            Page 6
       The World Bank
       Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)


civil works with minimum inconvenience to public life and safety. The use of safety nets covering the entire building,
erecting dust/noise barriers and nighttime material transport and adherence to other identified safety precautions will
effectively address these anticipated risks.
17.    The building is expected to be a design and build contract, and once the concept design is available an
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will need to be done as required by the Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) regulations of the country. The ESIA will include an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP),
Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) and other mitigation plans required as per the World Bank’s ESF requirements. The
PMU of the ongoing World Bank financed MUDRP with additional support, as needed, will be responsible for project
implementation and as such will benefit from the environment and social risk management already existing within the
PMU.
18.      The social risks of the project primarily stem from worker and community safety concerns during construction, as
well as broader social impacts on government service continuity, accessibility, and urban resilience. The anticipated influx
of foreign labor raises potential risks related to worker rights, OHS, and social tensions. A Labor Management Plan will be
established to address labor risks, incorporating a workers' Grievance Redress Mechanism and a Code of Conduct which
includes provisions to prevent Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH). As mentioned, an OHS plan
will be developed as part of the ESIA to ensure robust worker protections and minimize construction-related hazards for
surrounding communities.
19.       Beyond construction-related risks, the displacement of government staff following the fire has already disrupted
public services. Any delays in reconstruction could prolong these disruptions, affecting institutional efficiency. The
project’s urban location also presents challenges related to noise, dust, and traffic disruptions, necessitating careful
stakeholder engagement and mitigation strategies. Ensuring full compliance with newly endorsed accessibility guidelines
is critical, as the project sets a precedent for inclusive public infrastructure. Despite these risks, the project provides
significant social benefits. It will enhance fire safety and emergency preparedness, offering a secure, climate-resilient
workspace that serves as a model for Malé’s urban development. The project will create economic opportunities by
generating jobs for local workers and suppliers while promoting improved construction practices. Additionally, the
inclusion of accessibility features will foster a more inclusive built environment. By integrating climate-smart and multi-
hazard resilience principles, the project strengthens Malé’s long-term disaster preparedness and urban resilience. Given
these considerations, the social risk rating is classified as moderate, recognizing that while potential risks exist, they are
well-identified and can be effectively managed through planned mitigation measures.

 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
20.      Implementation of the ‘REBUILD’ project will be overseen by MoCHI through the MUDRP PMU, which will be
responsible for monitoring program progress and to ensure the accountability of relevant institutions. The joint MUDRP
and REBUILD PMU will be headed by a Project Director appointed by MoCHI and staffed with necessary technical experts
and specialists to coordinate and conduct project implementation and management. The ongoing MUDRP PMU, which
has been hired or deputed from GoM as necessary, may be supported by additional staff as necessary. Technical
committees will be established to ensure feedback and input from relevant stakeholders including MNDF, NDMA, MoFP
and MoTE. MoFP will be closely involved throughout the implementation.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate

                                                                                                                         Page 7
     The World Bank
     Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)


CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Natsuko Kikutake
 Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Phoram Shah
 Senior Urban Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Finance and Planning
 Mohamed Yammai
 Chief Resource Mobilization Executive
 mohamed.yammai@finance.gov.mv

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Construction, Housing and Infrastructure
 Ibrahim Thoaam Mohamed
 State Minister
 ibrahim.thoaam@infrastructure.gov.mv

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Natsuko Kikutake, Phoram Shah

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:




                                                                                        Page 8
The World Bank
Maldives Fire Reconstruction and Building Resilience Emergency Project (P510584)




                                                                                   Page 9
