Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sustainable Urban Development DPF(P512540)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                              Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDIC00243




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Urban Development DPF(P512540)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
 Brazil                         P512540                       Sustainable Urban Development DPF
 Region                         Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)         Financing Instrument
 LATIN AMERICA AND                                                                         Development Policy
                                15-Jul-2026                   Urban, Resilience and Land
 CARIBBEAN                                                                                 Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 Fortaleza Secretariat of       Fortaleza Urban and
 Finance                        Environment Secretariat

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To promote urban and financial sustainability in the municipality of Fortaleza


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                           194.76

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                          194.76
     World Bank Lending                                                                                      194.76

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                          Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Urban Development DPF(P512540)




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
Despite its status as one of the largest economies in Northeast Brazil, Fortaleza is falling short of its potential in fostering
economic growth and job creation. Fortaleza, one of the fastest growing large cities in Brazil in recent decades,
contributes 37 percent of the State of Ceará’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and employs 53 percent of Ceara’s
workforce.1 It concentrates approximately 28 percent of the State’s population and 44 percent of the metropolitan
region’s population.2 The service sector is the key driver of the local economy, generating on average 83 percent of GDP.
Yet, the municipality is not fully realizing its potential. The city’s rapid growth was not guided by adequate planning and
investment, leading to sprawling growth, high infrastructure and transportation costs, high levels of inequality, and loss
of environmentally protected areas.
Promoting Fortaleza’s sustainable growth and social inclusion requires improving urban management and
strengthening public finances. Sprawled growth hinders Fortaleza’s economic growth and job creation. This outward, low-
density development increases costs for extending and maintaining basic services and infrastructure, exacerbates income
inequality, and leads to encroachment of green areas. Urban planning strategies that strengthen services and
infrastructure to maximize the benefits of agglomeration and minimize the cost of congestion are important foundational
investments to foster a dynamic private sector that can create more and better jobs. Strengthening public finances will
also be critical to develop and maintain essential services to attract investment, support job creation, and respond to new
policy challenges.
Brazil’s macroeconomic policy framework is considered adequate for the proposed operation in São Paulo. Following
robust growth in 2024, economic activity is expected to moderate to 2.4 percent in 2025 and stabilize at its potential rate
of 2.5 percent in the medium term. The Federal Government has advanced growth-oriented reforms to improve the
business climate, financial sector, and indirect tax system, while fiscal policy under the new framework will require
continued consolidation to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio by the end of the decade. Brazil’s macroeconomic stability is
underpinned by an independent Central Bank, a resilient financial system, inflation targeting, and a flexible exchange rate
regime, with low liquidity risks supported by strong cash buffers and limited foreign exchange exposure. The external
position remains solid, with a trade surplus, rising foreign reserves, and manageable external financing needs. In Fortaleza,
its fiscal framework is adequate for this proposed operation, and the proposed DPF’s debt restructuring is expected to
generate significant fiscal space and mitigate near-term liquidity risks, ensuring the adequacy of the macro-fiscal
framework for this operation. Sustained fiscal discipline through short-term and structural fiscal adjustment measures will
be critical to correct the city government’s fiscal performance.

 Relationship to CPF

This DPF supports objectives of the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Brazil. This operation supports
reforms aimed at strengthening the municipality’s urban and financial sustainability, improving its planning, management,
and funding of interventions across several sectors relevant for Fortaleza’s economic competitiveness, including through
leveraging private sector capital and expertise, while preserving environmental protection areas and providing affordable
housing,

1 Fortaleza Secretariat of Economic Development, August 2025, formal employment for Fortaleza municipality and Ceara State.
2 According to the IBGE, in 2022, the population of Fortaleza was 2,428,708, the population of the metropolitan area 3,903,945 and the population

of the state of Ceará was 8,791,688.

                                                                                                                                             Page 2



                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Urban Development DPF(P512540)




 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

The Development Objective of this DPF aims to support the Municipality of Fortaleza in strengthening its urban and
financial sustainability.

  Key Results

The Fortaleza Sustainable Urban Development DPF is designed to strengthen the municipality’s urban and financial
sustainability.

 D. Concept Description
The proposed standalone US$195 million Development Policy Financing (DPF) for the Municipality of Fortaleza aims to
support the Municipality in strengthening its urban and financial sustainability to set the path for its long-term
transformation. The proposed operation builds on the technical work on urban planning and updating of the property
cadaster supported through the Fortaleza Sustainable Urban Development Project (P153012, IPF, US$60 million), to
solidify key reforms on urban and financial sustainability through the proposed DPF and will open fiscal space for a follow
on IPF to support investments in tourism to promote job creation. The proposed operation supports reforms that will
promote sustainable urban development through legislation aimed to incentivize transit-oriented development, expand
environmentally protected areas, earmarks land for affordable housing, advance mitigation and adaptation measures to
decrease urban heat, and expands funding sources and establishes a minimum allocation for investment in affordable
housing. The operation also aims to strengthen fiscal sustainability by broadening the municipality’s revenue base and
improve its expenditure controls.


 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts

The previous actions of Pillar I will have direct positive impacts on the poorest and most vulnerable layers of the population
of the city of Fortaleza. These impacts are related to the expansion of the real estate stock and investments for the
improvement of social housing (PA1 and PA3), the improvement of access to public transport and the reduction of the
degree of exposure to risks and impacts exacerbated by climate change (PA2). It is estimated that the revision of the
Municipal Urban Development Fund Law (PA3) will double, between 2025 and 2027, municipal investments in housing
improvements and triple the number of families served. This action has a significant impact in terms of gender equity and
social inclusion: the explicit targeting of social housing policies and the establishment of minimum funding allocations
ensure that resources reach those most in need, with anticipated positive effects on gender equity and the inclusion of
marginalized groups.3 Through the Municipal Policy on Climate Change, the municipality will prioritize strategies to combat
heat islands, reduce the vulnerability of communities exposed to extreme events and the effective participation of the




3 The municipality's Housing Registry Database informs that women and single mothers represent 81% and 37% of registered people, respectively.

In addition, the elderly, people with disabilities and the homeless population (estimated at 9,000 people) represent 8%, 4% and 4% of those
registered, respectively.

                                                                                                                                         Page 3



                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
             The World Bank
             Sustainable Urban Development DPF(P512540)


most vulnerable social groups in the formulation, execution, monitoring and evaluation of public policies related to
climate.4

The previous actions contained in Pillar II will have an indirect positive impact on poverty creating fiscal space for pro-poor
investments. PA4 and PA6 will increase the capacity of public investment by the municipality, implying an improvement
in the services offered to the population in general, but on which the poorest layers are more directly dependent. Poor
households will be protected from negative impacts of the changes to the urban property tax cadaster, as low-value
properties continue to be exempt from the tax and therefore mitigate regressive effects. PA5 will have two positive
impacts – the reduction of spending by low-income households who become exempt from paying the public lighting fee
and who benefit from the impacts that derive from the improvement of the public lighting system in terms of mobility
and safety.5

  Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

The operation is likely to have potential beneficial effects on Fortaleza’s environmental priorities, particularly under Pillar
1 (PA 1 and PA 2). Potential significant adverse effects of the operation on the environment, forests, and other natural
resources are unlikely. The approval of the revised Plano Diretor (PA1) and Municipal Climate Change Policy (PA2) would
strengthen the municipal environmental policy by increasing the land area designated as zones of relevant environmental
interest and strengthening regulations to protect green areas and increase soil permeability within the city, as well as by
increasing strategic arborization to create green corridors and reduce temperatures, contributing to the climate
adaptation of the urban environment. No significant environmental impact or benefit is expected from the other Prior
Actions as defined at this stage.

  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
  CONTACT POINT

  World Bank
     Hannah Kim
     Senior Urban Specialist

     Cornelius Fleischhaker
     Senior Economist

  Borrower/Client/Recipient
     Fortaleza Secretariat of Finance

  Implementing Agencies



4 Recent data estimate that one in 5 city residents live in irregular settlements and that 2,500 families live in 66 areas at risk of flooding, landslides or

erosion.
5 It is worth noting that Fortaleza is the fifth most violent state capital in the country (a homicide rate equal to 33.7 homicides/100,000 inhabitants) and which rises in peripheral regions of the city, characterized by low
income and poor infrastructure - MAGALHÃES, M. R. V.; DA SILVA, F. P.; NETO, A. M.; SANTOS, M. D.; PENNA, C. M. A criminalidade tomou conta da cidade: O cinturão de insegurança em Fortaleza, Ceará. Revista Brasileira
de Estudos Regionais e Urbanos, [S. l.], v. 18, n. 1, p. 118–149, 2024. DOI: 10.54766/rberu.v18i1.1069. Disponível em: https://revistaaber.org.br/rberu/article/view/1069.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 4



                                                                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Urban Development DPF(P512540)


 Fortaleza Urban and Environment Secretariat

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Hannah Kim, Cornelius Fleischhaker

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Federica Ranghieri                   25-Nov-2025

Country Director:                      Jorge A. Coarasa                     10-Dec-2025




                                                                                                  Page 5



                                                                                          Official Use Only
