Public Disclosure Authorized
                                      The World Bank
                                      Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                  Environmental and Social Review Summary


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                           Appraisal Stage
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)

      For Official Use Only
                                                World Bank Performance Standards (OP 4.03)

                                                                     Date Prepared/Updated: 29/03/2026




Public Disclosure Authorized                                 Date Prepared/Updated: | Report No: ESRSXXXXXX




                               DATE                                                                      Official Use Only   Page 1 of 20
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)




For Official Use Only

                         @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate

                         DATASHEET


                         BASIC INFORMATION



                         Project
                                                 Operation Name
                         Beneficiary(ies)

                         Brazil                  Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil

                                                                             Environmental and Social Risk
                         Operation ID            Financing Instrument
                                                                             Classification

                                                 Investment Project
                         P512529                                             Moderate
                                                 Financing (IPF)




                        DATE                                                                           Official Use Only   Page 2 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate

                         Financing & Implementation Modalities

                         [ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                   [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)

                         [ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                 [ ] Fragile State(s)

                         [ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                      [ ] Small State(s)

                         [✓✓] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                           [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country

                         [ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                  [ ] Conflict

                         [ ] Deferred Drawdown                                        [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster

                         [ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)               [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)



                         Expected Approval Date               Expected Closing Date

                         15-Jul-2026                          30-Jun-2031

                         Bank/IFC Collaboration               Joint Level




For Official Use Only
                         Yes                                  Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination



                         Proposed Development Objective(s)

                         Expand finance for sustainable housing construction and efficient urban development



                         Components

                          Component Name                                                                                             Cost (US$)

                          Component 1: Financing for Certified Sustainable Housing Projects                                      198,000,000.00

                          Component 2: Technical Assistance                                                                        2,000,000.00



                         @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate




                        DATE                                                                               Official Use Only           Page 3 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)




                         Organizations


                          Borrower:                        Caixa Econômica Federal

                          Implementing Agency:             Caixa Econômica Federal




                         B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                         Policy, para. 12?
                         No



                         C. Project Abstract [including Project structure, components, activities, technical design, flow of funds, etc.]
                         The objective of the project is to expand finance for sustainable housing construction and efficient urban development.




For Official Use Only
                         Sustainable certification programs enhance the benefits of housing construction in cities. Certification programs, such as
                         LEED, EDGE, AQUA-HQE, BREEAM and CAIXA’s Selo Casa Azul are active in Brazil. These certifications promote sustainable
                         urban growth by incentivizing the construction of housing that, among other things, is more water and energy efficient,
                         provides flood protection and drainage, encourages reduction and recycling of waste, uses sustainable construction
                         materials, and improves urban spaces and access to public transport. They also promote labor practices and social elements
                         including community engagement and education. These resulting housing developments help make the costs of provision
                         of services and living in cities more manageable and reduce risks.

                         This project is part of a coordinated WBG engagement with IFC to scale the adoption of sustainable housing. IFC has
                         supported green and sustainable housing and urban development in Brazil and the region through a mix of investment,
                         advisory services, policy engagement, and market-building initiatives, including supporting green building standards
                         through the EDGE green building certification system

                         As part of a separate but coordinated WBG intervention, IFC is proposing a loan of up to US$200 million to CAIXA to support
                         the expansion of CAIXA’s certified sustainable housing construction projects. The financing will be provided in advance of
                         IBRD financing to help kick off the program and meet Eco-Invest capital mobilization requirements. This will be the first in
                         a series of projects IFC is expected to finance in support of the Eco-Invest program in Brazil, alongside other
                         projects with commercial banks in the country (i.e., Banco Santander, Banco Bradesco, and Itaú Unibanco). While
                         the IBRD and IFC interventions are separate operations with different timelines, they have a common objective. The two
                         operations offer complementarity and will enable CAIXA to achieve outcomes beyond what would be achievable working
                         only with private markets or a single WBG institution. The operation will leverage IFC’s role in sustainable housing
                         standards, market creation, and advisory services, as well as the IBRD’s role in policy, programmatic support, and sovereign
                         engagement IFC financing is not contingent on, nor will it benefit from IBRD financing

                        DATE                                                                                 Official Use Only              Page 4 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         The Selo Casa Azul provides certification housing projects that meet certain social and sustainability standards, scored
                         based on criteria for: (i) urban quality and well-being (ii) energy efficiency and sustainable comfort, (iii) efficient water
                         management, (iv) sustainable development, (v) social and (vi) innovation.

                         The Operation will expand sustainable housing construction, including income segments and geographic areas underserved
                         by this market, and it will support the evolution of the certification system and financing for sustainable housing.

                         The primary beneficiaries of the project will be housing developers receiving sub-loans for the construction or retrofitting
                         of sustainable residential buildings. In addition, the project will benefit i) workers, through the creation of
                         an expected 10,000+ direct and indirect jobs for the design, construction, and maintenance of sustainable housing, ii)
                         public service providers, due to improvements in the operation and efficiency of housing related infrastructure services,
                         iii) 4,700 households (approximately 13,000 people) living in new and/or retrofitted sustainable housing developments
                         due to lower energy and electricity bills, decreased commuting costs, increased livability and property values, and better
                         lending terms and resale values, and iv) housing developers (beyond just those receiving sub-loans under the project) due
                         to increased availability of private capital for sustainable housing investments.

                         Component 1: Financing for Construction of Certified Sustainable Housing (IBRD USD 198,000,000, Government of
                         Brazil USD 40,000,000, and private financing 59,000,000). This component will finance the provision of sub-loans for the
                         implementation of Eligible Subprojects for construction or retrofitting of housing that is certified as sustainable under
                         Designated Certifications33. It is designed help cities better accommodate the demand for infrastructure and services,




For Official Use Only
                         improve livability and access to jobs, and reduce the risks and damages associated with climate hazards. This would be
                         done by providing financing that would reduce barriers and costs to adoption through the creation of a new credit line that
                         blends IBRD (US$198 million) and Government resources through Eco-Invest (US$40 million). The overall structure will
                         include five parts of IBRD and IFC and one part of Eco-Invest. IFC financing will be blended in a similar way with Eco-Invest
                         and contributes to the same development objective. This financing will be made available separately, prior to IBRD
                         financing. The pricing of the blended funding will depend on the World Bank financial product agreed with CAIXA, which
                         will be confirmed at appraisal. It will be designed on a cost-recovery basis, ensuring that CAIXA covers its funding,
                         operational, and risk-management costs. As Eco-invest is designed as a transitional program, the project would allow
                         evaluation of the implementation of the Eco-invest program for this subsector to understand costs, benefits, and fiscal
                         impact, and performance as transitional support in building the market. This would provide the Government with an
                         understanding of the need for its continuation or adjustment of the program.

                         The credit line will only be accessible to housing developers for i) the construction of new housing projects that have
                         sustainability certifications, including new housing developments; and ii) retrofitting of existing residential buildings
                         certified through the major sustainable housing certification systems.34 The size of each investment is flexible and will be
                         affected by the financing package provided by the new credit line and market demand. To enhance income targeting, a
                         ceiling price per unit has been agreed with CAIXA based on the market and an affordability analysis.35 In addition,
                         consistent with the IFC financing, on a best effort basis CAIXA will prioritize projects located in the North, Northeast and
                         Legal Amazon Regions, where relative housing deficits are higher. The credit line will, however, be available country-wide,
                         allowing for        support in          Brazil's      highly        urbanized           areas where absolute         housing
                         needs remain larger, exacerbated by elevated land costs and a higher cost of living.

                         The credit line will only finance construction activities and not include land purchase or upfront studies. The features of the
                         housing will depend on the development and how it responds to the requirements of certification. It will cover several

                        DATE                                                                                 Official Use Only              Page 5 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         categories for which the developer will need to meet minimum standards set by the certification. Depending on the
                         certification and individual development, these include measures to improve: energy efficiency (energy efficient devices,
                         natural ventilation and passive cooling, solar, individualized metering); water efficiency (water saving devices, rainwater
                         harvesting, individualized metering, reuse of greywater); construction practices (low GHG emission and recyclable
                         materials, construction waste recycling, certified wood); urban quality (quality of surrounding urban
                         space, including distance away from potential climate hazards, recreational space, proximity to public transport, waste
                         separation facilities); social aspects (labor practices, training, community relations); and/or introduction of innovative
                         practices. Most of these measures will also increase the resilience of cities and buildings. All climate-related requirements
                         of the Selo Casa Azul certification can be found in Annex 3.

                         The credit line will also incorporate sustainability-linked features, including differentiated interest-rate pricing tied to the
                         level of certification (many certifications have different levels designated by for example bronze, silver and gold) achieved
                         by the sub-borrower. Under this structure, a base rate would apply to projects that achieve certification, with incremental
                         reductions for higher certification levels, thereby aligning financial incentives with environmental
                         performance. Implementation details will be agreed upon and described in the POM.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (USD2,000,000). This component is designed to address barriers to adoption of
                         sustainable construction, including improving awareness of sustainable construction and certification programs, capacity
                         within CAIXA, development of new sustainable construction financing products tailored to other segments, and improving
                         the methodology and reporting of CAIXAs Selo Casa Azul certification to enable broader acceptance globally and within the




For Official Use Only
                         financial sector in Brazil. Elements of the component activities will also be supported through separate financing through
                         IFC advisory services.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening Institutions and Organizations for Sustainable Housing Certification. This
                         subcomponent will support updating CAIXA’s Casa Selo Azul certification and awareness and capacity building activities for
                         public and private actors. In particular, it will finance: (i) technical support to improve CAIXA’s Selo Casa Azul certification
                         to be more easily accepted and used by other national and global financial institutions and markets (including better
                         quantification, third party auditing and consistency with standards set by international organizations); (ii) support for a
                         program for public and private actors working with sustainable housing construction for promotion of the program and
                         awareness of sustainably certified housing; and (iii) providing practical guides and training and advice on incentives and
                         regulations to local governments.

                         In particular this sub-component will finance: Provision of technical assistance for the strengthening of institutions and
                         organizations for sustainable housing certification, including, inter alia, (a) technical support to improving the Borrower’s
                         [CAIXA Federal] Selo Casa Azul certification; (b) promotion and awareness of sustainably certified housing; and, (c) practical
                         guides, training and advice and other capacity building activities;

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening Financing for Sustainable Housing. This component is designed to improve the
                         financial products for housing and instruments for sustainable financing to help expand the market to lower-income
                         segments and underinvested housing investment typologies, and to better capitalize on the benefits of sustainable housing
                         including mobilizing private sector capital. It will support: (i) development of innovative housing portfolio products (e.g.
                         catered products for retrofits, social rental housing, PPPs, modular construction and low income sustainable certification
                         modalities) and (iii) development of sustainable financing instruments with higher potential for private capital mobilization
                         for sustainable housing (e.g., risk mitigation facility, second tier lending to private banks, green bonds and mortgages,

                        DATE                                                                                  Official Use Only              Page 6 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         refinancing options). Outputs will include a study on sustainable housing construction in Brazil and worldwide to support
                         the development and/or improvement of products and financial instruments focused on sustainable housing and an
                         operational roadmap.

                         In particular, this sub-component will finance: Provision of technical assistance for Strengthening Financing for Sustainable
                         Housing, including, inter alia, (a) development of innovative housing portfolio products and projects; and (b) development
                         of sustainable financing instruments.




                         D. Scope of application of Performance Standards (PSs) [and Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), if relevant]
                         Please indicate if both Performance Standards (PSs) and Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) apply to the project. If
                         so, indicate which components/activities/aspects of the project and the timing of private sector and public sector
                         engagement.
                         This Project will apply the Performance Standards only, given that this credit line will finance exclusively housing projects
                         developed by the private sector.

                         E. Environmental and Social Overview
                         E.1. Project location(s) and salient characteristics relevant to the ES assessment [geographic, environmental, social]

                         Brazil’s economy grew steadily, with GDP increasing by 3.2% in 2023 and maintaining a similar pace in 2024. Poverty rates




For Official Use Only
                         declined to 21.3%, supported by improved economic conditions, social protection programs, and a higher minimum wage.
                         Unemployment dropped to a historic low of 6.1%, and real household incomes rose. Although the pace of poverty reduction
                         slowed as social transfers stabilized, continued job growth and targeted social policies are expected to further reduce
                         poverty.

                         About 87% of Brazil’s population and 90% of its jobs are concentrated in urban areas. The construction sector employs over
                         3 million people and accounts for 8% of new job creation. Urban expansion—driven mainly by housing construction, which
                         has grown by 2.8% annually—has helped address the country’s housing deficit, but also intensified challenges such as
                         inadequate housing, unmaintained buildings, and increased demand for infrastructure and services. In 2023, according to
                         Fundação João Pinheiro, Brazil’s housing challenge combined a quantitative deficit of about 6.0 million dwellings (7.6% of
                         occupied homes) with widespread qualitative inadequacies affecting 27.7 million urban dwellings (40.8%). The deficit is
                         driven mainly by excessive rent burdens in urban areas (61%), while precarious housing and cohabitation remain central in
                         poorer regions. The North shows the highest relative deficit (11.9%), with severe precariousness in states such as Amapá,
                         Roraima and Amazonas, and a larger rural component; the Northeast concentrates large absolute needs and high shares
                         of precarious housing (notably Maranhão and Piauí). By contrast, the Southeast, South and Center‑West have lower relative
                         deficits but are dominated by rent burden pressures in metropolitan areas. Beyond the deficit, inadequacies are most acute
                         in the North (74.5% of urban homes) and Northeast (59.2%), largely due to infrastructure gaps (water, sanitation, waste),
                         while the Southeast has the lowest inadequacy rate (26.1%)

                         Urban growth has contributed to environmental pressures: by 2015, urban areas accounted for half of Brazil’s CO₂
                         emissions. Cities face significant climate risks, with an average of 2,740 climate-related events annually, leading to public
                         and private sector losses. These impacts are expected to worsen as temperatures rise and rainfall patterns become more


                        DATE                                                                                Official Use Only             Page 7 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         extreme, increasing flood risks and reducing water availability. The expansion of housing into flood-prone areas, along with
                         increased urban heat and congestion, further exacerbates these challenges.

                         Housing and construction activities drive up the consumption of materials, water, and energy—households account for
                         21% of electricity use and 68% of water consumption—and generate most of Brazil’s waste. Throughout their lifecycle,
                         housing was responsible for 9% of Brazil’s greenhouse gas emissions in 2013, mainly from energy use, material production,
                         and waste management, with additional emissions linked to increased commuting and traffic congestion.


                         E. 2. Client’s Organizational Capacity/Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                         Caixa is a state-owned financial institution with over 26,500 service units in more than 99% of Brazilian municipalities and
                         86,962 employees (44.9% women), and has the capacity and commitment to the environmental and social management
                         of its risks.

                         The National Monetary Council (CNM in Portuguese), a deliberative federal agency, has issued Resolution 4,943/2021 that
                         mandates that financial institutions address social, environmental, and climate risks. Complying with these requirements,
                         Caixa has in place an Environmental and Social Management System endorsed by the institution’s Senior Management.
                         Caixa’s Social, Environmental and Climate Responsibility Policy (PRSAC) incorporates five pillars: a) management of social,
                         environmental and climate risks; b) management of administrative and supply chain practices for governance; c) disclosure
                         and reporting of information; d) promotion of sustainable development; and e) relationship and engagement with
                         stakeholders. Since 2009 Caixa adheres to the Equator Principles and applies IFC’s Performance Standards for loans that




For Official Use Only
                         pose significant E&S risks.

                         Caixa’s structure includes a national managerial unit, the Gerência Nacional de Riscos Especiais, responsible for daily E&S
                         risk management, including screening, identifying, assessing risks, and monitoring borrowers' compliance with required
                         measures. Also, Caixa established a Sustainability Committee in 2022 and a Vice-Presidency of Sustainability and Digital
                         Citizenship in 2023. Annually, Caixa discloses information through the Sustainability Report and the Social, Environmental,
                         and Climate Risks and Opportunities Report, aligned with CNM’s resolution requirements.

                         Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) that has been assessed by the Bank for two other operations
                         currently under preparation: Brazil Electromobility Multiphase Programmatic Approach – MPA Phase 1 CEF (P504543) and
                         Brazilian States And Municipalities Digital Acceleration Project (P508363). The system was assessed as robust for Sub loans
                         that fall under the Equator Principles and for those where the Principles do not apply, the gap was filled with the
                         development and implementation of the tailored E&S screening tool, the guide for its implementation and the training of
                         the staff who will apply the tool, as agreed in the ESCPs of both Projects.


                          II. SUMMARY OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS
                          This assessment has been prepared based on review and analysis of ES documents that have been prepared by the
                          Borrower and/or Project Participants (including Private Entities and Financial Intermediaries (FIs)), as indicated by
                          PSSs and/or ESSs.

                        A. For ESSs: Environmental and Social Risk Classification – High, Substantial, Moderate and Low
                        Provide rationale for the risk classification
                         Non-applicable

                        DATE                                                                               Official Use Only             Page 8 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         B. For PSs: Environmental and Social Categorization - CATEGORY A, B, C, FI-1, FI-2 and FI-3
                         Provide rationale for the categorization


                         This Project triggered OP 4.03 – Performance Standards for the Private Sector Activities, given that this credit line will
                         finance only housing projects developed by the private sector. The environmental and social risk of the operation is
                         assessed as Category FI-2 (correspondent with a Moderate E&S Risk rating within the ESF), primarily due to the financing
                         of urban civil works. The subprojects are expected to be located in already modified environments and are not expected
                         to result in significant or irreversible environmental or social impacts. Potential risks are mainly related to occupational
                         health and safety and routine construction impacts, Gender Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual
                         Harassments, respectively (GBV-SEA/SH). most of the activities are expected to be few in number, generally site-specific,
                         largely reversible, and can be readily addressed through mitigation measures and the application of Good International
                         Industry Practice under Caixa’s ESMS. The criteria outlined in Caixa’s subproject screening tool developed for the two
                         other WB operations serve to classify the environmental and social risks associated with each proposal. These include
                         factors such as large-scale resettlement or expropriation, impacts on indigenous and quilombola lands, adverse effects on
                         vulnerable populations or cultural heritage, occupational and community health and safety risks, adequacy of risk
                         management and staff training, environmental licensing requirements, suppression of native vegetation, noise, and
                         changes in soil, water, and air quality, as well as greenhouse gas emissions and climate-related vulnerabilities. Regulatory
                         compliance regarding environmental authorizations and licenses is also considered.. The project excludes IFC Exclusion
                         List activities, coal-related activities, and Subprojects that are classified as having high or substantial risk will not be eligible




For Official Use Only
                         for this project. The potential environmental and social (E&S) issues, risks, and impacts are primarily associated with
                         Caixa’s capacity to effectively apply the newly developed E&S screening procedures, implemented through the enhanced
                         screening tool, and to manage the subprojects financed under the operation.
                         The due diligence confirmed that Caixa demonstrates solid understanding constructions-related E&S risks, familiarity with
                         IFC requirements, and a commitment to maintaining and strengthening its ESMS. Overall commitment is deemed
                         satisfactory for a FI-2 Project.
                         Also, a subproject is eligible for the Selo Azul certification if it complies with the specific requirements of the Selo Azul,
                         meets the prerequisites of CAIXA’s programs, fulfills the mandatory criteria, and achieves the minimum score in the
                         sustainability categories, with all requirements verified through technical documentation and reports.
                         The process involves document analysis, inspections, and confirmation of the implementation of the proposed sustainable
                         solutions. Examples of criteria include: urban quality, such as adequate infrastructure, relationship with the surroundings,
                         waste separation, urban improvements, landscaping, and sustainable mobility solutions; energy efficiency, such as solar
                         orientation, thermal and lighting comfort, energy-saving devices, and renewable energy generation; water management,
                         with saving devices, individual metering, permeable areas, reuse and rainwater harvesting; sustainable production,
                         including waste management, use of certified wood, industrialized components, and recycled aggregates; social criteria,
                         such as engagement with communities, support for resident management, environmental education, inclusion of local
                         workers, and promotion of well-being; and innovation, such as BIM application, carbon management, building
                         automation, connectivity, digital tools, and innovative proposals.
                         Finally, Caixa’s exclusion list covers companies and individuals convicted of human rights violations—including forced
                         labor, child labor, and discrimination—environmental crimes, or those involved in the production or trade of firearms,
                         military goods, alcohol, tobacco, fossil fuels, radioactive or nuclear materials, or asbestos. It also includes entities on
                         national and international watchlists for money laundering, terrorism financing, or weapons proliferation, as well as those

                        DATE                                                                                     Official Use Only               Page 9 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         lacking proper environmental licenses. Additionally, it excludes businesses engaged in unregulated gambling,
                         unsustainable logging, coal mining or power generation, certain financial activities, and those with high-risk mining
                         operations or involvement in the acquisition of animals for resale.
                         Annual E&S information is disclosed through Caixa’s Sustainability Report and the Social, Environmental and Climate Risks
                         and Opportunities Report (latest: 2024).



                          Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) Risk Rating

                         The SEA/SH risk rating is Moderate. Brazil has a strong legislation on SEA/SH, domestic violence and violence against women
                         and children. SEA/SH are defined as crimes in the Penal Code (Art. 216-A, 215-A, 218-B, and 228) and Law 13,431/2014. A
                         robust network of referral services to SEA/SH and GBV survivors is broadly available, follows a survivor-centered approach,
                         offers social, psychological, pedagogical, and legal care and guidance, pursues criminal action, and provides protective
                         measures. Despite this strong legal framework, the World Bank GBV Profile for Brazil (June 2023) highlights that the country
                         has one of the highest rates of GBV globally and there are significant challenges in the enforcement and implementation
                         of these laws, resulting in low execution by the government. However, it is important to contextualize this information, as
                         the predominant form of gender-based violence in Brazil happens intradomicile, which is not directly relevant to WB
                         projects that primarily assess risks of project-related SEA/SH. Still, operations may support the enforcement of the laws for
                         cases related to project workers and affected communities, and also contribute in aspects such as awareness and
                         information dissemination.




For Official Use Only
                         Following CMN’s Resolution 4,943/2021, one of the risks that require assessment refers to acts of harassment,
                         discrimination or prejudice based on personal attributes, such as ethnicity, race, color, socioeconomic status, family status,
                         nationality, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, belief, disability, or health and ideological or political
                         positioning. Caixa’s HR and OHS systems align with Brazilian labor law and IFC Performance Standard 2 (PS2), ensuring fair
                         treatment, non-discrimination, equal opportunity, freedom of association/collective bargaining, worker protection, and
                         prohibition of forced and child labor. Workers have confidential, non-retaliatory grievance channels, including for Sexual
                         Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH). This system helped addressing a 2022 sexual harassment incident
                         involving senior leadership. Authorities addressed the case and Caixa signed a Conduct Adjustment Agreement and paid a
                         US$1.91M fine. Corrective measures now strengthen SEA/SH prevention.

                         OHS is managed through an Internal Accident & Harassment Prevention Committee, a Risk Management Program, an OHS
                         Action Plan, and annual prevention initiatives. An independent grievance mechanism allows anonymous reporting. Staff
                         annually sign the Code of Conduct and comply with anti-harassment and anti-discrimination policies. Supplier requirements
                         prohibit forced/child labor and discrimination, mandate labor and OHS compliance, and require adherence to the Suppliers
                         Code of Conduct and PRSAC. Borrower due diligence also checks SEA/SH-related policies.


                        III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS

                         A. Performance Standards
                         PS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                         Overview of application of PS1:

                        DATE                                                                                  Official Use Only            Page 10 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)




                         Caixa has a well-established ESMS. In 2022, Caixa’s Board of Directors endorsed its Social, Environmental and Climate
                         Responsibility Policy (PRSAC) and approved the constitution of a Sustainability Committee responsible for advising on
                         issues related to sustainability and ESC responsibilities. PRSAC is anchored in the Resolução CMN 4943/2021, which
                         provides for the risk management framework, the capital management framework, and the information disclosure
                         policy. One of PRSAC’s principles establishes that the institution’s risk management structure shall be able to identify,
                         measure, assess, monitor, report, control and mitigate social, environmental and climate risks, ensuring alignment with
                         current legislation, corporate strategy and good market practices.

                         The assessment and contracting process for subprojects is structured in an integrated and sequential manner, ensuring
                         that no operation advances without a consistent review of legal, financial, technical, environmental, and social aspects.
                         From the early stages, the process seeks to identify relevant risks and verify the compliance of both the borrower and
                         the subproject with applicable legislation, institutional policies, and recognized socio-environmental good practices.
                         During the initial pre-screening stage, a preliminary assessment of the subproject is conducted, focusing on its location,
                         its suitability for the intended use, and its compatibility with the surrounding area. At this stage, critical
                         socio-environmental factors may already be identified, such as development in environmentally sensitive areas,
                         historical land uses with potential contamination risks, exposure to flood-prone areas, or the need for clearances from
                         environmental authorities. The Project excludes IFC Exclusion List activities, coal-related activities, and high-risk
                         Environmental and Social (E&S) transactions. These elements help determine the scope and depth of subsequent
                         assessments.




For Official Use Only
                         The legal and credit risk analyses assess the borrower’s legal standing, land tenure conditions, and the economic and
                         financial viability of the operation, while also incorporating relevant socio-environmental considerations. This includes,
                         for example, the borrower’s environmental and social track record, the existence of environmental or social liabilities,
                         reputational risks associated with the corporate group, and the alignment of the financed activity with the institution’s
                         environmental and social responsibility policies.
                         The technical and engineering assessment verifies the feasibility of the subproject in terms of design, construction
                         schedule, and costs, including confirmation of environmental regulatory compliance through the submission of
                         required licenses and authorizations, in accordance with applicable legislation. This assessment ensures that the
                         project proceeds only when the necessary environmental requirements for implementation have been duly met,
                         without substituting the role of the competent licensing authorities.
                         In an integrated manner, the environmental and social assessment identifies, classifies, and addresses the risks
                         associated with both the borrower and the subproject. This includes the evaluation of potential environmental impacts,
                         such as vegetation clearing or interference with natural resources, as well as relevant social aspects, including impacts
                         on local communities, potential land tenure or social conflicts, and the need for mitigation measures. These risks are
                         assessed in terms of their implications for credit risk, regulatory compliance, and reputational exposure. Furthermore,
                         the Selo Azul criteria also include elements of stakeholder engagement that grants a higher score to subprojects that
                         includes engagement activites with its workers, beneficiaries and surounding communities.


                         During the implementation phase, the subproject is subject to ongoing supervision, including verification of
                         construction progress, consistency between disbursements and physical advancement, and compliance with technical,
                         environmental, and social requirements. Subproject completion is conditional upon evidence of full compliance with

                        DATE                                                                                Official Use Only            Page 11 of 20
                                The World Bank
                                Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         the applicable conditions, ensuring that the operation is aligned with principles of responsible risk management,
                         environmental and social compliance, and sustainability, consistent with institutional objectives and international good
                         practices.
                         Complying with the Brazilian laws on access to information (Law 12,527/2011), Caixa has procedures for external
                         communications in place and discloses relevant information on its portfolio and ESMS. Caixa also operates an
                         Ombudsman’s Office to handle internal/external complaints. Caixa’s Ombudsman’s Office will handle Project-related
                         requests of information/complaints. This office was created in 2002 with three main purposes: a) dealing with
                         complaints and manifestations that are not resolved in the Institution's primary service channels or are registered with
                         external bodies; b) identifying products, services and processes that are generating customer dissatisfaction and
                         working with managers to correct identified problems;and c) maintaining relationships with the Ministry of Justice, the
                         Brazil Central Bank (BCB), and other regulatory or consumer protection bodies. Grievances can be reported to the
                         Ombudsman’s Office through a few channels (a tollfree telephone number, an e-mail address and the “Contact us”
                         form on Caixa’s website). These channels are publicized on all electronic sites and physical spaces operated by CEF and
                         its partners.


                         The work of the Ombudsman's Office is regulated by resolutions of the National Monetary Council (4,860/2020) and
                         the Securities and Exchange Commission (43/2021), and also complies with the Statute of Caixa and the decisions of
                         the Banking Self-Regulation System (SARB) of the Brazilian Federation of Banks (Febraban). According to the latest bi-
                         annual Ombudsman Report available, more than 215 thousand grievances were handled through the Caixa




For Official Use Only
                         Ombudsman channels in the second semester of 2024. Caixa’s regular Social, Environmental and Climate Questionnaire
                         as well as the new risk screening tool assesses borrowers’ practices related to dissemination of information for both
                         external and internal stakeholders on their sustainability programs, formal channels for community consultation and
                         dialogue on socioenvironmental risks and impacts of their operations and grievance redressing. Caixa requires
                         borrowers who implement all subprojects that are classified as Category A/High Risk or fall under the Equator Principles
                         (as well as some Category B/Substantial or Moderate subprojects) to provide stakeholders with access to relevant
                         information on subprojects, conduct stakeholder consultation, and establish efficient grievance mechanisms to receive
                         and facilitate the resolution of concerns and complaints regarding the socio-environmental performance of their
                         subprojects made by affected communities and workers. During the Project life cycle, Caixa’s external communication
                         channels will disclose relevant information on the Project and the supported subprojects. The Loan Agreement also
                         includes the obligation to Caixa to request its borrowers to disclose Caixa’s Ombudsman channels in worksites of
                         subprojects supported by the Project.

                         Selo Caixa Azul credit line has been developed to support greener housing provisions based on broad stakeholder
                         engagement with the sector. Caixa carries out continuous outreach and engagement activities with civil construction
                         clients and within Caixa’s community. In February 2026, during the Pauta ABRAINC event—which brings together CAIXA
                         and member construction companies on a bimonthly basis—input and suggestions from the private sector were
                         collected to support the improvement of the initiative. Throughout 2025, CAIXA conducted several external and
                         internal outreach and capacity‑building actions, including panels and presentations in the Green Zone of COP30 in
                         Belém, addressing sustainable housing, climate finance, and carbon measurement, as well as broad dissemination
                         through social media, specialized training courses, and institutional news coverage. Internally, meetings and training
                         content focused on sustainable housing were delivered and made available through Universidade CAIXA. In parallel,



                        DATE                                                                               Official Use Only            Page 12 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         the Housing Executive Network maintains regular meetings with construction companies to promote the Selo Casa Azul
                         and to prospect projects eligible for certification.



                         PS 2 Labor and Working Conditions
                         Overview of the relevance of PS2 for the project:

                         Caixa has in place human resources (HR) and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) procedures that are in compliance
                         with obligations arising from the robust Brazilian labor law. These procedures also promote sounding HR management
                         and provide a safe and healthy working environment and address relevant aspects of PS2. Brazilian labor laws
                         (summoned by the Brazilian Labor Code and the Consolidation of Labor Laws, or CLT) incorporate the principles of fair
                         treatment, non-discrimination, and equal opportunity of workers as well as freedom of association and collective
                         bargaining. They promote safety and health at work applying international standards for the protection of workers
                         from OHS hazards. They prevent the use of all forms of forced labor and child labor. They also provide workers with
                         accessible means to raise workplace concerns.
                         Federal Law 14,457/2022 determines the adoption of measures for preventing and combating sexual harassment and
                         other forms of violence at work. Federal Law 14,540/2023 established the Program for Preventing and Combating
                         Sexual Harassment and other Crimes against Sexual Dignity and Sexual Violence within the scope of public
                         administration and determines that governmental bodies and entities must develop actions and strategies aimed at
                         preventing and combating sexual harassment. Normative Standard 5 ruling the Internal Commissions on Accident
                         Prevention has been reviewed to incorporate the prevention and combat of sexual harassment and other forms of



For Official Use Only
                         violence at work among its attributions (MTE Ordinance 4,129/2020). This legal framework is properly enforced by
                         federal and state institutions – executive and judiciary branches -, including on aspects related with fair treatment,
                         non-discrimination, freedom of association, workers protection (avoiding all forms of forced and child labor), OHS
                         measures, and availability of channels to raise workplace concerns (including SEA/SH issues) without fear of retaliation
                         and allowing for anonymous complaints. Caixa has internal monitoring processes related to Occupational Health and
                         Safety at work, evaluating procedures, practices and processes that contribute to protect the health of Caixa
                         employees, prevent accidents at work, improve health and safety conditions.
                         An Internal Accident and Harassment Prevention Committee (including representatives of employees) holds the
                         responsibilities of: a) identifying risks in the working places; b) monitoring compliance with OHS standards; c) preparing
                         a preventive work plan; d) participating in the implementation and evaluation of security measures; e) carrying out
                         inspections in working places; f) disseminating information on safety and health at work; and g) participating in
                         discussions about the impacts of changes to the environment and work process. To ensure OHS standards, Caixa also
                         implements: a) a Risk Management Program, with the purpose of identifying and managing possible risks to the
                         workforce (risk inventory) that is carried out by specialized professionals specialized in consultation with the workers;
                         b) an Occupational Health and Safety Action Plan based on data contained in the risk inventory and defines control
                         actions as well as exposure monitoring activities; c) Medical Control and Occupational Health Program (PCMSO) with
                         the objective of protecting and preserving the health of the Institution's employees, in relation to occupational risks,
                         in accordance with the established in the Risk Management Program; and d) annual Internal Occupational Accident
                         Prevention Week with the purpose of publicizing, guiding and promoting safety and health at work and raising
                         awareness among employees of the importance of preventing risk factors and accidents at work. Caixa fosters an
                         organizational culture of respect for people's differences, encouraging management practices that promote inclusion,
                         equity and mitigation of all forms of prejudice and discrimination.
                         Caixa also holds a Grievance Mechanism that is operated by an external company, ensuring confidentiality,

                        DATE                                                                                Official Use Only             Page 13 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         independence, and impartiality. Externally and with regards to its borrowers, Caixa has requirements to comply with
                         obligations arising from legislation and labor regulations relating to applicable occupational health and safety,
                         including with regard to the absence of child and slave-like labor. Hence, when analyzing financing requests, Caixa
                         considers risks associated with the borrower’s track record in matters such as: a) failure to comply with social security
                         or labor obligations, including OHS regulatory standards; b) practice related to work in conditions similar to slavery; c)
                         irregular, illegal or criminal exploitation of child labor; d) acts of harassment, discrimination or prejudice based on
                         personal attributes (ethnicity, race, color, socioeconomic condition, family situation, nationality, age, sex, sexual
                         orientation, gender identity, religion, belief, disability, genetic or health condition and ideological or political
                         positioning); and e) practices related to human trafficking, sexual exploitation or criminal profit from prostitution.
                         Caixa also includes OHS topics in the new E&S risk screening platform to be applied in all subprojects. Furthermore,
                         Caixa monitors its portfolio in order to identify clients who have entered the Governmental Registry of Employers who
                         have subjected workers to conditions similar to slavery, highlighting that the granting of credit to clients included in
                         this Registry is not permitted (a criterion of absolute credit restriction).
                         Finally, Caixa reserves the right to terminate in advance the operations granted, in which the client is listed as a result
                         of the use of labor in a situation analogous to the condition of slave labor or the use of child labor, provided that there
                         is a final administrative decision, issued by an authority or competent body and/or final conviction. Finally, with regards
                         to primary suppliers and service providers, Caixa: a) values ethical conduct, especially in relation to combating
                         corruption; b) adopts mechanisms that mitigate noncompliance with workplace safety standards and requirements
                         and/or non-compliance with labor obligations; c) does not hire or enter into partnerships with companies that use
                         child labor or maintain an employment/work relationship, directly or indirectly, with minors under 18 years of age in
                         night, dangerous and unhealthy work, nor under 16 years of age in any work, except as an apprentice, from 14 years




For Official Use Only
                         of age; d) does not hire or enter into partnerships with companies that use labor in degrading working conditions or
                         similar to slavery or abide to discriminatory practices based on religious belief, disability, race, color, sex, sexual
                         orientation, political party , social class, nationality; and e) requires all primary suppliers and service suppliers to sign
                         a form of receipt, acknowledgment and adherence to its Suppliers Code of Conduct (available at
                         https://www.caixa.gov.br/Downloads/caixa-documentacao-basica-21/Codigo_de_Conduta_Fonecedores_caixa.pdf)
                         and an acknowledgment term of Caixa’s Policy of Social, Environmental and Climate Responsibility. Hence, Caixa
                         requires that the supply chain of primary supplies complies with the determinations of current environmental
                         legislation and act to prevent, mitigate, correct or compensate environmental impacts generated by processes and
                         products/services.

                         PS 3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                         Overview of the relevance of PS3 for the project:
                         PS3 is relevant. The project is classified as having moderate environmental risks, which are localized, temporary, and
                         reversible. Civil works may generate typical impacts such as resource consumption, air and noise pollution, dust
                         generation, localized greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and risks of soil and water contamination due to potential oil
                         and fuel leaks from heavy machinery, as well as inadequate waste management. These impacts can be effectively
                         mitigated through standard GIIP, as outlined in the World Bank Group’s EHSGs, and in accordance with Caixa’s
                         Environmental and Social Management Policy and ESMS and widely known by the Brazilian legal and institutional
                         framework.
                         Caixa’s Selo Azul requirements have a strong focus on resource efficiency—particularly water and energy efficiency—
                         which are integrated into subproject design and verified through the credit appraisal, contracting, and supervision
                         processes.
                         . No significant risks or impacts are expected from project activities. Caixa evaluates borrowers' EHS policies,
                         scrutinizing aspects related to waste management, sustainable resource use, and climate pollutant/GHG emissions

                        DATE                                                                                  Official Use Only              Page 14 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         reduction.. It also evaluates the generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste, the pollution of water, soil, and
                         air, and localized greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. For the level of impact, the national framework is sufficient.
                         Beyond compliance with national environmental regulations and Good International Industry Practice, CAIXA
                         strengthens alignment with PS3 through the integration of sustainable building certification requirements into the
                         sub-loan due diligence, contracting, and supervision processes. In particular, the Selo Casa Azul + CAIXA establishes
                         mandatory and scored criteria related to construction and demolition waste management, use of certified timber,
                         efficient use of water and energy, and pollution prevention measures at both design and construction stages.
                         Compliance with these requirements is verified through technical documentation, inspections, and supervision
                         throughout subproject implementation.
                         The certification framework also introduces climate-related co-benefits through criteria that promote energy
                         efficiency, renewable energy solutions, and, at higher certification levels, the management and reduction of
                         greenhouse gas emissions. Subprojects are incentivized to adopt low-carbon construction practices and technologies,
                         with differentiated scoring and, under the project design, financial incentives linked to higher certification levels.
                         These measures reinforce resource efficiency and pollution prevention objectives and contribute to reducing the
                         lifecycle environmental footprint of housing developments.


                         PS 4 Community Health and Safety
                         Overview of the relevance of PS4 for the project:
                         No significant risks or impacts on the community Health and Safety are expected from project activities. Caixa's PRSAC




For Official Use Only
                         policy and the Selo Azul requirements establish the need for evaluation to ensure that borrowers adopt safety
                         management measures for communities. This includes containing hazardous materials, exposure to diseases, preparing
                         for and responding to emergencies and risks associated with climate change, maintaining the quality of natural
                         resources and waste management, traffic and Construction Safety, noise and air pollution. It also requires the
                         assessment of project risks related to community health and safety and growing demand for public services. Caixa’s
                         Good Socioenvironmental Practices for Construction Works describes the corresponding mitigation measures and calls
                         for the development of communication mechanisms with the local population and disclosure of information on the
                         local impacts of the project on community health and safety. For the level of impact, the national framework is
                         sufficient at this stage. According Caixa’s requirements, aligned with the national regulations, contractors will be
                         required to develop and enforce a traffic management plan, including safety barriers, clear signage, and designated
                         pedestrian pathways to protect both workers and the public. Construction activities will comply with local regulations
                         regarding permissible noise levels and working hours. Dust suppression techniques will be implemented, such as
                         regular watering of exposed surfaces and covering of materials. Equipment and vehicles will be properly maintained to
                         reduce emissions and noise. Regular monitoring of noise and air quality will be conducted throughout construction.

                         PS 5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                         Overview of the relevance of PS5 for the project:

                         PS5 is not relevant. The construction of certified housing projects by the private sector are not expected to require any
                         land acquisition. Among the eligibility criteria for subprojects are the need for the selected land to be private and free
                         from any legal constraints, including occupation by third parties.


                         PS 6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                        DATE                                                                                Official Use Only            Page 15 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         Overview of the relevance of PS6 for the project:
                         PS 6 is not relevant. The overall environmental risk of the project is considered moderate. Although the exact location
                         of the subprojects is not yet known, they will be implemented in urban areas where natural habitats have already been
                         significantly altered by urbanization. The likelihood of the project affecting natural, critical, or protected habitats is
                         low, and if any impact occurs, it is expected to be minimal. Additionally, Caixa’s ESMS incorporates a robust risk
                         assessment process for land selection and project eligibility, evaluating whether the proposed site overlaps with Areas
                         of Permanent Preservation (APPs), requires an Permit for Vegetation Removal, and ensures full compliance with
                         national legislation. During construction, Caixa monitors the Documentation of Forest Origin (DOF) for all timber used,
                         , ensuring that materials originate from authorized sources. During project appraisal, the need for continuous
                         verification of timber origin throughout subproject implementation was identified. Accordingly, the requirement to
                         track and verify the DOF throughout the entire construction phase—previously required only at contract completion—
                         has been incorporated into the environmental and social screening tool and reflected in contractual clauses.
                         Non-compliance may result, in addition to penalties imposed by the federal environmental authority, in the suspension
                         of loan disbursements, financial penalties, and restrictions on future financing from Caixa
                          Caixa’s PRSAC policy establishes guidelines for biodiversity protection, which are guaranteed through contractual
                         clauses with sub-borrowers. It is also important to highlight that the Selo Azul recognizes and awards points to projects
                         that avoid deforestation, prioritizing the recovery of degraded or contaminated areas and the occupation of urban
                         voids, encouraging sustainable land use and directly contributing to biodiversity protection.




For Official Use Only
                         PS 7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                         Overview of the relevance of PS7 for the project:
                         PS7 is not relevant. Although the specific locations will not be known until the interested borrowers submit their
                         proposals during project implementation, the construction of certified housing projects by the private sector are
                         expected to occur only in private-owned land located in urban areas. No adverse risks or impacts on IPs or Indigenous
                         Lands are expected. Nevertheless, the Brazilian legislation is robust regarding IPs impacted by large projects that
                         require environmental licences and sufficient for the level of impact and Caixa’s E&S screening tool includes
                         questions related to Indigenous Peoples.
                         PS 8 Cultural Heritage

                         Overview of the relevance of PS8 for the project:

                         PS8 is relevant. No significant risks or impacts on cultural heritage are expected. However, the construction works
                         envisaged for the subprojects may require excavations and movement of earth. The E&S screening tool includes
                         specific screening for Cultural Heritage, aligned with PS8. In urban contexts, the primary cultural heritage risk
                         relates to potential chance finds of archaeological or historical remains during earthworks, which are addressed
                         through preventive requirements and procedures established under the national environmental licensing process.
                         For the level of impact, the national framework is sufficient at this stage. Brazil has a robust legislation on the
                         protection of cultural heritage and with regards to chance finds procedures, which requirements are set during the
                         process of environmental licensing of projects and overseen by responsible federal, state and municipal agencies.

                         B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                         ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                        DATE                                                                                Official Use Only            Page 16 of 20
                                The World Bank
                                Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         Overview of application of ESS1:
                         Does not apply
                         Areas where reliance on the Borrower’s E&S Framework may be considered:
                         Does not apply


                         ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                         Overview of application of ESS10:

                           Does not apply

                         ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions

                         Overview of the relevance of ESS2 for the project:
                         Does not Apply

                         ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                         Overview of the relevance of ESS3 for the project:
                         Does not Apply.




For Official Use Only
                         ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                         Overview of the relevance of ESS4 for the project:
                         Does not Apply.

                         ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                         Overview of the relevance of ESS5 for the project:
                         Does not Apply.

                         ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                         Overview of the relevance of ESS6 for the project:
                         Does not Apply.

                         ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                         Overview of the relevance of ESS7 for the project:
                         Does not Apply.


                         ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                         Overview of the relevance of ESS8 for the project:
                         Does not Apply.

                         ESS9 Financial Intermediaries

                        DATE                                                                            Official Use Only     Page 17 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         Overview of the relevance of ESS9 for the project:
                         Does not Apply.




                         B. Other Relevant Project Risks




                         C. Reliance on Borrower’s policy, legal and institutional framework, relevant to the Project’s specific ES risks and
                         impacts. This is relevant only for components that apply the ESSs.

                         Is this project being prepared for use of Borrower Framework? No.

                         Explanation:

                         D. Common Approach (yes/no). This is relevant only for components that apply the ESSs.




For Official Use Only
                          No.




                         E. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                         OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                          No
                         Explanation: The project is not expected to rely or result in impacts to International waterways.


                         OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No
                         Explanation: The project is not located in Disputed Areas.


                         F. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)

                         The Project does not have an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), an Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                         (SEP) nor an Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP). The environmental and social commitments of the Project
                         have been detailed in the Loan Agreement. During implementation, Caixa will be required to : (i) Screen all subprojects

                        DATE                                                                               Official Use Only            Page 18 of 20
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                         against the IFC Exclusion List, national laws, EPs, and sector guidelines per applicable PSs; (ii) Train commercial team
                         after Screening tool is updated in the ESMS; (iii) Continue meeting PS2 labor standards, and (iv) Submit semi-annual
                         E&S reports, including updates on anti-SEAH measures.


                         V. CONTACT POINTS
                         World Bank
                         Contact:         John Morton                         Title:   Senior Infrastructure Specialist

                         Telephone No: +1 202 867 6183                        Email: jmorton@worldbank.org

                         Contact:         Faruk Miguel Liriano                Title:   Senior Financial Sector Specialist

                         Telephone No: +1 202 473 3127                        Email: fmigueliriano@worldbank.org

                         Contact:         Emanuela Monteiro                   Title:   Senior Urban Specialist

                         Telephone No: +55 61 3329 1061                       Email: emonteiro@worldbank.org




For Official Use Only
                         Borrower/Client/Recipient:
                         Caixa Econômica Federal
                         Implementing Agency(ies)
                         Caixa Econômica Federal


                         VI. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                         The World Bank
                         1818 H Street, NW
                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                         Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                         Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                        VII. APPROVAL
                        Task Team Leader(s):
                          John Morton

                          Faruk Miguel Liriano

                          Emanuela Monteiro

                          Practice Manager:

                          David Seth Warren

                        DATE                                                                                Official Use Only           Page 19 of 20
                                The World Bank
                                Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                          Country Director:

                          Cecile Fruman




For Official Use Only




                        DATE                                                        Official Use Only   Page 20 of 20
