Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
                                   (Cat DDO) (P512660)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Program Information Document (PID)

                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2025 | Report No: PIDDA00195




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
     (Cat DDO) (P512660)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                            Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development
Croatia                        P512660                      Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
                                                            Option (Cat DDO)
Region                         Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
EUROPE AND CENTRAL                                                                        Development Policy
                               22-Dec-2025                  Urban, Resilience and Land
ASIA                                                                                      Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Ministry of Finance            Ministry of Interior

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Program Development Objective is to strengthen institutional, sectoral, and financial preparedness and resilience
to disasters and climate hazards in Croatia.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                             115.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                            115.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                        115.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision



                                                                                                                   Page 1



                                                                                                           Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
        (Cat DDO) (P512660)




 Explanation




  B. Introduction and Context
  Country Context
1.       Croatia has achieved significant economic development over the last decade, despite major shocks. Annual
gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 3.4 percent between 2015 and 2024, yet growth was uneven, and the
country was hit by several shocks in this period, including two earthquakes, the COVID-19 pandemic and the energy crisis
caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. COVID-19 caused the deepest recession in Croatia’s history due to its strong
reliance on tourism, which contributes close to 20 percent to GDP. Yet, the economic recovery was quick due to large
fiscal and monetary support schemes, including energy price caps and the inflow of European Union (EU) funds. Income
convergence with the EU has accelerated, and in 2024, Croatia reached 76.9 percent of the average EU27 level of income
(based on purchasing power standard), up from 70.2 percent in 2021. While GDP growth has been relatively high, it has
become increasingly dependent on household consumption and investment, that were supported by favorable labor
market developments, expansionary fiscal policy and strong inflow of EU funds. Despite its recent economic progress,
Croatia remains vulnerable to adverse shocks, including natural hazards and wider economic uncertainties.
2.      Past events and climate projections highlight the need for Croatia to adapt, mitigate, and prepare for disaster
and climate change impacts. Croatia is exposed to earthquakes, floods, extreme weather events, droughts, and wildfires.
In 2020, earthquakes caused €16.1 billion in damage and losses.1 Climate change is projected to intensify certain hazards,
with average temperatures rising up to 1.5°C by 2040 and over 2°C by 2070, driving more frequent heatwaves, droughts,
and extreme weather events. Coastal areas face increased sea-level rise risks, affecting infrastructure, agriculture, and
tourism through flooding, erosion, and saltwater intrusion. Reduced rainfall and longer drought occurrences pose
additional risks on key economic sectors, including water resources, energy, and health. Rising temperatures and more
frequent floods threaten transport and energy infrastructure, increasing maintenance costs and the likelihood of service
disruptions. The housing stock is particularly vulnerable to disaster impacts, including earthquakes but also climate-related
hazards. Tourism, a driver of Croatia’s economy, is at risk from coastal erosion, sea-level rise, and extreme heat events
that reduce visitor appeal and degrade natural attractions that the sector depends on. These and other climate-induced
hazards will also place additional pressure on the insurance sector, increasing claims and potentially constraining coverage
affordability and availability, as well as on the social protection sectors as people are impacted by disasters.
3.       These risks and gaps in the current framework highlight the need for reforms to enable actions by public and
private actors on disaster and climate resilience, including in critical economic sectors. Despite ongoing efforts, gaps
remain with respect to disaster preparedness and adaptation. These gaps related to the need to clarify mandates and
oversight, and to foster the resilience of critical infrastructure, shock-resilience in the energy sector, adaptation in the
tourism sector, safety of multi-apartment buildings, as well as strengthening of public and private solutions for financial
resilience.
 Relationship to CPF
4.      This operation is integral to the delivery of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY25–FY30, which aims to
foster sustainable and resilient economic growth. The CPF has two outcome areas—investment and more productive

1 Earthquakes: March 2020: €10.7 bn damage and €0.64 bn losses (GoC. 2020. Link), December 2020: €4.1 bn damage and €0.71 bn (GoC. 2021. Link).



                                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
       (Cat DDO) (P512660)


jobs, and increased environmental resilience—and an overarching focus on strengthening institutions for resilient and
inclusive growth. As the policy framework targets key institutional and sectoral reforms to enhance resilience, the
proposed Development Policy Loan (DPL) with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) will primarily
contribute to the second CPF area, especially Activity 2.1—Improved environmental and climate resilience. By enabling
private sector actors to participate in the housing and insurance sectors, and contributing to the disaster resilience of the
economy through improved continuity of critical services, the Cat DDO also indirectly contributes to the first CPF area.
Overall, the Cat DDO reforms can help strengthen the resilience of Croatia’s economy to a variety of exogenous shocks,
thus fostering an environment conducive to productivity- and job-enhancing investments.
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
5.       The Program Development Objective is to strengthen institutional, sectoral, and financial preparedness and
resilience to disasters and climate hazards in Croatia. The proposed Cat DDO helps to address key gaps in preparedness
and adaptation, strengthening Croatia’s institutional, physical, financial and social resilience, and offers a springboard for
further ambitious reforms in the medium-term. Addressing some of the critical challenges in Croatia that could impede
the country’s ability to sustain its strong economic growth and social progress, the Cat DDO focuses on critical reforms to
strengthen disaster preparedness and response capacities, resilient infrastructure and services which can withstand
disaster and climate-resilient shocks, and strengthening financial resilience.
 Key Results
6.       The operation will provide access to immediate liquidity to the country in the aftermath of a disaster and will
support the implementation of priority reforms related to disaster and climate resilience, in particular (i) to advance the
institutional framework for disaster prevention, preparedness, and response, (ii) to enable resilience actions in strategic
economic sectors, and (iii) to enhance the financial resilience of households and businesses. Combined with access to
immediate contingency financing, provided through this Cat DDO, these reforms can help Croatia reap both the short- as
well as long-term benefits of climate action, including improved resilience and management of macro-fiscal shocks.
 D. Project Description
7.       The proposed operation will help the Government of Croatia (GoC) enhance its institutional capacity at the
national level and across strategic sectors, and it will also strengthen the financial resilience of Croatia’s businesses and
people. The operation organizes policy reforms under three pillars. Pillar 1—Strengthening institutional capacity for
disaster preparedness and climate resilience—will support foundational reforms that increase the disaster preparedness
of critical infrastructure and services, and that build institutional capacity for climate change adaptation (CCA). Pillar 2—
Enhancing disaster preparedness and climate resilience in key economic sectors—will support reforms that address
vulnerabilities and foster sustainable development in the energy, tourism, and housing sectors. Pillar 3—Strengthening
the financial resilience of businesses and households—will advance reforms in the insurance and social protection sectors
to enhance coping and recovery capacity for disaster and climate impacts. These reforms are complemented by the Cat
DDO as a contingent financing mechanism which can supplement budget reserves and enhance fiscal resilience in case of
major disasters. These priorities align with and complement engagements by other institutions and development partners,
including the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), and the European Union (EU), as it leverages their ongoing support and aligns with their
recommendations for strengthening disaster preparedness and climate resilience.
8.      Pillar 1—Strengthening institutional capacity for disaster preparedness and climate resilience. Croatia has
improved its overall capacity to manage low-medium-impact events; however, more severe events – including extreme
weather events, which are expected to become more frequent– could stretch response capacities and affect the
population not only in the short term but also in the medium to long term. To address these challenges, reforms to
strengthen the institutional framework and capacity include the Critical Infrastructure Act, which strengthens the shock

                                                                                                                          Page 3



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
        (Cat DDO) (P512660)


resilience and continuity of critical infrastructure services; as well as the Law on Climate Change and Ozone Layer
Protection, which strengthens the institutional capacity for climate change adaptation measures.
9.       Pillar 2—Enhancing disaster preparedness and climate resilience in key economic sectors. Experiences from past
disasters show that gaps in Croatia’s policy framework and its operationalization hinder action by public and private actors
in key economic sectors – in particular, energy, tourism, and housing. While progress has been made, further reforms are
needed to systematically clarify mandates and oversight in all three sectors. The Cat DDO will support key reforms aimed
to advance shock resilience in these sectors, including the amendments on the Law on Renewable Energy Sources and
High-Efficiency Cogeneration which facilitates the uptake of energy generation for self-consumption and fosters shock-
resilience of end-users; the Ordinance on Indicators for Monitoring the Development and Sustainability of Tourism and
the Ordinance on the Methodology for the Development of the Destination Management Plan which will introduce
transparent, indicators-based assessment and monitoring systems to enhance the implementation of climate risk-
informed measures and investments; and the Law on Management and Maintenance of Buildings, which strengthens
building safety and climate sustainability through clarified mandate and responsibilities of housing associations.
10.      Pillar 3—Strengthening the financial resilience of businesses and households. Effective management of disaster
risks requires dedicated financial resilience instruments, including affordable private insurance products, a public social
protection system, and adequate sovereign contingent financing. In Croatia, gaps remain in all three areas. There is a
known private insurance gap in Croatia, as only 3 percent of disaster losses are insured, well-below the EU average of 25
percent.2 Social protection coverage could be strengthened, especially for certain population groups that are particularly
vulnerable in the context of disasters – including women – resulting in increased risk of poverty or violence. Finally, at the
public financial management level, the risk of large disaster losses is not yet systematically included in Croatia’s fiscal
strategy. To address these challenges this project supports the implementation of key reforms to strengthen the financial
resilience of households and businesses, including amendments to the Insurance Act, which will enhance the resilience of
Croatian insurers by requiring them to rigorously assess and plan for disaster scenarios, while also implementing financial
literacy initiatives; and amendments to the Social Welfare Act, which will improve social protection provision to socio-
economically vulnerable population groups. Moreover, the Cat DDO will provide rapid contingent liquidity to the
government to strengthen its fiscal resilience and ability to respond effectively to disasters.
 E. Implementation
 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
11.      Monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken jointly by the GoC and WB teams. The WB will conduct annual
reviews of the GoC’s adherence to the overall program, maintain policy dialogue, and coordinate with relevant partners
This process will be supported by ongoing monitoring under the broader WBG program in Croatia. The Ministry of Finance
(MoF) will act as the main coordinating body, collecting reports from relevant line ministries based on their existing
capacities. The project’s results framework is built around meaningful and manageable indicators, primarily relying on
available secondary data sources. Civil society organizations (CSOs) will also be regularly consulted and engaged in the
monitoring of relevant reforms. To ensure the quality and availability of data required for tracking progress, the indicators
are designed to leverage existing data systems and reporting mechanisms. The Cat DDO’s three-year loan duration is
intended to establish a foundation for future reforms, enabling risk-informed and systematic public action as well as
private sector contributions. The monitoring framework will also inform subsequent government actions and reforms
beyond 2029, building on the National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), which concludes in 2026.


2 European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA). Dashboard on Insurance Protection Gap for Natural Catastrophes. Link. European

Commission. 2021. ‘’Closing the Climate Protection Gap: Scoping Policy and Data Gaps.’’ Commission Staff Working Document. Link.

                                                                                                                                           Page 4



                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
       (Cat DDO) (P512660)


 F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
 Poverty and Social Impacts
12.     The Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) conducted for this project finds that the reforms supported
by the project are likely to have significant positive poverty and social effects, especially for poor people and vulnerable
groups. These actions—ranging from strengthening disaster preparedness in essential public services and infrastructure,
to enhancing climate resilience in key economic sectors like energy, tourism, and housing—are expected to improve
service continuity, lower energy costs, and increase social protection for the most vulnerable. The PSIA highlights that
while most impacts are positive, some short-term risks exist, such as potential exclusion of low-income households from
renewable energy benefits due to systemic barriers, or repair costs in the housing sector being passed on to tenants.
13.       To mitigate adverse impacts and enhance positive outcomes, the borrower’s systems are well-developed and
aligned with international standards, including EU regulations and the EU Taxonomy for sustainable finance. Croatia’s
legal framework, such as the Social Welfare Act and the Law on Lease of Apartments, provides protections for vulnerable
groups, while targeted measures—like subsidized repairs, capacity-building for housing associations, and expanded
eligibility for social benefits—are in place to address equity concerns. The GoC’s reforms also prioritize stakeholder
engagement and monitoring, ensuring that policy implementation is responsive to the needs of poor and vulnerable
populations. Overall, the PSIA concludes that the project’s prior actions are expected to generate substantial welfare gains,
with systems established to reduce adverse effects and promote inclusive benefits
 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
14.     The reforms supported by the project are not expected to have significant adverse effects on the environment,
forests, or natural resources. This conclusion is based on the nature of the reforms, which focus on institutional
strengthening, disaster preparedness, and climate resilience rather than large-scale infrastructure or activities with high
environmental risk. For example, while some investments under the institutional capacity for climate change adaptation
may involve civil works in sensitive areas, these are limited in scale and subject to EU environmental regulations. Similarly,
increased use of batteries in the power sector is addressed by Croatia’s existing operational system for hazardous and
battery waste management. The borrower’s systems for reducing adverse and enhancing positive effects rely on robust
national and EU frameworks, including comprehensive environmental impact assessments and adherence to directives
such as the EU Waste Framework Directive, Water Framework Directive, and Nature Restoration Regulation. These
systems ensure that any potential impacts are identified, managed, and mitigated, while also promoting positive outcomes
for environmental protection and climate resilience. Overall, the design and implementation of reforms under the Cat
DDO are likely to yield significant indirect benefits for environmental protection and climate resilience.
 G. Risks and Mitigation
15.     The overall risk rating for the proposed operation is moderate. Key risk categories, including sector strategies
and policies, technical design, institutional capacity for implementation, environmental and social (as noted above), and
stakeholders are all rated as moderate risks to the achievement of the program’s objectives, given available mitigation
measures. The risks link to potential policy inconsistency and fragmentation, gaps in resources and technical capacity, and
range of ministries involved. These will be mitigated by GoC’s commitment to the resilience agenda and broad consensus
on the reform program, alignment with the EU acquis, coordination led by the MoF, implementation support provided
through the Cat DDO and the ongoing WBG engagement as well as partners in several policy areas.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT




                                                                                                                          Page 5



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
     (Cat DDO) (P512660)


World Bank
 Zuzana Stanton-Geddes
 Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Jun Erik Maruyama Rentschler
 Senior Economist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Finance

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Interior

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Zuzana Stanton-Geddes, Jun Erik Maruyama Rentschler

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Peter D. Ellis                       24-Sep-2025

Country Director:                       Ann Akhalkatsi                       09-Oct-2025




                                                                                                             Page 6



                                                                                                     Official Use Only
