Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
                                   (Cat DDO)(P512660)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Sep-2025 | Report No: PIDIC00230




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
     (Cat DDO)(P512660)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                    Operation Name
                                                               Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development
Croatia                        P512660                         Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
                                                               Option (Cat DDO)
Region                         Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)            Financing Instrument
EUROPE AND CENTRAL                                                                             Development Policy
                               22-Dec-2025                     Urban, Resilience and Land
ASIA                                                                                           Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Ministry of Finance            Ministry of Interior

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Program Development Objective is to strengthen Croatia’s disaster preparedness and climate resilience by
enhancing institutional capacity at the national level and across strategic sectors, and increasing financial resilience.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                                   115.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                  115.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                              115.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate




                                                                                                                        Page 1



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
        (Cat DDO)(P512660)



Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue



  B. Introduction and Context
  Country Context
1.       Croatia is a small, open economy that has achieved significant economic development over the last decade,
despite major shocks. Annual GDP growth averaged 3.4 percent between 2015 and 2024, yet growth was uneven, and
the country was hit by several shocks in this period, including two earthquakes, the COVID-19 pandemic and the energy
crisis caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. COVID-19 caused the deepest recession in Croatia’s history due to its strong
reliance on tourism, which contributes close to 20 percent to GDP. Yet, the economic recovery was quick due to large
fiscal and monetary support schemes, including energy price caps and the inflow of European Union (EU) funds. Income
convergence with the EU has accelerated, and in 2024, Croatia reached 76.9 percent of the average EU27 level of income
(based on purchasing power standard), up from 70.2 percent in 2021. While GDP growth has been relatively high, it has
become increasingly dependent on household consumption and investment, that were supported by favorable labor
market developments, expansionary fiscal policy and strong inflow of EU funds. Despite its recent economic progress,
Croatia remains vulnerable to adverse shocks, including natural hazards and wider economic uncertainty.
2.       Past events and climate projections highlight the need for Croatia to adapt, mitigate, and prepare for disaster
and climate change impacts. Croatia is exposed to earthquakes, floods, extreme weather events, droughts, and wildfires.
Climate change is projected to intensify hazards, with average temperatures rising up to 1.5°C by 2040 and over 2°C by
2070, driving more frequent heatwaves, droughts, and extreme weather events. Coastal areas face increased sea-level
rise risks, affecting infrastructure, agriculture, and tourism through flooding, erosion, and saltwater intrusion. Reduced
rainfall and longer drought occurrences pose additional risks on key economic sectors, including water resources, energy,
and health. Croatia faces high seismic risk: in 2020, earthquakes caused €16.1 billion in damage and losses.1 Gaps remain
in the policy framework and institutional capacity hindering progress by public and private actors on climate adaptation
and resilience, including in critical economic sectors. Reforms are needed to clarify mandates and oversight, and to foster
the resilience of critical infrastructure, safety of multi-apartment buildings, shock-resilience in the energy sector,
adaptation in the tourism sector, as well as strengthening of public and private solutions for financial resilience.
  Relationship to CPF
3.       This operation is integral to the delivery of the CPF FY25–FY30, which aims to foster sustainable and resilient
economic growth. The CPF has two outcome areas—investment and more productive jobs, and increased environmental
resilience—and an overarching focus on strengthening institutions for resilient and inclusive growth. As the policy
framework targets key institutional and sectoral reforms to enhance resilience, the Cat DDO will primarily contribute to
the second CPF area, especially Activity 2.1—Improved environmental and climate resilience. By enabling private sector
actors to participate in the housing and insurance sectors, and contributing to the disaster resilience of the economy
through improved continuity of critical services, the Cat DDO also indirectly contributes to the first CPF area. Overall, the
Cat DDO reforms can help strengthen the resilience of Croatia’s economy to a variety of exogenous shocks, thus fostering
an environment conducive to productivity- and job-enhancing investments.
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
4.       The Program Development Objective is to strengthen Croatia’s disaster preparedness and climate resilience

1 Earthquakes: March 2020: €10.7 bn damage and €0.64 bn losses (GoC. 2020. Link), December 2020: €4.1 bn damage and €0.71 bn (GoC. 2021. Link).



                                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
       (Cat DDO)(P512660)


by enhancing institutional capacity at the national level and across strategic sectors, and increasing financial resilience.
The proposed Cat DDO helps to address key gaps in preparedness and adaptation, strengthening Croatia’s institutional,
physical, financial and social resilience, and offers a springboard for further ambitious reforms in the medium-term. The
program responds to Croatia’s risk profile, including climate hazards, which are already placing strains on the country's
communities – including the most vulnerable groups –, infrastructure systems, and key economic sectors.
   Key Results
5.      The operation will provide access to immediate liquidity to the country in the aftermath of a disaster and to
address priority reforms related to disaster resilience and climate adaptation, in particular (i) to advance the institutional
framework for disaster prevention, preparedness, and response, (ii) to enable resilience actions in strategic economic
sectors, and (iii) to enhance the financial resilience of households and businesses. Combined with access to immediate
contingency financing, provided through this Cat DDO, these reforms can help Croatia reap both the short- as well as long-
term benefits of climate action, including improved resilience and management of macro-fiscal shocks.
  D. Concept Description
6.        The program supports key reforms to strengthen the enabling environment for disaster preparedness and
climate resilience measures in Croatia. It does so by, first, by reforming the institutional framework for disaster risk
management and climate action, second, by advancing resilience to shocks in key economic and infrastructure sectors,
and third, by enhancing financial resilience of households and businesses. Reforms to strengthen the institutional
framework and capacity include the Critical Infrastructure Act, which strengthens the shock resilience and continuity of
critical infrastructure services; as well as the Law on Climate Change and Ozone Layer Protection, which strengthens the
institutional capacity for climate change adaptation measures. Reforms to advance sustainability and shock resilience in
key sectors include the amendments on the Law on Renewable Energy Sources and High-Efficiency Cogeneration which
facilitates the uptake of energy generation for self-consumption and fosters shock-resilience of end-users; the Ordinance
on Indicators for Monitoring the Development and Sustainability of Tourism which will introduce transparent, indicators-
based assessment and monitoring systems to enhance the implementation of climate risk-informed measures and
investments; and the Law on Management and Maintenance of Buildings, which strengthens building safety and climate
sustainability through dedicated housing associations. Reforms to strengthen the financial resilience of households and
businesses include amendments to the Insurance Act, which will enhance the resilience of Croatian insurers by requiring
them to rigorously assess and plan for disaster scenarios, while also implementing financial literacy initiatives; and
amendments to the Social Welfare Act, which will improve social protection provision to socio-economically vulnerable
population groups.
 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
 Poverty and Social Impacts
7.      As disasters disproportionately impact poor and vulnerable groups, reforms under this operation are
anticipated to contribute to more equitable outcomes by strengthening resilience and preventive measures. A Poverty
and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) will be undertaken to assess potential downstream impacts and identify appropriate
mitigation or enhancement measures. The PSIA will examine if the reforms have differentiated impacts on poor and
vulnerable populations, identify transmission channels through which policies may affect welfare, and explore measures
to maximize development outcomes.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
8.       The reforms are expected to have positive environmental effects; in the medium- to long-term, potential
implementation-related negative effects can be managed through the existing legal framework. The reforms will
contribute to enhancing the resilience of individuals, infrastructure, institutions, and ecosystems, while strengthening
institutional capacity and policy coherence on the overall disaster risk management and climate agendas. Potential

                                                                                                                          Page 3



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
      The World Bank
      Croatia Disaster and Climate Resilience Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
      (Cat DDO)(P512660)


negative environmental effects (direct/indirect) that could arise from reforms’ implementation include infrastructure
development impacts, such as but not limited to waste generation, land degradation, noise, dust. These - and any other
areas as relevant - will be assessed during preparation.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Zuzana Stanton-Geddes
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

   Jun Erik Maruyama Rentschler
   Senior Economist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Finance

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Interior

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                     Zuzana Stanton-Geddes, Jun Erik Maruyama Rentschler

 Approved By

 Practice Manager/Manager:                Elif Ayhan                              19-Aug-2025

 Country Director:                        Ann Akhalkatsi                          22-Sep-2025




                                                                                                                  Page 4



                                                                                                          Official Use Only
