Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2025 | Report No: PIDDC01421




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)        Operation ID                Operation Name
Brazil                          P512529                     Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil
Region                          Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
LATIN AMERICA AND               12-Feb-2026                 15-Jul-2026                  Urban, Resilience and Land
CARIBBEAN
Financing Instrument            Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project              Caixa Econômica Federal     Caixa Econômica Federal
Financing (IPF)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Promote efficient urban development by expanding finance for sustainable housing in the construction sector.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                         810.00

  Total Financing                                                                                              810.00
                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              200.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                               200.00
    IFC Own Resources/Mobilization                                                                             200.00
  Non-World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)


        Commercial Financing                                                                                        330.00
           Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                        330.00
        Counterpart Funding                                                                                           80.00
           National Government                                                                                        80.00




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                     Concept Review Decision
Moderate                                                         The review did not authorize the preparation to continue




    Other Decision (as needed)

    B. Introduction and Context

  Country Context
1.        Brazil's real GDP grew by 3.4 percent in 2024, driven by robust private consumption, bolstered by a tight labor
market and fiscal stimulus through expanded social transfers, and by recovering investment. The poverty rate declined
from 23.4 to 20.6 percent (US$8.30 per day, 2021 PPP) in 2024, supported by a strong labor market. GDP growth is
projected to moderate to 2.4 percent in 2025, as private consumption growth slows amid reduced government transfers,
and rising household indebtedness. Elevated interest rates and global uncertainty are expected to weigh on investment
and exports. Inflation is projected to gradually decline to 4.2 percent by 2027. Ensuring fiscal sustainability remains a
critical challenge. Despite efforts to raise revenues and contain spending, additional measures are needed to reinforce
fiscal credibility, while budget rigidity and the large share of indexed expenditures continue to limit policy flexibility.
Limited fiscal space will also constrain poverty reduction efforts, with the poverty rate expected to reach 19.9 percent by
2027. Brazil’s medium-term growth outlook is positive but constrained, with recent structural reforms improving the
business environment, the financial sector, and indirect taxation, and expected to raise potential output to about 2.5
percent. However, achieving faster, more inclusive, long-term growth will require further reforms to enhance
competitiveness, reduce financial and market distortions, expand infrastructure investment, integrate into global value
chains, and improve the quality of education. A more adverse external environment, prolonged monetary tightening, and
a slower-than-expected fiscal consolidation could undermine growth prospects and exacerbate debt vulnerabilities.

2.       Brazil’s growing job market is concentrated in urban areas and exhibits regional disparities in terms of job
quality. Between August 2024 and June 2025, 1.5 million formal jobs were added to the economy, a 3.2 percent increase
from the previous year. This represents a total of 64 million jobs with the informal economy contributing an additional 39
million jobs1. Informal jobs account for 38 percent of the total, a 1.2 percent decrease from the previous year2. The service
sector represented the largest formal employer and accounted for 53 percent of new formal jobs in the country over that

1 Source IBGE, PNAD Continua, June 2025.
2
    Source IBGE, PNAD Continua, June 2025.

                                                                                                                         Page 2



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)


period, followed by vehicle repair and maintenance (22%) and general industry (17%). Ninety percent of all jobs are found
in urban areas3 and are driving job growth. The largest cities account for 31 percent of all new formal jobs with Sao Paulo
municipality accounting for 8 percent of these jobs4. All regions showed positive formal job growth over the period.
Regional disparities, however, exist in the quality of jobs, with higher levels of informality in the North and Northeast (an
average 52 percent of jobs are informal) compared to the other regions (33%). Similarly, the highest salaries are found in
the Central-West Region and Southeast Region and the lowest in the North and Northeast5.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

3.       Most of the population in Brazil are found in expanding urban areas. Cities in Brazil have created jobs, higher
incomes and productivity due to their inherent benefits as urban agglomerations: the co-location of firms and consumers,
shared infrastructure, large and diverse labor and services, and the scale of markets. As a result, 16.6 million people have
been added to urban areas between 2010 and 2022, and they host 87 percent of the population and 90 percent of the
jobs in the country6. Driven by this urban job growth, housing construction has increased 2.8 percent per year, adding 90.7
million new units since 2010.7 The expansion of housing in cities is creating a virtuous cycle, responding to Brazil’s
urbanization and need for adequate housing, while providing an estimated 1.15 million jobs8 accounting for 38 percent of
employment in the construction sector.

4.      Housing is important to the growth and productivity of Cities in Brazil. As Brazil’s Cities strive to reach their
potential as centers for productivity and jobs, they are facing the challenges of accommodating urban growth and
managing unplanned development.9 Cities increasingly need to manage growing climate risks and meet the increased
resource demand and services associated with urbanization. Accounting for most of the urban area, and as the main driver
for the expansion of urban areas, housing and settlements are central to this challenge. The urbanized area in Brazil has
increased 5 percent per year in recent years10 and with this expansion of built-up area and urban sprawl, city services are
being strained, congestion and commuting times are increasing, and floods and urban heat are more frequent and
severe.11 Housing is also resource intensive. Households account for 21 percent of Brazil’s total electricity consumption
and 68 percent of its water consumption, and the production of construction materials add significantly to this resource
burden. Housing also accounts for most of the waste generated in the country12. and 9 percent of Brazil‘s greenhouse gas


3
    IBGE, 2022 Census
4 The most jobs were added in the following municipalities (in order) from July 2024- June 2025: Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Brasilia, Salvador,

Manaus, Fortaleza, Recife, Curitiba, Osasco, Porto Alegre, Belo Horizonte, Guarulhos, Goiania, Joao Pessoa, Belem. These combined contributed 31
percent of new Jobs. Source IBGE CAGED, June 2025.
5
  The latest data (from 2022, IBGE Central Registry of Enterprises) show average salaries to be: Central-West Region, 3.3 times the minimum wage,
followed by the Southeast Region (3.2), South (2.8), North (2.7) and Northeast (2.3).
6
  IBGE, 2022 Census.
7
  IBGE, 2022 Census
8 Pesquisa Anual da Industria da Construção, 2023
9
  Ianchovichina, Elena. 2024. The Evolving Geography of Productivity and Employment: Ideas for Inclusive Growth through a Territorial Lens in Latin
America and the Caribbean. World Bank Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Washington, DC.
10
   The absolute housing deficit was estimated to be 6 million units as of 202210, equivalent to 8 percent of occupied households in the country,
Fundação João Pinheiro
11 It is estimated that 11.5 percent of new development in Brazil’s cities are found in flood-prone areas. [citation] In Rio De Janeiro nighttime

temperature differences between urban and rural areas were 7–8°C and cities in the Amazon (Belem and Sao Luis) are anticipated to experience
over 300 days of extreme heat by 2050 which is among the highest in Latin America. World Bank. 2025. Unlivable: Confronting Extreme Urban Heat
in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC: World Bank.
12 In 2023 it was estimated 80 million tons of municipal waste was produced in urban areas, the majority from households while construction and

demolition waste amounted to 44 million tons. Abrema (2024), “Panorama dos Residuos Solidos no Brasil, 2024.

                                                                                                                                                  Page 3



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)


emissions13. Adding to this, is the inefficiency of the deteriorated stock of housing in Brazil, as fifty percent of residential
buildings were constructed before 1990.

5.      Sustainable certification programs reduce the burden of housing construction on cities. Certification programs,
such as LEED, EDGE, AQUA-HQE, BREEM and CAIXAs Selo Casa Azul are active in Brazil. These certifications promote
sustainable urban growth through by incentivizing the construction of housing that, among other things, is more water
and energy efficient, provides flood protection and drainage, encourages reduction and recycling of waste, uses
sustainable construction materials and improves urban spaces and access to public transport. They also promote inclusive
labor practices, and social elements including community engagement and education. These resulting housing
developments not only help address the challenges of urbanization but provide additional and higher paying employment
than traditional housing.

6.       Sustainable Certified Housing, however, represent less than 2 percent of housing units constructed in the
country.14 The largest quantity of certified housing developments is found in large metropolitan regions, consistent with
construction trends. Regionally, the Southeast has the most certified sustainable housing, while other regions including
the North and Northeast—have a lower overall number and share of housing developments with certifications15. While
Brazil’s certification ecosystem is nascent, recent years have seen a relative growth in certifications, highlighting its
potential16. Other countries in the region have been able to achieve larger housing market penetration (Colombia, Chile
for example are estimated to have 6 percent to 8 percent housing units as certified) and are growing while countries with
long established financial and regulatory incentives and greater awareness and capacity for sustainable construction and
materials supply are able to reach much higher adoption rates. In Brazil the adoption rate is constrained by limited
financing targeted to this segment, a lack of awareness and absence of a mature ecosystem that can readily provide at
reasonable cost, the skills, materials and construction techniques needed for more widespread adoption of sustainable
housing.

7.      Government Programs have successfully reached lower income segments and expanded the stock of low-
income housing, but financing mechanism for broad market adoption of sustainable design has been limited. Housing
finance in Brazil combines a large, earmarked segment, including a subsidized housing program designed to respond to
the housing deficit in the country and a free-market component. On the earmarked side, the Sistema Financiero da
Habitação (SFH) channels a regulated share of savings deposits (“SBPE”) into mortgages with caps on loan size, property
value, and interest rates; while the Fundo de Garantia por Tempo de Serviço (FGTS, a mandatory employee indemnity
fund) is deployed through CAIXA to fund subsidized low income housing programs such as Minha Casa Minha Vida
(MCMV). Together, SFH and FGTS represented 85.8 percent of newly originated loans as of 2023. By contrast, the free-



13 Lassio et al./Environmental Engineering and Management Journal 20 (2021), 8, 1225-1236; Lauriano L., (2013), How is the sustainability

management in the construction sector? (in Portuguese), Technical report, RP1 301, Nova Lima,
14 Based on publicly available data from the major certifications. The total certified housing units from the major certifications are estimated to be

just under 2 percent. 86,200 certified units were identified out of the 5.5 million new housing units produced between 2020 and 2025. Selo Casa Azul
certified 552 housing developments with 43,337 units during this time while; EDGE has certified 80 developments with an average size of 228 units,
amounting to an estimated 18,000 units; Based reported data for AQUA HQE approximately 25,000 units were certified over this time period. LEED
has reported very few residential developments as their focus in more commercial and industrial, amounting to less than 200 housing units.
15
   Based on data on the Selo Casa Azul program, 42 percent of certified housing developments are found in the Southeast, 5 percwent in the North
and 23 percent in the Northeast.
16
   While overall small, the potential is highlighted by recent growth. For example, 620 residential developments certified since the introduction of
Selo Casa Azul, 553 were realized in the last 5 years, and reported EDGE certifications of residential developments increased from 7 in 2023 to 41 in
2025. n of Selo Casa Azul, 553 were realized in the last 5 years, and reported EDGE certifications of residential developments increased from 7 in
2023 to 41 in 2025.

                                                                                                                                                 Page 4



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)


market segment (crédito livre) operates outside regulatory caps and relies on more diversified funding sources, including
savings deposits, bank liabilities, and capital market instruments.

8.       Sustainably certified housing has been commonly financed through SFH which is becoming constrained. All
segments and especially SFH, are affected by the declining relative weight of savings deposits as households migrate to
higher-yielding investments17, and by the maturity mismatch between short-term funding instruments and long-term
mortgage contracts. This is already constraining private mortgage lending, including most real estate projects with
sustainable certification. Furthermore, recently passed reform has dictated that by 2027, banks will no longer be required
to allocate 65 percent of savings deposits to housing loans, affecting this traditional funding base.

9.       The shrinking savings deposit funding is also affecting developer financing. Developer Finance for housing in
Brazil remains bank-centric and short-tenor. This finance is anchored o SFH/FGTS construction loans and pre-sales
escrows. The shrinking funding is affecting liquidity, especially for certified sustainable projects. Capital Market options
(CRI/FIDC) are expanding but remain shallow for smaller developers and sustainable builds.

10.      The project will support diversifying funding sources to mobilize private capital for sustainable housing
construction. Since October 2024, CAIXA has mobilized external credit lines to reduce reliance on savings deposits and
sustain origination volumes. The project supports this transition by proving a new credit line, separate from the other
programs, that provides blended-finance credit that combines Government of Brazil concessional financing intended to
assist in the country’s transition to greener economy (“Eco Invest” program), IBRD, and IFC loans to develop market-based
instruments for sustainable housing. This strategy sustains origination despite the erosion of savings deposits and expands
developer financing for sustainable housing, where private lenders remain hesitant. It also increases the supply of
sustainable/green mortgage assets, for which private banks have already developed products and creates a potential
downstream market for green bond issuance or refinancing to allow it to be bundled with broader distribution to the
market.

11.      The project will also help address non-financing barriers to the sustainable housing market. In addition, to
helping unlock this financing barrier, the project will support the enabling environment for sustainable housing
investments. In particular, the project will encourage construction of certified sustainable housing as a more common
practice for developers by introducing an attractive credit line; building awareness among and promotion to developers;
adapting to lower income segments and other sources of financing; and providing advice to municipalities and states on
regulatory and other incentives for adoption of sustainable housing. It will also work with CAIXA on their Selo Casa Azul
certification to have it recognized internationally and to a wider range of financial institutions with the intention of
enhancing downstream asset value and potential for private capital mobilization.

 Relationship to CPF

12.      The proposed Project is consistent with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Brazil
(FY24-FY28),18 contributing directly and indirectly to all three High Level Outcomes (HLO). The project’s focus on
promoting sustainable practices in the Brazilian Housing sector directly supports: (i) HLO1: Providing greater productivity
and employment through promotion of greater and greener competitiveness among housing developers in a sector that
will in turn provide green investments that provide additional employment and higher salaries relative to traditional
investments. Green Building certification is specifically included as a core element of this High Level Outcome; (ii) HL03:

17 In 2024, for example, the net balance of savings deposits contracted by R$15.4 billion as households shifted to higher-yielding investments
18 WBG CPF for Brazil (FY24-28) was approved by the WB Board of Directors on April 9th, 2024.




                                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)


Providing a greener economy and with reduced vulnerability to climate shocks through increasing the stock of housing
with greater resilience to energy and water availability shocks, lower greenhouse gas emissions and that reduces urban
heat and flood risk. Technical assistance under component 2 will indirectly contribute to HLO2: Greater Inclusion of the
Poor and Underserved Populations by promoting adaptation of certified housing to lower income segments under
component 2. The project will also support climate change adaptation and mitigation in line with the goals outlined in the
Brazil Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) and its Climate Change Action Plan.19 The project also consistent
with the CPF regional priorities, specifically, the credit line will target the North and Northeast with the goal of having 50
percent of the investment reaching these areas, responding to the relatively lower investment higher level of informal
jobs and lower salaries in found for these regions.20

13.      The Project Supports the September 2025 “Foundations for Growth and Jobs” Report to the Development
Committee Meeting. Under Pillar 1, Investment in the foundational infrastructure critical to private-sector job creation,
the project work with government and the private sector to invest in housing that: provides easier access to urban jobs,
makes efficient use of natural resources and is constructed to better enable cities to be managed to enhance productivity
and jobs. It does this by channeling private investment and deploying a blended finance solution that supports more
common practice of sustainable housing, increasing awareness and reducing barriers to its adoption. Consistent with the
goals of the Eco-invest program it is intended to hasten the ecological transition in the country through the private sector,
lower the risks of adoption and making the market more attractive. It also provides jobs in the infrastructure sector,
focusing on expanding green jobs for an infrastructure sub-sector (housing) that already provides among the highest levels
of employment per unit of investment.21

14.     Under Pillar 3: Mobilize private investment at scale, the creation of a new credit line that increases access to
financing for sustainable housing will directly mobilize equity from private developers and help attract commercial
financing. Additionally, assets created under the credit line could also be used to mobilize private capital through, for
example, the World Bank group initiative to “Originate to Distribute” or as part of green bonds issuance. Originate to
Distribute is designed to enable the creation of an emerging market infrastructure asset class to attract global and
domestic institutional investors. The ambition is to have the World Bank create a supply of USD15-20 billion per year of
assets by 2030 by originating infrastructure assets, bundling them, enhancing their credit to achieve the required ratings
and distributing to institutional investors. Green bonds are common among the major banks in Brazil22. Caixa, for example,
provides labeled issuances under its Sustainable Bond Framework, which received a “Very good” Second-Party Opinion
grade23. Through this framework, CAIXA has already issued sustainable bonds to mobilize private capital, with certified
sustainable buildings identified as a key eligible asset class. A step-up loan will be discussed with the client to enhance
these options. This loan was designed to allow quick capital recycling through a price incentive given to clients who choose
to accelerate repayment of their loan, thereby freeing up World Bank resources that can be reinvested in other projects.
The technical assistance under component 2 will support broader development of the market to further encourage this
private capital mobilization beyond that provided under the credit line through promotion and awareness of sustainable

19 World Bank Group. 2023. Brazil Country Climate and Development Report. CCDR Series.
20
  In the North and Northeast, an average 52 percent of jobs are informal vs. 38 percent nationally (IBGE, PNAD Continua, June 2025); 70 percent of the infrastructure
investment (based on value of construction) is in the South and Southeast, while only 21 percent is in the North and Northeast; and construction salaries are on
average 15 percent lower than the national average (Pesquisa Annual de Industria de Construcao, 2023).
21Based on data from construction related employment in Brazil (Pesquisa Annual de Industria de Construcao, 2023) and typical costs of
investments in a housing complex, 50 direct jobs are created per USD 1 million in investment while other types of construction are lower.
Sustainable construction has been shown globally to create additional specialized construction and design-architecture jobs related to the
specialized materials and equipment that add 10 to 30 percent to this number. Additionally, it spurs specialized manufacturing for materials for
sustainable construction.
22 Banco BV, Itaú Unibanco, and BTG Pactual as well as CAIXA and BNDES are examples of Bank that are active in issuing Green Bonds and could

take advantage of the created assets.
23 Moodys Investor Service, Caixa Economica Federal Second Party Opinion – Sustainable Finance Framework, May 2024.



                                                                                                                                                                Page 6



                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
            The World Bank
            Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)


housing to the market; and enhancing acceptance of CAIXAs certification to local and international financial and private
sector developer markets.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Promote resource efficiency and livability in urban settlements by improving access to finance and reducing barriers
 to construction of sustainable housing.


     Key Results (From PCN)

        •    Increase in the share of housing financed that is certified sustainable.
        •    Reduction in energy used due to project related sustainable certified housing.
        •    Reduction in water used due to project-related sustainable certified housing.
        •    Jobs created due to project-related sustainable certified housing.
        •    Private capital mobilization due to project-related sustainable certified housing.
 D. Concept Description

15.      The Project is designed to support the goals of “Eco-Invest” program which is a Brazilian Government initiative
supported by the World Bank24 designed to reduce financial and other barriers for adoption by the private sector of
practices and technologies essential for the country's ecological transformation. The program aims to strengthen climate
finance and create a favorable market environment for transitioning to sustainable investments using blended finance
through government resources leveraged by international financing, which in this case is being provided by IBRD (USD200
million) and IFC (USD200 million).25

16.     In particular, the project will help improve the market for sustainable housing by providing targeted financing to
sustainably certified housing and addressing non-financial barriers by improving awareness, capacity and certification
processes and reporting. This will be done by providing a new credit line combined with technical assistance.

17.      Component 1: Financing for Certified Sustainable Housing Projects (IBRD USD198,000,000.00 with IFC
USD200,000,000 and Government of Brazil USD80,000,000 plus private investor capital). This component will finance the
construction of housing that is certified as sustainable and would mitigate the impact of growing resource use and
greenhouse gas emissions associated with urbanization, while helping cities better accommodate the increasing service
challenges, improve livability and access to jobs. This would be done by providing financing that would reduce barriers
and costs to adoption. This would be done through the creation of a new credit line that blends IFC, IBRD and Government
resources through Eco-Invest. The blending will include five parts IBRD and IFC (USD398 million combined) and one part
Eco-Invest concessional financing. The pricing of the blended financing will depend on the financial product from the
World Bank and IFC that is agreed with CAIXA, which will be confirmed at appraisal. It will be designed on a cost-recovery
basis, ensuring that CAIXA covers its funding, operational, and risk-management cost. As Eco-invest is designed as a
transitional program, the Project would allow evaluation of the implementation of the Eco-invest program for this
subsector to understand costs, benefits, and fiscal impact, and performance as transitional support in building the market.
This would provide the Government an understanding the need for its continuation or for adjustment of the program.

24
     The Eco Invest program is supported by the Brazil Increasing Productivity, Sustainability and Inclusion DPF (P507322)
25 CAIXA’s Eco Invest portfolio totals USD170 million and includes financing for municipal electromobility projects, construction of sustainable

buildings, and urban infrastructure (CAIXA Notícias, November 29 2024).

                                                                                                                                                   Page 7



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)




18.    Subcomponent 1.1: Sustainable Housing Production. This subcomponent will finance sub-loans to developers for
new housing projects that have sustainability certifications. This would include new housing developments in expanding
and densifying urban areas, in which sustainable housing construction is underrepresented. While the size of each
investment is flexible and will be affected by the financing package provided by the new credit line and the increased
awareness provided by the program, based on recent investments in sustainable housing in CAIXA, the average units of
each development was 157 units with an average price of USD675,000,000 of which the average loan accounts for 72
percent ($490,000,000) of this amount. The average developer financing tenor is expected to be 4 years.

19.     Subcomponent 1.2: Sustainable Retrofit of Housing. This subcomponent will finance sub-loans to developers for
housing retrofit projects that have sustainability certifications. This credit line targets the retrofitting of the existing
building stock, an underrepresented sustainable housing market which has a large potential for sustainability benefits due
to the inefficiency of energy and water use in this old housing stock, and the potential benefits for urban mobility and
urban amenities. The size of these retrofits is flexible and will depend on market demand.

20.      Component 2: Technical Assistance (USD2,000,000). This component is designed to address non-financing
barriers to adoption of sustainable construction including improving awareness of sustainable construction and
certification programs, capacity within CAIXA, development of new sustainable construction financing products tailored
to other segments, and improving the methodology and reporting of CAIXAs Selo Casa Azul certification to enable broader
acceptance globally and within the financial sector in Brazil. Elements of the component activities will also be supported
through separate financing through IFC advisory services.

21.     Subcomponent 2.1: Institutional Strengthening for Sustainable Housing Certification in CAIXA. This subcomponent
will support training of CAIXA's technical staff on certification and other innovations in the housing sector including: (i)
improving CAIXAs ability to quantify and report on Selo Casa Azul certification consistent with accepted standards; (ii)
technical support the Caixa team in improving Selo Casa Azul methodologies and processes to expand acceptance and use
to other markets; and (iii) Support to innovative housing portfolio products that can expand the market for sustainable
housing (e.g., green bonds and mortgages, modular construction; expansion of to lower income markets and housing
products).

22.      Subcomponent 2.2: Awareness and Promotion for Sustainable Housing. The resources allocated under this
subcomponent will support promotion of the program and awareness of sustainably certified housing including: (i) the
development of practical guides and training for the quantification and reporting and methodology to obtain certification.
(ii) development of advocacy materials and their dissemination; (iii) advice on incentives and regulations to local
governments; and (iii) dissemination and outreach activities to improve awareness of sustainable housing construction
and certification.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                     Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No


                                                                                                                        Page 8



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)



 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




23.     The environmental and social risk Moderate, mainly due to civil works. These activities are situated in urbanized,
modified environments and are not expected to cause habitat loss or significant impacts on natural habitats. Typical civil
work impacts include waste generation, machinery emissions, dust, and hydrocarbon leaks. Occupational health and
safety risks involve construction hazards such as working at heights, electrical shocks, noise exposure, ergonomic risks,
stress, and fatigue. These risks and impacts are expected to be site-specific, temporary, reversible, and manageable
through standard GIIP practices as outlined in the WBG's EHSGs and the Environmental and Social Management Policy
and ESMS of Caixa. The Project is not expected to cause significant permanent impacts; on the contrary, the adoption of
sustainable practices—such as energy efficiency and the use of low-carbon materials—reduces emissions throughout the
lifecycle of the buildings. Certified projects prioritize the use of devices and technologies that reduce energy consumption,
such as natural lighting, cross ventilation, solar heating, and renewable energy generation. The implementation of systems
for water savings, individual metering, greywater reuse, rainwater harvesting, and permeable areas for infiltration is also
promoted. The subprojects are expected to be implemented in consolidated urban areas, which reduces the likelihood of
significant adverse impacts on vulnerable groups or communities. However, risks remain related to occupational health
and safety (OHS) for workers involved in construction and retrofitting activities, as well as potential temporary
disturbances to neighboring communities during civil works. There is also a risk of insufficient inclusion of disadvantaged
groups, such as women, persons with disabilities, and low-income households, particularly in regions where access to
certified sustainable housing has historically been limited. To mitigate these risks, the project will require developers to
comply with robust social and environmental standards, including the implementation of community engagement plans
and the incorporation of feedback from stakeholders. The Selo Casa Azul certification process includes criteria for social
well-being, community integration, and support for residents, which will be strengthened to mainstream gender and
inclusion aspects.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank




                                                                                                                         Page 9



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil(P512529)


 John Morton
 Senior Infrastructure Specialist

 Faruk Miguel Liriano
 Senior Financial Sector Specialist

 Emanuela Monteiro
 Senior Urban Development Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Caixa Econômica Federal

Implementing Agencies
 Caixa Econômica Federal

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    John Morton, Faruk Miguel Liriano, Emanuela Monteiro

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Federica Ranghieri                   06-Nov-2025

Country Director:                       Cecile Fruman                        18-Dec-2025




                                                                                                      Page 10



                                                                                               Official Use Only
