Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)




                                     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


           _For Official Use Only_
                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2026 | Report No: PIDIA01620




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)         Region                      Operation ID              Operation Name
                                                           LATIN AMERICA AND                                     Promoting Sustainable
                          Brazil                                                       P512529
                                                           CARIBBEAN                                             Housing in Brazil
                          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date   Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                                                 Urban, Subnational
                          Investment Project
                                                           13-Apr-2026                 29-Sep-2026               Finance, Disaster
                          Financing (IPF)
                                                                                                                 Management, Tourism
                          Borrower(s)                      Implementing Agency
                          Caixa Econômica Federal          Caixa Econômica Federal

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)




_For Official Use Only_
                          Expand finance for sustainable housing construction and efficient urban development

                          Components
                          Component 1: Financing for Certified Sustainable Housing Projects
                          Component 2: Technical Assistance

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                   299.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                        299.00
                                          of which IBRD/IDA                                                                        200.00
                            Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00

                          DETAILS
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)



                              World Bank Group Financing
                                International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                                       200.00
                              Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                Commercial Financing                                                                                                                59.00
                                   Unguaranteed Commercial Financing                                                                                                59.00
                                Counterpart Funding                                                                                                                 40.00
                                   National Government                                                                                                              40.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@ffiprocessing#doctemplate

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification




_For Official Use Only_
                          Moderate


                           Decision




                           Other Decision (as needed)




                           B. Introduction and Context

                           Project Strategic Context

                           Brazil is a highly urbanized country, with most of its population, jobs, and economic activity concentrated in cities.
                           Brazil’s cities have driven job creation, higher incomes, and productivity by leveraging the inherent benefits of urbanized
                           areas, such as proximity between firms and consumers, shared infrastructure, diverse labor markets, and large-scale
                           demand.28 As these cities expand and strengthen their roles as engines for this growth, they face rising demand for
                           housing alongside a significant deficit in housing quality and increasing costs of providing and paying for water, energy,
                           and essential services. In many cities, these costs, combined with limited budgets, are resulting in service gaps and
                           interruptions that directly affect businesses and labor productivity as well as the quality of life of their residents.

                          28 Ianchovichina, Elena. 2024. The Evolving Geography of Productivity and Employment: Ideas for Inclusive Growth through a Territorial Lens in

                          Latin America and the Caribbean. World Bank Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Washington, DC.
                                     The World Bank
                                     Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)


                               Sustainable certification programs deliver housing in low-risk areas, with higher value, better quality, and with more
                               affordable utility costs. It is also a tool that helps cities and utilities better manage service delivery, increase the economic
                               benefits of urbanization, and contribute to more and better jobs in a labor-intensive subsector of the construction
                               industry. Currently, sustainable housing, and financing for it, is underrepresented in Brazil, accounting for less than two
                               percent of new housing construction.

                               Sectoral and Institutional Context

                           Brazil is rapidly urbanizing, with housing construction acting as a key driver of urban growth and job generation.
                           Between 2010 and 2022, urban areas absorbed an additional 16.6 million people and now account for 87 percent of the
                           population and 90 percent of jobs. Most of the job growth in the country is in cities. Driven by this growth, housing
                           construction has increased 2.8 percent per year, adding 23 million new units since 20104. The expansion of housing in
                           cities has created a virtuous cycle, responding to Brazil’s urban job growth and need for housing, and providing an
                           estimated 1.15 million jobs5 accounting for 38 percent of employment in the construction sector and half of its production
                           value6.

                           Housing accounts for 21% of Brazil’s electricity- and 68% of its water-use, and produces most of the waste generated
                           in the country10,11. Much of the existing housing stock is inefficient, of poor quality, and deteriorated. The majority of




_For Official Use Only_
                           residential buildings in the country were constructed before 1990, and 41 percent of urban dwellings are considered
                           inadequate. 12 New housing construction does not generally employ significant energy and water savings or other more
                           efficient construction methods and features. The over 2.5 million housing units expected to be constructed over the next
                           5 years will require over US$1.8 billion per year in supporting infrastructure and services13. The costs of providing services
                           to these new and existing households affect the cost of living in urban areas, and many municipalities and utilities do not
                           have the resources to provide uninterrupted services of adequate quality, especially in lower-income and unplanned
                           communities. Additionally, a significant portion of new urban settlements are at risk of flooding or landslides7. As a result,
                           the number of disasters in urban areas has increased over 5 times in the last three decades, with an estimated annual
                           cost to the public and private sector of US$2.8 billion8.

                           Sustainable certification programs enhance the benefits of housing construction in cities. Certification programs such
                           as LEED, EDGE, AQUA-HQE, BREEAM, and CAIXA’s Selo Casa Azul + CAIXA, are active in Brazil. These certifications promote
                           efficient urban growth by incentivizing the construction of housing that, among other things, is more water and energy
                           efficient; provides flood protection and drainage; encourages reduction and recycling of waste; uses more efficient and
                           effective construction materials; is located in areas less vulnerable to floods and landslides; and improves urban spaces
                           and access to public transport. These housing developments are in low-risk areas and make the costs of provision of

                          4 IBGE, 2022 Census
                          5 Pesquisa Anual da Industria da Construção, 2023
                          6 Inflation Report, Banco Central do Brasil, September 2023
                          10
                             Lassio et al. Environmental Engineering and Management Journal 20 (2021); Lauriano L., (2013), How is the sustainability management in the construction sector?,
                          Technical report, RP1 301, Nova Lima,
                          11 80 million tons of municipal waste are produced in urban areas (2023), from households and construction and demolition waste. Abrema (2024), “Panorama dos

                          Residuos Solidos no Brasil, 2024.
                          12 Fundação João Pinheiro. Diretoria de Estatística e Informações. Inadequação de domicílios no Brasil 2022.
                          13
                             Based on annual operational costs and annualized capital expenditures for water, wastewater treatment, drainage and solid waste services and the projected
                          annualized marginal cost of capacity expansion for electricity. Sistema Nacional de Informações em Saneamento Básico – SINISA and Plano Decenal de Expansão de
                          Energia 2034.
                          7 11.5% of new urban areas are prone to flooding and landslides, Mapbiomas, Áreas Urbanizadas No Brasil 1985 - 2022
                          8 Mapbiomas, Áreas Urbanizadas No Brasil 1985 – 2022; 2004-2023; Annual losses to private sector (USD 1.36 billion), public (USD0.26 billion); and public sector

                          installations (USD1.2 billion) from hydrological and metrological risk based on Digital Atlas of Disasters; Financial Risks and Opportunities: Establishing Effective National
                          and Regional Risk Financing Mechanisms for Brazil, World Bank 2025.
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)


                          services and living in cities more manageable. They also provide significant jobs, with additional and higher paying
                          employment than traditional housing. From a financial perspective, experience in countries with mature sustainable
                          housing markets have shown that while the upfront costs of certified sustainable housing construction are modestly
                          higher, the downstream benefits include cost savings on utilities, operation and maintenance costs, improved occupant
                          health and well-being, and reduced transport time, make these investments financially viable for developers, owners, and
                          occupants15.

                          Sustainable certified housing currently represents less than two percent of housing units constructed in the country. 16
                          Brazil has a relatively small number of certified housing developments, with the majority found where the developer
                          market is largest—in metropolitan regions, and for housing developments affordable for lower to lower middle-income
                          families. 18 Long established financial and regulatory incentives, greater awareness, specialized skills, and a value chain
                          for sustainable construction and materials supply have allowed other countries to reach much higher penetration,
                          effectively mainstreaming sustainable housing into new construction19. In Brazil, most of the certifications have been
                          financed by CAIXA, with private banks yet to enter this market in a significant way. The adoption rate is constrained by
                          the reluctance of developers to provide upfront costs, fueled by a focus on short term gains and the lack of awareness of
                          how to capitalize on the downstream benefits. The lack of common practice and a supportive regulatory environment
                          also more generally contribute.

                          Brazil has established the Eco-Invest program to address the sustainability of certified housing in the country. Eco-Invest




_For Official Use Only_
                          is a transitional blended-finance initiative that expands financing for sustainability-certified housing by combining
                          concessional Government resources with funding from multilateral development banks (MDBs). Through a dedicated
                          credit line and targeted technical assistance, it diversifies housing funding sources, addresses key bottlenecks such as
                          foreign currency volatility and high credit costs, and builds a pipeline of certified sustainable housing assets. By providing
                          temporary incentives and risk-sharing, Eco-Invest aims to unlock and mainstream sustainable housing finance so the
                          private sector can sustain and scale it beyond the program’s lifetime.

                          This operation is being prepared in combination with an IFC operation that provides a loan to CAIXA to expand its certified
                          sustainable housing portfolio. The World Bank project adds a blended finance credit line and technical assistance.
                          Together, these coordinated efforts help CAIXA and private market actors adopt and scale sustainable housing models
                          that would be difficult to achieve through isolated public or private initiatives.


                          C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                          Promote efficient urban development by expanding finance for sustainable housing in the construction sector.
                           Key Results



                           15 The Business Case for Green Building, A Review of the Costs and Benefits for Developers, Investors and Occupants, World Green Building Council; Sustainable

                           Cities: Residential Certifications and Urban Transformation J. Gisbert. J. Roig-Hernando, J. Campana-Varas, 2025.
                           16
                              Based on publicly available data from the major certifications, 86,200 certified units were identified out of the 5.5 million new housing units produced between
                           2020 and 2025.
                           18 For Selo Casa Azul + CAIXA, over the last two years 42 percent of certified housing developments are in the Southeast, 5 percent in the North and 23 percent in

                           the Northeast; 92 percent of this certified housing is priced under the threshold for Minha Casa Minha Vida and serve lower or lower middle income families (Income
                           ranges based on Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada Conjuntura, February 2026).
                           19 Based on government data, building association data and sustainability reports of developers, countries with mature sustainable building markets and regulations

                           have high adoption. For example, for Singapore ~95% of new buildings are certified while for Sweden, UK, Australia and Germany adoption is between 40% and 60%.
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)


                                •   Increased financing for certified sustainable housing projects (by income levels and regions served).
                                •   Reduction of energy consumption due to the construction of certified sustainable housing
                                •   Reduction of water consumption due to the construction of certified sustainable housing
                                •   Number of people benefiting from climate-resilient infrastructure (by women and youth, income levels and
                                    regions)


                            D. Project Description
                            This project will help improve the private market for sustainable housing by providing targeted financing to housing that
                            is certified sustainable, improving awareness and capacity, improving acceptance of the certification in the financial
                            sector, and expanding supporting financial instruments and products. This will be done by providing a new credit line
                            combined with technical assistance. The project credit line is anticipated to create nearly 10,000 more and better jobs
                            and mobilize US$59 million in private capital, while the technical assistance will enable the sector more broadly to
                            provide additional jobs and private investment.

                           Component 1: Financing for Construction of Certified Sustainable Housing (IBRD US$198,000,000, Government of Brazil
                           US$40,000,000, and private financing US$59,000,000). This component will finance sub-loans for the implementation of
                           construction or retrofitting of housing certified as sustainable. The credit line will be accessible to housing developers and
                           construction companies for: (i) the construction of new housing projects that have sustainability certifications; and (ii) the




_For Official Use Only_
                           retrofitting of existing residential buildings that have sustainability certifications. To enhance targeting beyond sustainable
                           housing investments, a ceiling price per unit (which is under the ceiling price to qualify for CAIXA’s housing programs) has
                           been agreed with CAIXA. The credit line will only finance construction activities and not include land purchase or upfront
                           studies. Depending on the certification and individual development, they will include measures to improve energy and
                           water efficiency; construction practices; urban quality; social aspects; and introduction of innovative practices.

                           The project credit line will demonstrate sustainable housing at scale by expanding developer financing in Brazil’s most
                           active real estate segment, where major industry players operate. A maximum unit price, set below the Minha Casa Minha
                           Vida cap, will target low to lower-middle income households—the lowest-income segment eligible for mortgage finance—
                           so units remain affordable while improving housing quality and reducing utility bills. Through this line, CAIXA will grow
                           the sustainable housing market in regions with higher housing quality deficits (North, Northeast, and the Legal Amazon)
                           and support further expansion in highly urbanized areas, where housing deficits and construction and living costs are
                           highest.

                           Component 2: Technical Assistance (USD2,000,000). This component is designed to address barriers to adoption of
                           sustainable construction, including improving awareness of construction techniques and certification programs,
                           improving capacity within CAIXA, developing new sustainable construction financing products tailored to other segments,
                           and improving the methodology and reporting of CAIXAs Selo Casa Azul + CAIXA certification to enable broader
                           acceptance globally and within the financial sector in Brazil.

                          The technical assistance component will support scaling of the broader sustainable housing market beyond the credit line
                          ’s target segment. For very low-income households that cannot access mortgage financing under the credit line, technical
                          assistance will leverage existing subsidized housing programs of the Government of Brazil to introduce suitable housing
                          finance products, promote awareness, and adapt certification schemes to their needs. For middle-high and high-income
                          segments that typically use market-rate mortgages, technical assistance—together with IFC’s ongoing advisory work with
                          private banks and developers—will help expand demand and supply for sustainable housing by strengthening
                          understanding, acceptance, and perceived value of certified sustainable housing in the finance and construction sectors.
                                 The World Bank
                                 Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          This Project triggered OP 4.03 – Performance Standards for the Private Sector Activities, given that this credit line will
                          finance only housing projects developed by the private sector. The environmental and social (E&S) risk of the operation is
                          assessed as Category FI-2 (correspondent with a Moderate E&S Risk rating within the ESF). The subprojects are expected
                          to be located in already modified environments and are not expected to result in significant or irreversible environmental
                          or social impacts. The project will not require any resettlement or land acquisition. Potential risks include occupational
                          health and safety and routine construction impacts, Gender Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual




_For Official Use Only_
                          Harassments (GBV-SEA/SH). The potential risks are site-specific, temporary, and manageable through standard mitigation
                          measures and the application of Good International Industry Practice. CAIXA operates under a well-developed
                          Environmental and Social Management System assessed for two World Bank operations (P50543 and P508363). The
                          project excludes IFC Exclusion List activities, coal-related activities, and high-risk E&S transactions. The potential E&S
                          issues, risks, and impacts are associated with CAIXA’s capacity to effectively apply the E&S screening procedures,
                          implemented through the enhanced screening tool, and to manage the subprojects financed under the operation.

                          CAIXA’s Human Resource and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) systems align with Brazilian labor law and IFC
                          Performance Standard 2 (PS2), ensuring fair treatment, non-discrimination, equal opportunity, freedom of
                          association/collective bargaining, worker protection, and prohibition of forced and child labor. Workers have confidential,
                          non-retaliatory grievance channels, including for SEA/SH. OHS is managed through an Internal Accident & Harassment
                          Prevention Committee, a Risk Management Program, an OHS Action Plan, and annual prevention initiatives. An
                          independent grievance mechanism allows anonymous reporting. Staff annually sign the Code of Conduct and comply with
                          anti-harassment and anti-discrimination policies. Supplier requirements prohibit forced/child labor and discrimination,
                          mandate labor and OHS compliance, and require adherence to the Suppliers Code of Conduct and PRSAC. Borrower due
                          diligence also checks SEA/SH-related policies. With respect to biodiversity, specific attention was given to the legal origin
                          of timber used in construction works. The requirement for continuous verification of timber origin throughout subproject
                          implementation has been incorporated into the E&S screening tool and reflected in contractual clauses with non-
                          compliance penalties.

                          The due diligence confirmed that CAIXA’s overall commitment is deemed satisfactory for a FI-2 Project and they comply
                          with National Law (CMN Resolution 4.943/2021), requiring financial institutions to manage social, environmental, and
                          climate risks. CAIXA has a full-time dedicated E&S Officer. CAIXA discloses ESMS and portfolio information and maintains a
                          formal Stakeholder Engagement Plan. Complaints are managed through its Ombudsman’s Office via phone, email, and
                          online channels. Annual E&S information is disclosed through CAIXA’s Sustainability Report and the Social, Environmental
                          and Climate Risks and Opportunities Report.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 1
                                    The World Bank
                                    Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)


                          CAIXA will ensure the project is carried out in accordance with the ESMS, the Exclusion List, and the Performance
                          Standards46, in a manner acceptable to the Bank. For this operation, CAIXA is required to: (i) screen all subprojects against
                          the IFC Exclusion List, national laws, EPs, and sector guidelines per applicable PSs; (ii) train commercial teams after the
                          Sector tool is updated in the ESMS; (iii) continue meeting PS2 labor standards, and (iv) submit semi-annual E&S reports,
                          including updates on anti-SEAH measures. An ESCP is not foreseen in OP 4.03 Policy. Key E&S requirements will be included
                          in the Legal Agreement in line with IFC’s E&S strategy for their loan in the same Eco-Invest program to ensure
                          harmonization within WBG institutions. CAIXA will ensure all bidding documents and contracts for civil works under
                          the project include the obligation of contractors and subcontractors and supervising engineers under the ESMS.

                          This Project triggers OP 4.03 and the IFC's Performance Standards. The official Concept Stage ESRS has been cleared and
                          disclosed. It can be accessed at: https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-
                          reports/documentdetail/099642112122533488

                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements




_For Official Use Only_
                          CAIXA is the implementing agency for this project. CAIXA is a state-owned bank fully owned by the Federal Government
                          of Brazil and founded in 1861. As one of the largest state-owned financial institutions in Latin America, it has a strong
                          presence in thousands of Brazilian cities and manages over 85 million accounts. With assets exceeding US$630 billion,
                          CAIXA administers government pension funds and other public resources, playing a crucial role in public investment and
                          financial service expansion. CAIXA is the primary, but not the only, bank implementing financing through Brazil’s national
                          housing program that supports low- and middle-income households. As Brazil’s largest mortgage lender, with an estimated
                          ~65% share of the national housing finance market, Caixa plays a central role in shaping standards across the sector. It is
                          the main administrator of FGTS resources, which constitute the largest source of long-term, subsidized funding for housing
                          in the country. Through this role, CAIXA finances, appraises, contracts, and monitors a significant share of Brazil’s housing
                          production, including large-scale housing programs such as MCMV. From January 2023 to December 2024, it financed
                          more than 1.2 million housing units. Beyond lending, CAIXA performs technical and engineering due diligence, construction
                          monitoring, and compliance verification including with certification programs. It manages and administers the Casa Selo
                          Azul + CAIXA certification program.


                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                               CONTACT POINT

                               World Bank
                                John Morton
                                Senior Infrastructure Specialist

                               Borrower/Client/Recipient

                          46
                            “Performance Standards” means the IFC's Performance Standards on Social & Environmental Sustainability, dated January 1, 2012, copies of which
                          are available publicly on the IFC website at https://www.ifc.org/content/dam/ifc/doc/mgrt/ifc-performance-standards.pdf.



                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2
                               The World Bank
                               Promoting Sustainable Housing in Brazil (P512529)


                           Caixa Econômica Federal

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Caixa Econômica Federal

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL




_For Official Use Only_
                          Task Team Leader(s):                    John Morton

                          Co- Team Leader(s):                     Faruk Miguel Liriano, Emanuela Monteiro

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:

                          Country/Division Director:              Jorge A. Coarasa                      18-May-2026




                                                                                                                      Page 3
