Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconpfrcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Program Information Document (PID)


                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2026 | Report No: PIDPC00229




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Program Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                         Housing Opportunity:
                               LATIN AMERICA AND
El Salvador                                                 P513953                      Governance, Affordability,
                               CARIBBEAN
                                                                                         Reform in El Salvador
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
Program-for-Results
                               01-Jul-2026                  25-Sep-2026                  Urban, Resilience and Land
Financing (PforR)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Ministerio de VIvienda de
Republic of El Salvador
                               El Salvador

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
To strengthen El Salvador’s affordable housing institutional and financing ecosystems.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
COST & FINANCING (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Government program Cost                                                                                       680.00

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          180.00
    Total Program Cost                                                                                      179.62
    Other Costs (Front-end fee,IBRD)                                                                              0.38
  Total Financing                                                                                               180.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

FINANCING
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                              150.00

                                                                                                                   Page 1



                                                                                                         Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


      World Bank Lending                                                                                                                  150.00
    Total Government Contribution                                                                                                          30.00


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrconceptdecision#doctemplate
Concept Review Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1. El Salvador has achieved important development gains over the past two decades, marked by declining poverty and
   inequality, improved public security, and greater macroeconomic stability. Real GDP per capita reached US$5,023 in
   2023, and sovereign spreads have fallen sharply since their 2022 peaks, reflecting improved investor confidence.1
   Official poverty rates dropped by 14 percentage points, driven by a 10-point decline in extreme poverty and a 4-point
   decline in relative poverty.2 In 2023, El Salvador’s poverty rate was lower than that of Latin American peers with
   comparable income levels. Inequality also declined since the start of the century, with the Gini index falling from 0.52
   to 0.39, placing El Salvador among the more equal countries in the region. These gains were supported by modest but
   steady economic growth supported by remittances, which accounted for 24 percent of the country’s GDP in 2023, and
   growing tourism sector that saw a 17 percent increase in international tourist arrivals.3

2. Despite these achievements, structural and macroeconomic constraints and gaps in infrastructure and service
   provision continue to hinder inclusive development. Real GDP per capita has grown at a modest average of 2 percent
   and is projected to remain low over the medium term, held back by persistent productivity gaps, high labor informality,
   and infrastructure deficits. Gross public debt reached 87.5 percent of GDP in 2024, and high government spending
   leaves limited fiscal space for new investment.4 Informality affects 64 percent of the workforce, particularly women
   and youth, undermining productivity and access to formal financial instruments, including housing finance. 5 While
   remittances are helping growth of higher end residential construction, development of affordable housing is largely
   crowded out due to limited availability of serviced land and limited access to finance for developers in this segment.
   Many households continue to face insecure living conditions and exposure to climate-related shocks, highlighting the
   urgency of expanding access to basic services and resilient infrastructure.


1 International Monetary Fund. (2025). El Salvador: 2025 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under the Extended Fund Facility, and Requests for

Waivers of Nonobservance of Performance Criteria, and Modification of Performance Criteria (IMF Country Report No. 25/190). International
Monetary Fund.
2 World Bank (2024). Poverty and Equity Assessment for El Salvador 2024: Improving Lives and Livelihoods. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
3
  Ministerio de Turismo (2025). El Salvador consolida su crecimiento turístico con 3.9 millones de visitantes internacionales en 2024.
4 International Monetary Fund. (2025). El Salvador: 2025 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under the Extended Fund Facility, and Requests for

Waivers of Nonobservance of Performance Criteria, and Modification of Performance Criteria (IMF Country Report No. 25/190). International
Monetary Fund.
5 World Bank (2024). Improving lives and livelihoods Poverty and Equity Assessment for El Salvador 2024. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.



                                                                                                                                               Page 2



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
          The World Bank
          Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


3. Territorial disparities highlight the urgency of the housing crisis. Although rural poverty rates remain higher, more
   than 1.2 million poor Salvadorans live in cities, often in informal settlements lacking adequate water, sanitation, and
   housing.6 Concentrated pockets of poverty can be found in the peripheries of the San Salvador Metropolitan Area
   (SSMA), where growth has outpaced planning capacity and municipal investment. Informality, institutional
   fragmentation, and limited fiscal space at the local level have contributed to infrastructure backlogs and service
   delivery gaps.7

4. El Salvador ranks among the countries most vulnerable to climate change and natural hazards, with nearly 89
   percent of its territory and 95 percent of its population exposed to risks such as floods, landslides, earthquakes,
   droughts, and tropical storms. Average annual losses from disasters are estimated at 2.5 percent of GDP, and climate
   change is expected to increase the intensity and frequency of hydrometeorological events, including heatwaves,
   intense rainfall, and prolonged droughts. These risks are especially acute in cities, where rapid and unplanned growth
   has pushed low-income households into informal settlements often located on unstable hillsides or flood-prone areas.
   Nearly 30 percent of urban dwellers live in informal settlements with limited public services and heightened exposure
   to disasters.

 Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program

5. Housing is a key driver of social inclusion and economic dynamism in El Salvador. Between 2014 and 2023, the
   construction sector grew at an average annual rate of 4.4 percent, outpacing national GDP growth of 2.4 percent.
   Over the past decade, it has become an important engine of economic activity, contributing 6.38 percent of GDP in
   2023 (up from 5.34 percent in 2014) and generating 8.4 percent of total employment. Housing also plays a vital role
   in improving living conditions and resilience, particularly in the context of high informality, climate risks, and
   inequality.




   Figure 1 - Construction sector share of GDP, 2014–2023 (left) and construction employment as a share of total employment, 2013–2024 (right)
                                                      Sources: BCR, CEPAL, Own elaboration

6. Despite strong demand, housing production has not kept pace with household formation, and the market fails to
   serve low- and middle-income groups. The number of households has grown by 1.8 percent annually since 2007,
   faster than population growth, driven by declining household size. However, only 28,000 occupied units were added
   annually between 2007 and 2024, compared to the 30,000 - 40,000 units needed to meet demographic demand and
   reduce the accumulated housing deficit. As of 2023, 68 percent of households faced a housing deficit, including 15

6 Ibid.
7 World Bank (2023). El Salvador - Country Partnership Framework for the Period FY23-FY27 (English). Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.



                                                                                                                                            Page 3



                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


    percent with quantitative gaps (or approximately 300,000 households) and more than 50% of households that face
    qualitative deficiencies (over a million households). More than 40 percent of households spend over 30 percent of
    income on housing, with the poorest quintile spending up to 55 percent, indicating a high affordability burden.

7. Formal supply is concentrated in higher-income segments, with limited availability of affordable housing. Data from
   127 housing projects in the SSMA show that 96.8 percent of units are priced above US$100,000, and none fall below
   US$60,000.8 In contrast, over half of poor households can only afford units priced under US$40,000. This supply gap
   reflects structural constraints in the housing value chain, including limited access to construction finance, high land
   and infrastructure costs, material shortages, and limited developer incentives for affordable segments.

8. El Salvador’s housing finance sector remains underdeveloped, with weak presence of the private sector. The
   mortgage market in El Salvador is roughly evenly split between the Fondo Social de la Vivienda (FSV)
   and private financial institutions, mainly three commercial banks. The FSV originates about half of all loans but only
   25% of total volume, reflecting its focus on lower-income households. Between 2015 and 2024, roughly 116,000 home
   loans were granted, about 12,000 annually, with numbers remaining largely unchanged over the years. Lending
   dipped in 2020, peaked in 2021, and has declined since. In value terms, mortgages grew 7% annually (four times
   inflation) which shows how rising housing prices are further straining affordability. With a mortgage-to-GDP ratio of
   just 2%, unchanged for a decade and below the 6% average of higher middle-income LAC countries, El Salvador’s
   housing finance sector remains underdeveloped.




                       Figure 2 - Housing projects by price segment in the SSMA, May 2025 (Sources: IFC, Own elaboration)

9. El Salvador has taken important steps to strengthen its institutional and policy framework for housing and urban
   development. The creation of the Ministry of Housing in 2019 consolidated key sectoral institutions, including Fondo
   Social para la Vivienda (FSV), Fondo Nacional de Vivienda Popular (FONAVIPO), and Instituto de Legalización de la
   Propiedad (ILP), under a unified system, improving coordination and enabling a more strategic response to the
   country’s housing deficit.9 The Ministry now leads efforts to expand access to affordable housing, reduce disaster risk,


8
  El Salvador’s median national housing price in 2024 was the highest in the region at approximately US$265,000 - compared to US$161,000 in
Honduras, US$100,000 in Panama, and US$51,000 in Colombia (Lincoln Institute, 2050). In Colombia, despite a recent market contraction, 69
percent of all new housing units built in 2024 were classified as affordable (including both social and priority housing categories). (CAMACOL,
2025).
9 Ministry of Housing. (2025). Institutional Framework. Government of El Salvador: Ministry of Housing.



                                                                                                                                                  Page 4



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


    and promote territorial planning. This reorganization has enabled stronger alignment with national development goals
    and a growing recognition of housing as a tool for poverty reduction and territorial development.

10. FSV and FONAVIPO are the two public institutions in El Salvador that serve as the government’s main vehicles for
    providing housing assistance to households. FSV is a public mortgage bank originally conceived as a provident
    fund, similar to Mexico’s INFONAVIT. It provides mortgages for homes below a specified price ceiling. Following the
    establishment of private pension funds in the late 1990s, FSV ceased to receive social security contributions and, as a
    result, lost its primary source of funding. FONAVIPO is a public institution that supports low-income households’
    access to housing by combining housing loans and subsidies9. It operates through two channels: (i) a second-tier
    model that lends through a network of authorized financial institutions, and (ii) a more recent, smaller-scale first-tier
    model providing direct loans to households.

11. To build on this institutional foundation, the Government is finalizing the National Housing and Urban Development
    Policy (PNVDU), which aims at providing a long-term framework to guide sectoral investments, strengthen
    intersectoral coordination, and promote inclusive, sustainable, and resilient urban growth. The policy reflects a rights-
    based approach and emphasizes equity, gender, disaster risk management, and social fabric recovery as core
    principles. It seeks to consolidate existing efforts under a unified vision while addressing critical gaps in access,
    financing, and urban planning.

12. However, existing public programs are insufficient to address the scale and depth of the housing deficit. FONAVIPO
    delivers just 241 housing solutions per year, while FSV provides around 5,000 loans annually, primarily to formal
    households in the top 40% of income distribution. Nearly 60 percent of Salvadorans are excluded from formal finance
    due to informality and income constraints, pushing them toward self-construction in high-risk areas. Public resources
    are also stretched: expanding FSV coverage to 20,000 loans would require US$300 million per year, which is fiscally
    unsustainable under the current government-financed model.
13. To address the housing shortages and improve access to housing for the poor EL Salvador needs to leverage private
    capital and focus public assistance on the least fortunate. The private sector could serve households earning four or
    more minimum wages if affordable housing, priced up to US$60,000, is built in sufficient quantities. Public subsidies
    could be better targeted by shifting from interest rate subsidies to upfront support (e.g., down payment assistance)
    tailored to household repayment capacity. Blended finance models, including guarantees and risk-sharing
    instruments, will be critical to crowd-in private banks and developers, create incentives for financial institutions to
    lend to underserved populations, especially beneficiaries employed in the informal sector and extend loan tenors to
    make housing more affordable. Public investment should focus on enabling infrastructure, regulatory streamlining,
    and planning instruments that unlock serviced land and strengthen housing system coordination.

14. This document presents the World Bank Group’s proposed engagement in El Salvador’s housing sector through a
    Multi-phase Programmatic Approach (MPA). The MPA is designed to catalyze a comprehensive transformation of the
    sector by expanding access to affordable and resilient housing while supporting broader socio-economic development
    and job creation. Phase 1 of the MPA includes the proposed Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform
    in El Salvador (HOGARES) Project (P513953), described in the main section of this document and detailed in Annex 1.
    The MPA’s phased structure will allow the Government of El Salvador (GoES) and the World Bank Group to implement
    coordinated supply- and demand-side interventions, adapt to market and institutional readiness, and scale private
    sector participation over time.




                                                                                                                         Page 5



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


  Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

15. The MPA is the most suitable modality to support the Government of El Salvador in achieving a comprehensive
    transformation of its housing sector. The scale and complexity of El Salvador’s housing challenges, including a
    fragmented institutional landscape, deep affordability constraints, significant informality, and substantial investment
    needs, require a long-term, adaptative, and coordinated engagement. The MPA with the PforR used for phase one
    provides the structure to sequentially achieve the following targets:
            i.  Create a unified government vision and strategy for addressing housing crisis and align institutional
                structure and capacity with the needs of its implementation
           ii.  Lay the groundwork for a gradual transition from a state-led housing support model to a model that is
                designed to leverage private capital to ensure greater impact, scalability, and fiscal sustainability of the
                public housing support programs.
          iii.  Build a flexible program that enables phased implementation and course correction, allowing for pilot
                programs addressing gaps on the demand or supply side to test the design and market response, and then
                scale them once the critical lessons are incorporated.
          iv.   Enable a One World Bank Group approach that promotes coordinated, multi-institutional engagement to
                address housing constraints comprehensively.


16. The MPA facilitates a One WBG strategy that can leverage the comparative advantages of IBRD, IFC, and the WBG
    Guarantee Platform to deliver a unified response to El Salvador’s housing needs. Through this approach, the Bank
    will support institutional strengthening, financial innovation, and policy coherence to unlock affordable and resilient
    housing markets. IBRD will focus on public system reforms, enhancing affordability through optimized subsidies and
    mortgage guarantees, and foundational investments; IFC will help structure public-private partnerships and crowd in
    developer and lender participation; and WBG guarantees and risk-mitigation instruments will be utilized as necessary
    to de-risk private investments. By aligning these instruments and expertise under one umbrella, the MPA can
    systematically shift El Salvador’s housing ecosystem toward a more sustainable, inclusive, and market-responsive
    model.

17. The PforR is selected for the first stage of program implementation as the optimal instrument for establishing
    institutional and policy foundations and improving the design of existing government programs. The Program-for-
    Results design allows for setting up a series of targets to build institutional capacity and support the development of
    housing assistance programs that meet the program's objectives. This will be achieved through a sequential series of
    steps reflected in the Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs). This design will also enable the use of disbursements to
    finance pilot housing support programs of a new type once they are designed, which will aid the preparation of the
    second phase of the program aimed at scaling up housing support to reach a larger population.

 C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

  Program Development Objective(s)


 To strengthen El Salvador’s affordable housing institutional and financing ecosystems.


 PDO Level Results Indicators



                                                                                                                        Page 6



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


           i.    Number of housing sector reforms or regulatory instruments adopted to enable affordable and resilient
                 housing.
           ii.   Number of low-income households benefiting from pilot housing finance schemes.
          iii.   Private capital mobilized

 D. Program Description

 PforR Program Boundary

18. El Salvador is currently formulating a new National Housing and Urban Development Policy (Política Nacional de
    Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano, PNVDU) that seeks to provide a long-term State-led vision for the country’s housing
    and territorial development systems. The PNVDU is being designed as an instrument of public management rooted
    in a rights-based approach, incorporating gender equity, disaster risk management, and social cohesion. The policy
    aims at unifying public and private efforts around a coherent institutional framework that ensures sustainable and
    inclusive access to dignified housing and resilient urban development. The policy is expected to guide sectoral
    priorities over the short-to-medium term, aligned with the current administration’s mandate.


19. The PNVDU builds on the vision and objectives set out in El Salvador’s Plan Cuscatlán (2019–2024), particularly the
    axis on “Housing and Urban Development Access,” which recognized housing as both a fundamental right and an
    engine for development. However, despite past efforts, the sector continues to face deep-rooted challenges. These
    include a persistent quantitative and qualitative housing deficit, limited access to serviced land, high exposure to
    climate and disaster risks, and a fragmented institutional landscape with weak coordination and financing
    mechanisms. Many low-income households live in overcrowded or substandard conditions, often in risk-prone areas
    with inadequate services and insecure tenure. These structural challenges underpin the need for a renewed housing
    policy and sector transformation effort.


20. The overarching objective of the PNVDU is to promote access to dignified housing and habitat for all segments of
    the population through strengthened local economies, social inclusion, and civic participation, anchored in
    sustainable and equitable urban development. To this end, the policy seeks to: (i) reduce both quantitative and
    qualitative housing deficits through tailored, territory-sensitive interventions; (ii) expand access to serviced land and
    basic infrastructure, including public spaces and community amenities; (iii) develop a sustainable and inclusive housing
    finance ecosystem; (iv) enhance competitiveness and innovation in the housing sector; (v) support social cohesion and
    the right to the city; and (vi) establish an effective institutional and legal framework to ensure policy implementation.


21. The PforR program is strongly aligned with the six policy axes of El Salvador’s upcoming National Housing and Urban
    Development Policy (PNVDU), reflecting a shared vision to transform the country’s housing ecosystem. As the first
    phase of a broader Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA), the PforR focuses on laying the regulatory, financial,
    and institutional foundations needed to implement the national policy and unlock scale-up opportunities in future
    phases. The significant overlap between the PforR Results Areas and the PNVDU’s strategic axes highlights the
    government’s commitment to a coherent, whole-of-system approach to addressing housing deficits, improving urban
    equity, and strengthening resilience:


                                                                                                                         Page 7



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
The World Bank
Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


   i.    Axis 1 – Addressing Quantitative and Qualitative Housing Deficit: All three Results Areas (RAs) address
         structural drivers of El Salvador’s housing deficit. RA1 lays the institutional and regulatory foundations to
         transform the housing ecosystem. RA2 introduces pro-poor financial instruments, including subsidies and
         PPP structuring, to expand formal supply, directly echoing the policy’s emphasis on mobilizing public and
         private investment in social housing. RA3 supports the creation of housing data systems, consistent with
         the policy’s stated need for robust information platforms to guide investment and planning.

   ii.   Axis 2 – Access to Land, Infrastructure, Public Space, and Services: RA1 contributes through standardizing
         regulatory definitions and processes, such as VIS typologies and tenure modalities, while RA3’s land
         mapping activities align with policy goals to promote secure tenure and enable the management and
         generation of urbanizable land.


  iii.   Axis 3 – Developing Housing and Habitat Financing Mechanisms: RA1 creates the enabling legal and
         institutional frameworks for RA2 to pilot and scale inclusive financing instruments. RA2 directly supports
         the policy’s objectives to develop sustainable financing mechanisms and recover investments, including
         through self-construction support and targeted subsidies. Together, these RAs advance the creation of a
         permanent and diversified housing finance system.


  iv.    Axis 4 – Promoting Innovation, Competitiveness, and Technological Adoption in the Construction and
         Housing Value Chains: RA1 includes planning and regulatory upgrades that integrate resilience and
         climate adaptation measures. RA3 facilitates the adoption of innovation and new technologies by
         strengthening the housing data ecosystem and supporting inter-institutional coordination, both of which
         are called for in the policy to boost construction efficiency and sustainability.


   v.    Axis 5 – Strengthening the Social Fabric through Participatory and Community-based Approaches : RA2’s
         design of pro-poor instruments includes components that may engage community groups or facilitate
         participatory targeting and co-production. These align with the policy’s goals to promote citizen
         participation and co-responsibility in housing construction, improvement, and management.


  vi.    Axis 6 – Consolidating Institutional and Legal Frameworks to Operationalize the Policy: RA1 is directly
         aligned with this axis, supporting legal harmonization, institutional strengthening of the Ministry of
         Housing and its affiliated agencies, and enhancing coordination mechanisms between central and local
         government actors. RA3 further contributes by establishing information systems that improve decision-
         making, policy relevance, and program targeting.

         Government program pillars          Covered by PforR       Partially Covered      Not covered
                                                                        by PforR            by PforR
     1. Housing Deficit                                                     Yes
     2. Access to Land, Infrastructure,                                     Yes
     and Services
     3. Housing and Habitat Financing                                      Yes


                                                                                                                  Page 8



                                                                                                          Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


           4. Innovation and Technology                                                   Yes
           5. Social Fabric                                                               Yes
           6. Institutional and Legal                             Yes
           Framework
                                         Table 1 – Government program pillars covered by PforR



                          Government                      PforR                           Reasons for non-alignment
                           program
Duration               2025-TBD                  2026-2031                 Supporting first phase
Geographic             All the country           All the country
coverage
Results areas          RA1-RA6                   RA1-3                     The PforR is broadly aligned with the emerging
                                                                           national housing policy, though full alignment is not
                                                                           expected given the policy’s broad scope and the
                                                                           PforR’s focus on foundational reforms in this first
                                                                           phase.
Overall Financing      $ 680M                    $ 150M

                                 Table 2 – Non-alignment between Government program and PforR



 E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening

22. The initial environmental and social risk rating for the Program is considered Moderate and will be further revised
    during the preparation phase. The PforR includes the following activities, which are relevant for the environmental
    and social risk rating: (i) support policy and regulatory reforms related to affordable housing and PPP national
    framework that incorporates affordability criteria for low-income households, (ii) institutional strengthening and
    capacity building for relevant government entities that support housing programs, (iii) development of subsidy
    schemes and financial and guarantee instruments, (iv) public land mapping, and (v) the structuring of a PPP project
    for affordable housing. During preparation, an Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) will be developed
    to assesses the borrower’s E&S management systems and capacity, identify risks and gaps, and recommend measures
    to ensure the Program meets the World Bank’s E&S requirements.

23. At this stage, the environmental risk is considered low. The Program will not finance, support, or directly enable
    any civil works or housing construction activities. As such, no direct, induced, or cumulative adverse environmental,
    health and safety risks or impacts are anticipated. Potential environmental risks are limited to indirect, downstream
    effects that could emerge from the implementation of the different policies, regulations, institutional arrangements,
    land mapping exercises, financial instruments, and PPP frameworks that will be developed as part of the PforR. These
    include, for example, the potential for increased demand for housing development to be channeled to locations with
    inadequate environmental planning or weak enforcement of land-use controls, leading to pressures on natural
    resources or settlement in hazard-prone areas. Additional low-level risks typical of technical assistance operations
    may relate to OHS during trainings, workshops, and office-based activities; minor resource use and waste or e-waste
    associated with capacity-building support; and health and safety considerations during stakeholder engagement

                                                                                                                              Page 9



                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


    activities and field visits. These risks and impacts are envisaged to be low and temporary and are expected to be
    mitigated with readily available measures.

24. The initial social risk for the Program is considered Moderate given the nature and scope of activities under the
    proposed PforR. These activities carry social risks such as: potential exclusion of low-income and vulnerable groups
    (including women-headed households, persons with disabilities, and informal settlers) if the policies, regulations,
    subsidy schemes, and eligibility criteria do not adequately address access barriers and include proactive inclusion
    measures; risks of limited or non-representative stakeholder engagement during the development of policy and
    regulatory reforms, PPP frameworks, and land mapping exercises, which could reduce legitimacy and social
    acceptability; risks of inadequate information disclosure and communication; and risks that gaps between national
    legislation and international good practice in environmental and social risk management persist, particularly in the
    preparation of PPP frameworks. During preparation, the ESSA will also assess grievance and redress mechanisms and
    data privacy regulations, and provide recommendations to strengthen these systems.


25. To help manage these risks, an exclusion list will be developed during preparation of the ESSA. The Program will not
    finance any action that results in the resettlement of people. E&S ratings will be revisited following completion of the
    ESSA, which will provide a detailed analysis of these risks and recommend mitigation measures.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Dmitry Sivaev
   Senior Urban Specialist

   Gabriel Sergio Arrisueno Fajardo
   Senior Urban Development Specialist

   Karima Ben Bih
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Republic of El Salvador

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministerio de VIvienda de El Salvador

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                                                       Page 10



                                                                                                                Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Housing Opportunity: Governance, Affordability, Reform in El Salvador(P513953)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                                            Page 11



                                                                                     Official Use Only
