                                                                                         PUBLIC



                    DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                      TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO




                 URBAN UPGRADING AND REVITALIZATION PROGRAM

                                       (TT-L1056 AND TT-L1057)




                                            LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Robin Rajack, Team Leader
(HUD/CBA); Gilberto Chona, Alternate Team leader; Paloma Silva, Dianela Avila and Beatriz
González (CSD/HUD); Luca Marini, and Maria Elena Castro-Munoz (VPS/ESG); Leonor Corriols,
Paula Louis-Grant and Jeremy Valentine-Harry (FMP/CTT); Kavita Maharaj and Priya
Ramsumair-John (CCB/CTT); Christopher Persaud (INE/TSP); Marcelo Consolo (TSP/CTT);
Gilroy Lewis (WSA/CTT); Ana Cuesta (SPD/SDV); Juliana Almeida and Esperanza Gonzalez
(CSD/CCS); and Louis Francois Chretien (LEG/SGO).


Under the Access to Information Policy, this document is subject to public disclosure.
                                                       CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY ........................................................................................................... 1


I.     PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................... 2

        A.      Background, problem addressed, and justification .............................. 2
        B.      Objective, components, and cost ......................................................... 9
        C.      Key results indicators ......................................................................... 13

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................. 14

        A.      Financing instruments ........................................................................ 14
        B.      Environmental and social safeguard risks ......................................... 15
        C.      Fiduciary risk...................................................................................... 16
        D.      Other risks and key issues ................................................................. 16

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................. 18

        A.      Summary of implementation arrangements ....................................... 18
        B.      Summary of arrangements for monitoring results .............................. 20
                                            - ii -




                                         ANNEXES
Annex I     Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM)
Annex II    Results Framework
Annex III   Fiduciary Arrangements

                             REQUIRED ELECTRONIC LINKS (REL)
REL#1       Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) / Annual Operational Plan (AOP)
REL#2       Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
REL#3       Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)
REL#4       Procurement Plan


                             OPTIONAL ELECTRONIC LINKS (OEL)
OEL#1       Analysis of Project Cost and Economic Viability
OEL#2       Operating Manual (Operating Regulations for Component 3)
OEL#3       Gender Analysis
OEL#4       Project Completion Report for TT-L1016; 2469/OC-TT
OEL#5       Public Utilities Policy
OEL#6       Climate Change Analysis
OEL#7       Reference list
OEL#8       Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF)
                                       - iii -


                              ABBREVIATIONS
AOP      Annual Operational Plan
CTB      Central Tenders Board
EPOSDC   East Port of Spain Development Company
ESA      Environment and Social Assessments
ESMF     Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESMP     Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESMR     Environmental and Social Management Report
ESS      Environmental and Social Strategy
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
HDC      Housing Development Corporation
IDB      Inter-American Development Bank
LSA      Land Settlement Agency
MDB      Multilateral Development Bank
MHUD     Ministry of Housing and Urban Development
MWP      Multiple Works Program
NIPDEC   National Insurance Property Development Company Limited
NPV      Net Present Value
NSDS     National Spatial Development Strategy
NUP      Neighborhood Upgrading Program
OM       Operating Manual
OPR      Office of Procurement Regulation
PCR      Project Completion Report
PEFA     Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PEP      Pluriannual Execution Plan
PFMS     Public financial management systems
PMCEU    Program Management, Coordinating and Evaluation Unit
PMR      Progress Monitoring Report
POS      Port of Spain
PPDPP    Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Property
PPS      Public-Private Partnerships
SAI      Supreme Audit Institution
SIL      Specific Investment Loan
THA      The Tobago House of Assembly
TTMF     Trinidad and Tobago Mortgage Finance Company
WASA     Water and Sewerage Authority
                                                     PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                    TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
                                         URBAN UPGRADING AND REVITALIZATION PROGRAM
                                                     (TT-L1056 AND TT-L1057)
                                                   Financial Terms and Conditions
 Borrower                                                                                     Flexible Financing Facility(a)
 Republic of Trinidad and Tobago                                                   Amortization Period:        24 Years
 Executing Agency                                                                  Disbursement Period:        6 Years
 Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (MHUD)
                                                                                   Grace Period:               6.5 Years (b)
                                         Amount
           Source                      (US$ million)            Total      %
                                                                                   Interest rate:              LIBOR Based
                                 TT-L1056        TT-L1057
                                                                                                               (c)
 IDB (Ordinary Capital):           32.5            17.5        50.0      100       Credit Fee:
                                                                                   Inspection and              (c)
                                                                                   Supervision Fee:
                                                                                   Weighted Average Life
                                                                                                               15.25 Years
                                                                                   (WAL):
 Total:                            32.5            17.5        50.0      100
                                                                                                               Dollars of the United
                                                                                   Currency of Approval:
                                                                                                               States of America
                                                         Project at a Glance
 Project Objective/Description: The general objective of the program is to contribute to the improvement of the quality of the urban
 built environment. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the habitability in urban settlements on State-owned lands; and
 (ii) improve the physical quality and economic performance of urban public spaces; (iii) enhance housing conditions for low income
 households; and (iv) strengthen the capacity of supply side stakeholders to satisfy effective housing demand.
 Special Contractual Clauses prior to the First Disbursement: the executing agency will provide evidence to the satisfaction of
 the Bank of: (i) the establishment of the Program Management, Coordinating and Evaluation Unit (PMCEU) and of the assignment
 or hiring by the executing agency of a program director, a financial specialist, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a procurement
 specialist, and an environmental and social specialist; and (ii) its approval of the Operating Manual (OM) of the program, in
 accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (¶3.4). See also other special contractual conditions in Annex B of
 the Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR).
 Special Contractual Clauses of Execution: the executing agency will provide evidence to the satisfaction of the Bank: (i) prior to
 the disbursement of loan resources for Component 1 activities in Trinidad, that an agreement has been entered into between the
 executing agency and the Land Settlement Agency (LSA) for the execution for such activities; and (ii) prior to the disbursement of
 loan resources for the execution of Components 1, 2 and 3 activities in Tobago, that an agreement has been entered into between
 the executing agency and the Tobago House Assembly (THA) for the execution of such activities (¶3.5). See also other special
 contractual conditions in Annex B of the Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR).
 Exceptions to Bank Policies: None.
                                                                Strategic Alignment
 Challenges(d):                                 SI                              PI                             EI

 Cross-Cutting Themes(e):                      GD                              CC                              IC
(a)
      Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option to request modifications to the amortization schedule, as
      well as currency, interest rate and commodity conversions. In considering such requests, the Bank will take into account operational and risk
      management considerations.
(b)
      Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility (FFF), changes in the grace period are possible as long the Original
      Weighted Average Life (WAL) and the last payment date, as documented in the loan agreement, are not exceeded.
(c)
      The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during its review of the
      Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies.
(d)
      SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(e)
      GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law).
                                                        -2-




                      I.       PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and justification

1.1       Trinidad and Tobago is slowly recovering from a deep economic recession. The
          economy contracted by 6.5% in 2016, another 1.9% in 2017 and remained roughly
          flat in 2018 and 2019 [22].1 As a result of a fiscal consolidation program, public
          debt has stabilized, measuring 62.2% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) [2] at
          the end of 2018. Going forward, the economy is expected to grow by 1.5% in
          2020 [22], however, volatility in energy prices and production volumes,
          underscores the need for continued discipline in public expenditure, even as the
          Government of Trinidad and Tobago attempts to stimulate growth and reduce
          inequity.

1.2       The Government is committed to improving equity, efficiency, and sustainability in
          the urban built environment.2 This program will finance a needed extension of
          informal settlement upgrading, affordable housing finance programs, and
          institutional strengthening activities implemented under the recently concluded
          Neighborhood Upgrading Program - NUP (TT-L1016; 2469/OC-TT). It will,
          however, prioritize upgrading and improvements in housing quality in the main
          urbanized corridors and also contribute to the revitalization of urban centers,3 as
          part of a strategy to foster a pattern of more sustainable built development. The
          program will be executed through two different loan modalities, a Multiple Works
          Program (MWP), TT-L1056, and a Specific Investment Loan (SIL), TT-L1057.

1.3       High incidence of informal settlement. An international analysis of 87 countries
          found that with close to 30% of its urban population squatting 4 in 2005, Trinidad
          and Tobago has a much higher incidence of slum population than expected,5 given
          its high GDP per capita [14]. One in every five households is squatting [30] and in
          2019, the Land Settlement Agency (LSA) mapped 250 squatter sites that are
          known to be predominantly on State lands, with the most populous located in urban
          areas. The LSA identified a further 60 sites as also possibly being predominantly
          on State land. In Trinidad, which is 71% urbanized, such settlements in urban
          areas are often on hillsides or close to water courses, increasing their vulnerability
          to natural disasters and high impact rainfall events associated with climate
          change-vulnerability that upgrading interventions typically reduce. In squatter
          sites, not only are the land tenure, road layout and buildings typically irregular, but
          squatter households are twice as likely (15% vs 8%) to lack piped-water and three
          times more likely (26% vs 9%) to use pit-latrines, than non-squatter households,
          which poses potential implications for household health and disproportionate
          impacts on women and female-headed households [1]. Squatter sites are also

1     Optional electronic link OEL#7 contains the bibliographic references identified by the number in brackets [#].
2     Commonly understood to include man-made features such as buildings, infrastructure, and public facilities in
      urban centers and along urban corridors.
3     Commonly understood as city or town areas where there is proximity to a range of commercial, retail, and
      public administration activities and a concentration of employment opportunities.
4     Squatting is commonly understood as the occupation of land without the expressed authorization of the
      owner.
5     Generally understood as heavily populated urban areas characterized by substandard housing and poor living
      conditions due to deficient or missing basic services.
                                                      -3-


          notable for irregular and sometimes illegal electricity connections, and for a lack of
          fire hydrants, increasing their risks of significant fire-related losses. More generally,
          inadequate housing and infrastructure conditions have been shown to be
          associated with lesser life satisfaction [23, 6].

1.4       Improving the habitability in informal settlements will improve the quality of the
          urban built environment and directly impact the quality of life of low-income
          households6 living in those communities since among other things, it will provide
          the convenience and security of an access to each home that does not require
          passing through a neighbor’s yard, drain, river, or informal path. In many cases,
          vehicles, will now be able to travel directly to the homes, providing significant
          convenience and improved safety. Improved habitability will also reduce the
          inconvenience, risks and costs associated with not having potable water supply
          and indoor water closet toilets – an inconvenience disproportionately borne by
          women who do the majority of household chores such as: cooking, laundry, and
          cleaning. Servicing greenfield sites located close to economic centers with basic
          infrastructure and systematically allocating the serviced-plots to low-income
          households will also help to improve the urban built environment by providing an
          alternative to new informal settlement.

1.5       Housing unaffordability. Nationally, the House-Price-to-Wages ratio was
          consistently over 10:1 for the period between the mid-1990s and 2015 [18], much
          higher than the 3:1 threshold of affordability defined by international standards [4].
          This is likely the result of a mismatch between demand and formal supply. The
          National Spatial Development Strategy (NSDS) of 2013 estimated an annual
          housing demand of 5,000 units per year up to 2033 to cater for the formation of
          new households, as well as replacement of aging housing stock [9]. There is,
          however, an acute shortage of formal housing for low-income- households,7
          evidenced in part by squatting (settlement on land without the authorization of the
          owners – described above) and a waiting list for state-supplied housing that
          exceeds 175,000 applicants according to the Housing Development Corporation
          (HDC) of which approximately 50% do not meet the minimum qualification criteria
          for a state subsidized mortgage for the typical unit produced by the HDC. In the
          housing production chain, the country’s rankings in the World Bank’s 2019 Doing
          Business Rankings [36] for enforcing contracts, land registration and construction
          permitting, of 174th, 158th and 125th, respectively, are illustrative of systemic
          challenges in improving formal housing supply efficiency.

1.6       Women, and in particular low-income households headed by women,8 are
          disproportionately affected by housing unaffordability, given that the ratio of
          women's earnings to men's is estimated at 0.64 [37] and that women are 15
          percentage points less likely than men to borrow from financial institutions.9 In
          addition, almost 1 in 3 women have or will experience some form of physical or

6     To be understood as household income of TT$96,000 or less per year or TT$8,000 or less per month -slightly
      less than the TT$8,500 median monthly, household income as determined by the CSO from its 2014,
      Continuous Sample Survey of Population (CSSP).
7     To be understood as having a household income of TT$8,000 or less per month or TT$96,000 or less per
      year.
8
      40% of households were female-led in 2018 [27].
9     According to data from the Global Findex, only 20% of the women in Trinidad and Tobago borrowed from a
      financial institution in 2017, compared to 35% of men [34].
                                                 -4-


          sexual violence in their lifetime in Trinidad and Tobago [28], which indicates the
          importance of ensuring that women and their children have access to adequate
          housing and the means to be financially independent. However, gender challenges
          also extend to adolescent and young men who are at-risk of joining street gangs
          and engaging in violence (many of whom live in informal settlements in urban
          areas), given their lower performance and expected years of schooling.10 (See
          OEL#3).

1.7       These affordability and informal settlement challenges occur in a context of
          sub-urbanization and the neglect of urban centers. The main urban centers,
          including Port of Spain (POS), San Fernando and Chaguanas in Trinidad, and
          Scarborough in Tobago, have all seen a significant increase in suburban
          development (residential and mixed-use development on the outskirts of the urban
          centers), while their core areas are congested by slow-moving vehicular traffic,
          lacking in new investments and high quality public space, and aesthetically
          unattractive. As in San Fernando, the waterfront in Scarborough is
          underdeveloped and underutilized. In fact, a 2012 regional analysis based on
          2007 Gallup Survey data ranked local respondents’ overall satisfaction with the
          city or area in which they live 21st out of 24 countries [14].

1.8       While the POS waterfront was significantly redeveloped with the completion of the
          International Waterfront Center in 2009, the Central Business District has not seen
          comparable investment, and in some sections, value is being undermined by
          vacant sites in prime locations; old and poorly maintained facilities, such as public
          malls. One of them, Eastside Plaza on Charlotte Street, a building of historical
          import given that it was the site of the original market of the city and has rare
          architectural features, is badly in need of retrofits and modernization. Such facilities
          and vacant sites, blight surrounding properties and are sometimes characterized
          by unsafe conditions for tenants and customers.

1.9       In this context, the national pattern of housing and built environment expansion is
          unsustainable. The administratively determined capital city, POS, and the second
          city, San Fernando, experienced declines of 24% and 12% respectively [7],
          between the 2000 and 2011 censuses [9]. At the same time, five of the six Regional
          Corporations in Trinidad that experienced the largest population growth between
          the 2000 and 2011 censuses have extremely low population densities by urban
          standards (less than five persons per hectare). Similarly, a 2018 analysis found
          that the rapid spatial expansion of the Scarborough and Roxborough built up areas
          in recent decades has been very inefficient [21]. Overall, this pattern of dispersed
          housing and built-environment growth is creating a growing fiscal and
          environmental cost [5].

1.10      Improving the physical quality and economic performance of public spaces in
          urban centers will contribute to the improvement in the quality of the urban built
          environment by creating conditions that enhance productivity and encourage more
          customer and visitor traffic. Project investments in structural features such as site
          infrastructure, building reinforcements, updated mechanical and electrical
          systems, cost-saving green-building technologies, and better site layout
          functionality, will facilitate higher levels of productivity and lower risk for those who

10    According to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 2018 Human Development Index.
                                                  -5-


         perform economic activities on the site. Streetscaping infrastructure (e.g.
         sidewalks, benches, exercise and play equipment, and shade trees), as well as
         design features that maximize site views, more functional circulation of visitors,
         better visibility for shop frontages, improved accessibility (e.g. elevators and
         ramps), and attention to comforts and safety (e.g. air-conditioning and security
         cameras), enhance the visitor experience, encouraging more visitors, longer stays,
         higher demand to host events on site, all of which should add to patronage of
         businesses on or proximate to the site. Overall, the project investments should
         generate higher economic rents and more employment for the target sites and
         adjacent areas, adding to the attractiveness of the urban area.

1.11     Qualitative urban housing deficits. In addition to the high incidence of
         informality, housing in urban areas is older than the rest of the stock and suffers
         from significant qualitative deficits. According to the 2011 Census, 71% of the stock
         in POS, and over 50% in the adjoining populous urban areas of Diego Martin and
         San Juan/Laventille, as well as in San Fernando, was built prior to 1980. Analysis
         of the 2014 nationally representative Survey of Living Conditions shows that
         16.5% of the poorest households (lowest income quintile), had outer walls of their
         houses made of wood or galvanize.11 In the same 2014 Survey, more than a third
         (34.1%) of low-income households,12 was living in overcrowded conditions.13
         Moreover, 2012 UN-Habitat Urban Profiling exercises found poor housing in terms
         of durability, adequacy and design in the Greater POS Area [32], San Fernando
         [33], and Scarborough, Tobago [34].

1.12     Improving housing conditions for low-income households through home
         construction and home improvement subsidies will directly enhance the urban built
         environment and the quality of life of low-income households since it will alleviate
         daily frustrations and burdens associated with inadequate living conditions such
         as overcrowding, a leaking roof, an insecure outer wall, or an outdoor toilet facility
         (pit latrine). Savings in usage on electricity and water through inclusion of
         green technologies in new homes will also provide benefits associated with more
         disposable income.

1.13     Institutional capacity gaps. Beyond fixing the above-described short-term
         problems in the existing housing stock, there is a need for sector studies to help
         fill information gaps and position government policy and programming in the
         medium-term. For example, systematic analyses of drainage, flood abatement and
         waste-water management in the Diego Martin River Basin is needed. Similarly, a
         determination of what constitutes appropriate development standards in densely
         populated, urban, hillside-communities is needed if longer-term goals for full
         regularization, including land titling are to be achieved. Likewise, medium-term
         housing and urban development planning in Tobago would benefit from the
         development of an Infrastructure Plan. Better-targeted interventions in informal
         settlements and low-income housing programs require up-to-date socio-economic
         information from an ongoing national survey of those settlements, and proper
         analysis of the existing, extensive HDC application database. At the sector scale,
         a more systematic analysis of housing demand and supply-chain constraints is

11
     Zinc-coated sheets of metal commonly used for roofing or fences.
12   Lowest 2 income quintiles.
13   Households were classified as overcrowded when there were 2 or more persons per bedroom.
                                                         -6-


         needed. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (MHUD)
         needs capacity strengthening to perform broader urban development roles, given
         the findings of a recent SWOT analysis14 documented in its Strategic Plan
         2018-2023, that noted lack of clarity in its urban development mandate and limited
         innovation in solving housing problems [13]. This includes strengthening of
         technical and information systems capacity in real estate management and spatial
         analysis, and broader exposure to international learning through global and
         regional conferences and exchanges with Spanish speaking counterparts in the
         region.

1.14     Government’s strategy for addressing the challenges of unaffordability and
         informality have been dual-pronged. On the one hand there has been a systematic
         program of informal settlement regularization on State lands for the last three
         decades. On the other hand, with respect to affordability, the government has
         augmented housing supply through construction of public housing units by the
         Housing Development Corporation (HDC), servicing of some greenfield sites with
         residential infrastructure, and by expanding housing finance. Regarding housing
         finance, this has included subsidized interest rates through the Trinidad and
         Tobago Mortgage Finance Company (TTMF) which in December 2018 received a
         partial-credit guarantee of TT$120 million from IDB Invest – the IDB’s private
         sector arm.

1.15     At a more direct and modest scale, approximately four thousand low income
         households benefitted from Home Improvement Subsidies and Home Construction
         Subsidies under the operation 2469/OC-TT [12]. By the end of the operation
         2469/OC-TT in 2017 there were hundreds of pre-screened applicants who were
         deemed eligible but did not receive grants due to limitations on funding. These
         limitations are reflected in the fact that the average recurrent expenditure allocated
         to the MHUD in the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 budget cycles was 34% less than
         the allocation in 2012-2013.

1.16     Regarding suburbanization and the neglect of urban centers, Government aims to
         improve the functionality and attractiveness of urban centers as places to recreate,
         do business, and even reside. As the NSDS puts it: “constraining the spatial
         expansion of urban areas will only be effective if efforts and resources are
         simultaneously directed towards improving the efficiency and quality of existing
         urban areas” [8]. The Government is pursuing such measures through initiatives
         such as the San Fernando Waterfront Redevelopment Project; the revitalization of
         Skinner Park in San Fernando; the completion of the Government campus near
         the waterfront in POS; and the restoration of several landmark, heritage buildings
         in POS. With respect to Tobago, the NSDS calls for strengthening the urban fabric
         of Scarborough to harness its cultural and tourism potential, and the Tobago
         House of Assembly (THA) has begun to design a waterfront initiative to this effect.
         Additionally, several regeneration investments in POS were identified in the
         IDB-financed Sustainable POS Action Plan [16].




14
     SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats analysis) is a framework for identifying and
     analyzing the internal and external factors that can have an impact on the viability of a project, product, place,
     institution or person.
                                            -7-


1.17   Climate change and sustainability. Sustainability is an emerging theme in the
       country’s development agenda. Trinidad and Tobago ranks 90th in the ND-GAIN
       index [27] and faces hazards such as tropical storms, flooding, wind and heavy
       rainfall. With climate change, expected temperature increases will result in longer
       warm spells, longer hot and dry spells, an increase in intense rainfall, and
       moderate to extreme drought. In 2018 the country experienced its worst flooding
       in history, affecting 150,000 people and causing an estimated of US$3.7 million in
       economic damages [3]. In some informal settlements, indiscriminate disposal of
       solid waste into drainage channels and watercourses exacerbates flooding
       vulnerabilities. In light of these threats, infrastructure and building designs need to
       incorporate climate resilience and the sustainable use of energy and water,
       consistent with Government’s policy on the greening of its operations [10].

1.18   Program strategy. The program to be funded by this operation is part of the
       MHUD’s ongoing strategy to address informal settlement regularization on State
       lands, reduce the qualitative and quantitative housing deficits, and revitalize urban
       centers. The program’s emphasis on consolidating the build development footprint
       in urban centers and along the main urban corridors, and on minimizing dislocation
       of households from economic and social networks, is fully consistent with the
       emphasis of the New Urban Agenda developed at the United Nations flagship 2016
       forum, HABITAT III. It is also consistent with the development approach embodied
       in the National Spatial Development Strategy of 2014 [8,9] and guided by the 2010
       Local Area Spatial Development Plans for practically all urban centers and areas
       alongside the main urban corridors. In the case of proposed investments in or
       around Port of Spain, there is also consistency with the Sustainable Port of Spain
       Action Plan [16] produced under the IDB’s Emerging and Sustainable Cities
       Initiative in 2015. Finally, the development strategy emphasized in this program is
       congruent with the Government’s focus on sustainable urban mobility as embodied
       in ongoing Technical Cooperation exercises, as well as the 2016 Analysis of Mass
       Transit Alternatives for POS and the Main Urban Corridors of Trinidad [17].
1.19   Sector knowledge. Based on Caribbean experiences, a recent IDB study found
       that direct subsidies for self-construction were successful in addressing housing
       deficits and that infrastructure upgrading was effective in reaching vulnerable
       populations [19]. In relation to home construction subsidies, it has been shown that
       the mechanism of combining household savings and the grant-voucher, was
       successful in targeting poor populations [24]. In addition, according to other
       regional studies in Latin America and the Caribbean, infrastructure upgrading
       interventions can contribute to increased land and property values. Moreover,
       research on Trinidad and Tobago has shown that augmenting perceptions of
       tenure security through infrastructural works can be a reliable contributor to greater
       home improvement and repair [29]. Looking at the English experience, Tyler et al
       [31] concluded that benefit-cost ratios for urban regeneration projects range
       between 2.4 and 3.5 on average, and between 5.9 to 7.9 for the kind of
       regeneration projects included in the present program (urban markets and plazas).
1.20   Lessons Learned. Regarding 2469/OC-TT, the Final Evaluation similarly
       concluded that the housing subsidies/grants program was very successful in
       controlling the amount of public investment, while leveraging private sweat equity
       and cash contributions [12]. The Project Completion Report (PCR) for 2469/OC-TT
       (OEL#4), recommends selecting future upgrading sites with high baseline
       population density, and proximity to income-generating economic activities [20],
                                            -8-


       consistent with the focus in this new operation. Additional recommendations from
       the PCR that were incorporated into the program design include: (i) inclusion of
       regulatory agencies in the Steering Committee to facilitate better coordination on
       regulatory approvals; (ii) inclusion of a dedicated Monitoring and Evaluation
       Officer, in the executing agency; and (iii) timing the execution of institutional
       strengthening activities to make use of potentially valuable inputs, and better
       inform investment decisions.

1.21   Strategic alignment. This operation is consistent with the Second Update to the
       Institutional Strategy - UIS (AB-3190-2) and is expected to contribute to the
       Corporate Results Framework 2020-2023 - CRF (GN-2727-12) through the
       development challenge of: (i) Social Inclusion and Equality, by facilitating the
       integration of informal settlers; and (ii) Productivity and Innovation, through its
       contributions to enhanced economic performance of urban public spaces. It also
       aligns to the cross-cutting themes of: (i) Gender Equality and Diversity, through its
       targeting of female-headed households for housing grants and targeting of women
       as well as at-risk young men for community-sourced labor in the upgrading of living
       conditions in informal settlements; (ii) Climate Change and Environmental
       Sustainability, through its drainage and flood-mitigation initiatives within upgrading
       sites, and incorporation of green building technologies; and (iii) Institutional
       Capacity and Rule of Law, through its training and information systems
       management investments. According to the joint Multilateral Development Bank
       (MDB) approach on climate finance tracking, 37.5% of total IDB funding result in
       climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. The program contributes to the
       IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of approvals by year’s end 2020” (OEL#6).

1.22   The operation is consistent with the IDB Group Country Strategy with the Republic
       of Trinidad and Tobago 2016-2020 (GN-2888), through the Strategic Area of
       Fostering Human Development and the Strategic Objective of Increasing Access
       to Quality Housing. It is also consistent with the Bank’s Disaster Risk Management
       Policy (GN-2354-5) and the Urban Development and Housing Sector Framework
       (GN-2732-6) through the following Lines of Action: (i) support programs for the
       improvement of informal neighborhoods; (ii) improve the maintenance, coverage,
       quality, and environmental sustainability of urban services and infrastructure;
       (iii) foster and expand access to public and private financing for housing services
       for the poorest households or in areas of high environmental, climate-related, or
       geophysical vulnerability; (iv) foster and expand the supply of housing services
       with low environmental and climate impact in areas with access to services and
       job markets; (v) reinforce the capacity of the institutions involved in producing,
       financing, and regulating affordable housing; (vi) revitalize degraded urban areas
       and preserve the historical heritage of the cities without harming the residents of
       these areas; and (vii) expand the supply and improve the accessibility and quality
       of urban green areas. It is also consistent with the Climate Change Sector
       Framework (GN-2835-8) through the Line of Action to mainstream climate action;
       the Gender and Diversity Sector Framework (GN-2800-8) through the Line of
       Action to improve the well-being of women and children by expanding access to
       quality public services that are culturally relevant; and the Public Utilities Policy
       (GN-2716-6). This operation is also consistent with the policies of the Government
       as reflected in several key policy documents such as the Vision 2030 Strategy [11].
       Lastly, TT-L1056 is included in the 2020 Operational Program Report (GN-2991-
       1).
                                            -9-


1.23   Gender. Several of the gender-sensitivities raised in the diagnostic ¶1.6 and in
       OEL#3 are addressed in the program design through the following: (i) targeting of
       women as well as at-risk young men for community-sourced labor in Component
       1; (ii) investments in improved access to homes, street lighting, as well as in-house
       piped potable water supply in Component 1 to decrease the security risks that
       women and girls face in their daily activities; (iii) improving the conditions for more
       productive and safer enterprise in Eastside Plaza where women are the vast
       majority of existing tenants, under Component 2; and (iv) targeting of
       female-headed households in Component 3 to increase women’s financial
       independence.

1.24   Compliance with the Public Utilities Policy (OEL#5). The program complies
       with the conditions of financial sustainability and economic evaluation and is
       aligned with the goals and principles of the Public Utilities Policy (GN-2716-6) and
       with the objectives and principles of the Policy as it relates to the provision of
       water and sanitation, solid waste and electricity services to the beneficiary
       households under the program. The Water and Sewerage Authority (WASA) is
       mandated by its 1965 Act to provide water and sewerage services for Trinidad and
       Tobago. WASA has been able to meet its O&M costs through a combination of
       tariffs and timely and transparent subsidies from the Government. Additionally,
       WASA recently commissioned a Business Plan and Price Control Proposal
       (2019 – 2024) that seeks to improve the operational and financial sustainability of
       the utility. This is in addition to current Institutional Strengthening under
       TT-L1026 (LO2890/OC-TT). The Trinidad and Tobago Electricity Commission, a
       corporatized entity, provides electricity service and the Municipal Corporations Act
       (Act 21 of 1990) mandates the collection and disposal of solid waste. Finally, the
       infrastructure services to be financed under the program are socio-economically
       viable according to Net present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
       calculated by the economic evaluation (OEL#1).

B.     Objective, components, and cost

1.25   Objective. The general objective of the program is to contribute to the
       improvement of the quality of the urban built environment. The specific objectives
       are to: (i) improve the habitability in urban settlements on State-owned lands;
       (ii) improve the physical quality and economic performance of urban public spaces;
       (iii) enhance housing conditions for low income households; and (iv) strengthen
       the capacity of supply-side stakeholders to satisfy effective housing demand.

       Component 1. Urban Residential Infrastructure (US$15.0 million)
1.26   This Component will finance a cohort of independent, urban residential
       infrastructure sub-projects of similar scope, to either upgrade living conditions in
       informal settlements on State lands or to develop planned, residential sub-divisions
       in well-located State-owned greenfield sites, for systematic allocation to low-
       income households. Locationally, the focus will be on the main urban corridors,
       and on sites not previously upgraded. This component’s specific investments will
       include: (i) construction or upgrading of resilient site infrastructure, including
       drainage systems, waste-water management systems, road and accessibility
       systems, streetlights, potable water supply, fire-hydrants and social infrastructure,
       such as community centers and recreational facilities (with gender-sensitive
                                                   - 10 -


         designs), when appropriate; (ii) solid-waste management, including installation of
         recycling collection points and receptacles within upgraded settlements; and
         (iii) regularization of electricity supply. Infrastructure will be designed to cope with
         anticipated climate change effects and common natural hazard threats.
         Community labor, including women and at-risk young men, would be engaged in
         construction activities where appropriate. In densely populated, urban, hillside
         communities, early and emergency works will be the focus, primarily improving
         accessibility to homes through paved pathways, stairways and railings, as well as
         alleviating urgent drainage and land slippage challenges.

1.27     The Multiple Works Program (MWP) sample for this component comprises three
         sites in the highly-urbanized East-West corridor, including two sites (Sahadeen
         Trace and Bois Bande C) in the Sangre Grande region which saw very significant
         population growth between the last two censuses. The third sample site is Factory
         Road in the Diego Martin region which is home to some of the nation’s largest
         informal settlements,15 and is representative of sites that will receive the more
         limited treatment of early and emergency infrastructure works.

1.28     The Pre-construction activities including surveying, land use planning, engineering
         designs, and environmental and social assessments for these three sites are
         complete. Tender documents are also close to finalization. The MWP sample
         represents 38% of the cost of Component 1.

1.29     Both the MWP sample and other eligible projects under Component 1 are subject
         to the following Eligibility Criteria which require that they: (i) are focused on
         residential infrastructure; (ii) are for sites wholly or predominantly State-owned;
         (iii) are located in an urban center or along a main urban corridor; and (iv) cannot
         be classified as Category A according to Bank’s Environmental and Social
         Safeguards Compliance Policy, OP-703. In the case of informal settlement
         upgrading, sites must: (v) have a majority of households with gross annual
         household incomes of TT$96,000 or less; (vi) have infrastructure deficits as
         measured by indicators such as paved roads per hectare and amenities per unit
         of population; and (vii) be at least 70% occupied. For greenfield sites, where
         systematic allocation of serviced plots will occur, beneficiaries must have:
         (viii) average gross annual household incomes of TT$96,000 or less.

         Component 2. Urban Regeneration (US$15.5 million)

1.30     This component will finance a cohort of independent, urban regeneration initiatives
         of similar scope, with an emphasis on improving the physical quality and economic
         performance of urban public spaces. This is an innovation since globally, such
         investments are today seen as integral to harnessing the potential of urbanization.
         Since it is an emerging development front in the country, the MWP modality will
         allow the flexibility to define some of the investments after local contextualization
         and prioritization have improved. This component’s specific investments will
         include building refurbishment, site and streetscaping infrastructure, and
         landscaping to increase the attractiveness, resilience, and sustainable use of
         urban public spaces and facilities. This component may finance some land
         assembly/acquisition in exceptional cases. An Operations and Maintenance Plan

15   According to LSA’s 2018 mapping and survey of informal settlements on State lands.
                                           - 11 -


       will also be financed for each upgraded place/facility, to help promote
       sustainability. This component will be supported by an awareness campaign to
       promote empowerment and ownership of beneficiaries in urban public spaces,
       including reducing littering and increasing recycling, financed under Component 4.

1.31   The MWP sample project for this component is the renovation of Eastside Plaza,
       a publicly-owned urban mall on lower Charlotte Street in POS which houses about
       150 service and retail facilities as well as production workshops. The economic
       performance and attraction of this nearly century-old facility that once served as
       the capital city’s historic market, is expected to be significantly boosted by the
       project interventions that will include a more efficient, accessible, and functional
       layout of the facility; addition of about 20 booths for new tenants (existing tenants,
       who are majority female, will all be retained); improvements in the health and
       safety conditions through major electrical, mechanical, plumbing, air-conditioning
       and surveillance system revamps; and introduction of cost-saving green-building
       technologies such as thermal insulation for the roof, installation of a chill-water
       air-conditioning system, enhanced natural lighting, efficient lights controlled by
       sensors, dual flush toilets, and low-flow faucet aerators.

1.32   Pre-construction activities for the Eastside Plaza renovation, including conceptual
       designs, architectural designs, mechanical and electrical designs, engineering
       designs for construction, and environmental and social assessments are complete.
       The MWP sample represents 39% of the cost of Component 2.

1.33   Both the MWP sample and other eligible projects under Component 2 must comply
       with the following Eligibility Criteria: (i) be focused on the rehabilitation or
       construction of buildings or public space in an urban center; (ii) have a significant
       commercial land use element (either on-site or directly adjacent); and (iii) cannot
       be classified as Category A according to Bank’s Environmental and Social
       Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703). One such candidate project under
       design is the redevelopment of the esplanade and waterfront market area in
       Scarborough, Tobago.

       Component 3. Affordable Housing Subsidies (US$15.0 million)

1.34   This component will finance specific investments to further improve habitability for
       low-income households through reducing the qualitative and quantitative housing
       deficits, as well as sustainability of the built environment. It will provide subsidies
       nationwide to finance: (i) selective home improvements for currently-occupied
       homes, which qualitatively enhance the basic living conditions of eligible
       low-income households; and (ii) new construction or acquisition of basic homes on
       property that is already owned, which directly services the housing needs of
       low-income households. Subsidy caps will be the same as used under
       2469/OC-TT, as these limits proved to be adequate and the Government is
       increasingly trying to reach more households with limited resources (¶1.26). A
       family income threshold of TT$8,000 per month will be part of the eligibility criteria
       (see OEL#2).

1.35   Approximately 3,500 households who were not granted subsidies under earlier
       IDB-financed operations will receive subsidies, 2.460 for home improvement, and
       1056 for new construction. A significant innovation is that subsidies will be
                                                    - 12 -


         administered in a manner that facilitates more sustainable outcomes. In particular,
         at least 75% of all subsidies will be for households located proximate to the main
         highway networks,16 thus contributing to the consolidation of the housing stock in
         areas that are well serviced by existing infrastructure and accessibility. At least
         10% of home improvement subsidies (HISs) will be reserved for projects that
         include the addition of a self-contained housing solution, within existing premises,
         which will augment the supply of housing in the existing built up areas. At least
         75% of construction subsidies (HCSs) will be conditional on the agreement of the
         beneficiary to include eco-technologies that reduce the consuming of water and
         electricity. Such criteria will also be mandated for at least 15% of home
         improvement subsidies.17 Finally, at least 40% of all subsidies will be allocated to
         women-headed households, to help redress the disproportionate vulnerability that
         such households experience.

1.36     Under Component 3, for HISs, following an open application window, households
         and proposed projects will be screened by technical officers of the MHUD
         and largely implemented as owner-managed projects without public procurement
         of goods or labour. For HCSs, a two-tranche system will be used as under
         2469/OC-TT, whereby disbursement of the second tranche will be contingent upon
         certification of satisfactory completion of the pre-agreed first phase activities. While
         it is anticipated that most HISs and HCSs will be for owner-managed projects, a
         notable innovation is that the subsidies will also be payable directly to an
         intermediary such as one of the more established Credit Unions or to a
         pre-qualified Executing Developer certified by MHUD, on behalf of an eligible
         beneficiary household, according to criteria established in the OM. Under such
         arrangements the focus remains on household beneficiaries and no developer-led
         housing construction projects in greenfield sites will be financed under this
         component.

         Component 4. Strengthening of Housing and Urban Development Sector
         Stakeholders’ Capacities (US$2.0 million)

1.37     This component will finance a range of activities which will better equip supply-side
         stakeholders to address the medium-term housing and sustainable urban
         development needs of the country. Among them will be various sector studies,
         including a national housing market study; a drainage and waste-water
         management Plan for the Diego Martin area; and a Study of appropriate
         development standards in dense, hillside, urban communities. For the Tobago
         House of Assembly (THA), a key activity will be the preparation of an Infrastructure
         Investment Plan to guide sustainable development. All of these studies will
         strengthen the underlying physical planning framework for public policy and
         investments. For the MHUD and its line Agencies, capacity building in real-estate
         management and analysis, will be financed with the aim of better understanding
         dynamic land and housing market trends and improving the strategic management
         of real estate assets under the control of MHUD and its line agencies. This will be
         complemented by financing: the completion of the nationwide survey of squatters
         on State-owned lands; cleaning and analysis of the HDC application database;

16
     Proximity will be further defined in the OM, however an IDB 2016 Mass Transit Technical Cooperation Report
     noted that 72% of the population of Trinidad lives within 3km of the main highway network.
17   The OM will include the list of eco-technologies and associated guidelines.
                                                       - 13 -


          building of an information system for Real Estate Management and housing market
          updates; purchase and installation of geographic information software for the HDC;
          MHUD’s ongoing Communications campaign, and an impact evaluation of past
          regularization efforts. Conference participation of key sector stakeholders, training
          in business and conversational Spanish, update of the Yardi software, and
          purchase of equipment and a vehicle will also to be financed. Most of the Sector
          studies to be undertaken in this component will be executed during the first two
          years of the operation, so that the information they yield can be factored into
          sub-project selection under Components 1 and 2. Such studies may also benefit
          from preliminary data releases from the 2020 national population Census.

1.38      In addition, the Program’s administrative,18 auditing, monitoring and evaluation
          expenses will be financed. This amounts to US$2.5 million of which US$2.0 million
          will be under TT-L1056 and US$0.5 million will be under TT-L1057.

C.        Key results indicators

1.39      Expected results. The program is expected to achieve the following outcomes:
          (i) an increase in the proportion of households in the project sites with an indoor
          water closet toilet; (ii) a decrease in the proportion of households in the project
          sites with inadequate access to their home; (iii) an increase in the proportion of
          low-income households that live in houses with adequate quality; (iv) water savings
          in new dwellings; (v) energy savings in new dwellings; (vi) an increase in average
          weekly revenues of retail units at each regenerated site; (vii) an increase in the
          number of events per year hosted at each regenerated site; (viii) water savings in
          each regenerated site; (ix) energy savings in each regenerated site; (x) a reduction
          in the average number of months in the project cycle to complete housing solutions
          (home improvement and home construction); and (xi) an increase in the proportion
          of housing solutions developed by MHUD and its line agencies that is affordable
          to low income households.
1.40      The economic evaluation (OEL#1) measured the expected benefit and cost
          streams for the sample interventions. For Component 1, information on local
          housing prices in the sample sites was gathered and compared with prices from a
          district with better infrastructure, Kangalee Village; the area represents the
          scenario of the impact that infrastructural works at Bois Bande C, Sahadeen and
          Factory Road could have after the intervention. The evaluation for Component
          1 was based on both land and housing prices, and the total cost of implementing
          the project. Additional assumptions include a discount rate of 12%, an evaluation
          period of 10 years, and full capture of benefits and complete valuation of land and
          housing at the third year. The analysis for Component 1 showed a NPV of
          TT$13.590.028, and an IRR of 49%. The analysis for Component 2 included
          benefits related to an increase in jobs, sales and energy savings in East Side
          Plaza. The analysis showed an NPV of TT$10.097.121, and an IRR of
          18%. Additional sensitivity analyses were carried out for Component 1 (Bois
          Bande, Sahadeen, and Factory Road) and Component 2 (East Side Plaza). The
          results of the sensitivity analysis showed that in the eventuality that there were
          external shocks that increased costs and reduced benefits by 25% the project

18
     Administrative expenses may include recurrent expenses for the payment of utilities and office operating costs,
     advertisement costs, remuneration of consultants to be hired to strengthen the capacity of the PMCEU and
     LSA, as well as travel related costs for the PMCEU members.
                                                - 14 -


       works are still deemed to be financially viable. The analysis for Component
       3 includes as benefit the increase in wealth of the beneficiaries of home
       improvement through the increase in house value. The average property value of
       dwellings in fair, poor and very poor condition is TT$67,500 and the project
       estimates to reach 2,460 households. The aggregated estimated benefit would be
       an increase in the property values of TT$65,390,490. As such, the benefit-cost
       ratio is 1.33.
1.41   Beneficiary population. The primary beneficiaries of this operation will be
       low-income households currently residing in inadequate housing and settlement
       conditions. According to the 2014 Survey of Living Conditions, 14% of all
       households were living in inadequate housing at that time. And as noted earlier in
       ¶1.3, approximately 20% of all households are estimated to be squatting.
       A secondary set of beneficiaries will be current and potential users of urban public
       spaces.

                             II.           FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.     Financing instruments

2.1    The project’s estimated cost is US$50 million, as shown in Table 2. It will
       be financed through an Investment loan with the following modalities: (i) a Multiple
       Works Program (MWP) for US$32.5 million (TT-L1056) chargeable to the Ordinary
       Capital (OC) of the Bank; and (ii) a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) for
       US$17.5 million (TT-L1057) also chargeable to the OC of the Bank. The structure
       was chosen for the program in order to differentiate the scope and nature of each
       component, and to facilitate orderly monitoring by financing modality. Components
       1 and 2 satisfy the requirements for a MWP since they have the purpose of
       financing similar work groups (a sample of which have been completely defined)
       with the following characteristics: (i) they are physically similar, but independent of
       each other; (ii) its feasibility does not depend on the execution of a particular
       number of work projects; and (iii) its individual size does not justify that the Bank
       directly manages the operation. Components 3 and 4 will be financed through a
       SIL since they satisfy the requirements for a SIL in that the activities they finance
       are defined at the time the Bank’s loan is approved and represent several specific
       projects within a sectoral program. The disbursement period for both modalities
       will be six years, as follows in Table 1:

                        Table 1. Disbursement Schedule (in US$ million)

              Source               Year 1      Year 2    Year 3   Year 4   Year 5    Year 6

                IDB                 13.4        11.9      13.1     4.8      5.9        0.9

                %                   27           24       26        9       12          2
                                             - 15 -


                       Table 2. Summary of Program costs (in US$ million)
                                                                               IDB (OC)
       Components                               TT-L1056       TT-L1057                    %
                                                                                 Total
      Component 1. Urban Upgrading and            15.0              -            15.0      30
      Service-sites
      Comprehensive residential                   11.7              -            11.7     23.4
      infrastructure civil works
      Emergency civil works                       3.3               -            3.3       6.6
      Component 2. Urban Regeneration             15.5              -            15.5      31
      Urban buildings regeneration                 9.3             -             9.3      18.6
      Public space regeneration                    6.2             -             6.2      12.4
      Component 3. Affordable Housing               -             15.0           15.0      30
      Subsidies
      Home improvement subsidies                      -            7.8           7.8      15.6
      Home construction subsidies                     -            7.2           7.2      14.4
      Component 4. Strengthening of                   -            2.0           2.0       4
      Housing and Urban Development
      Sector Stakeholders’ Capacities
      Sector studies                                -              1.7           1.7       3.4
      Training                                      -              0.2           0.2       0.4
      Nationwide squatters survey                   -              0.1           0.1       0.2
      Administration, auditing and M&E             2.0             0.5           2.5        5
      Total                                      32.5            17.5            50.0     100.0
      Note: The sub-category estimates for Components 1 and 2 are indicative


B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks

2.2   TT-L1056 is expected to have mostly positive impacts; identified social and
      environmental impacts are short-term, localized, and can be mitigated. Therefore,
      it has been classified as category “B”, according to the Bank’s Environmental and
      Social Safeguards Compliance Policy, OP-703. Environmental impacts are those
      typically related to construction and will mitigated following standard protection
      procedures. Upgrading and green-field development under Component 1 will focus
      on state-owned lands and the provision of standard urban infrastructure (water,
      sanitation, street-lighting, waste collection) that will not require land acquisition; as
      in the previous programs, involuntary resettlement is expected to be exceptional,
      as shown for the MWP representative sample for this Component. The MWP
      representative sample for Component 2 (Eastside Plaza) is expected to cause
      temporary displacement. Accordingly, a Temporary Relocation and Livelihood
      Restoration Plan was prepared in consultation with the affected population.
      Several alternatives have been analyzed to minimize this impact and offer
      compensations for potential economic displacement considering the options
      proposed by the affected population. Because the country is prone to suffer from
      natural disasters, OP-704 has been triggered to ensure construction meets
      adequate standards. The project will also apply the Gender Equality Policy
      (OP-761) to ensure women’s access to project benefits. Women participated in
      consultations conducted during preparation and will continue to do so under the
      program.

2.3   Because TT-L1056 has been designed under the MWP modality, an Environment
      and Social Assessment (ESA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan
      (ESMP) have been prepared for each specific project sample. Based on the
      findings and recommendations of these studies, an overall Environmental and
                                                      - 16 -


          Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared in compliance with
          OP-703, B.6 to guide the ESA and ESMP preparation for other projects to be
          undertaken under the Program. Draft and Final versions of the ESMF, sample
          project assessments, and respective mitigation plans were consulted with the
          public and disclosed according to Bank Policy. The executing agency, together
          with a consultant, conducted meaningful stakeholder consultation meetings at all
          sample project locations. Key recommendations of the consultations for
          Component 2 referred to the works to be conducted within Eastside Plaza and
          have been taken into consideration in the Management Plan. Also,
          recommendations from consultations in the three sample settlements included in
          Component 1 (timing of the work, communication, interaction with neighbors,
          improvements to the settlement) were included in the respective Management
          Plan.

2.4       The operation TT-L1057 is not expected to have environmental and social impacts
          and has been categorized as “C” according to OP-703. The focus of this operation
          will be mainly on institutional strengthening and on the provision of affordable
          housing subsidies. The subsidies will be managed by the executing agency, and
          will finance: (i) selective home improvements for currently occupied homes, which
          qualitatively enhance the basic living conditions of eligible low income households;
          and (ii) new basic home construction on land already owned by beneficiaries and
          acquisition of new homes, which directly services the housing needs of low income
          households. Being a category “C” project, no Environmental and Social
          Assessment and consultations are required.

C.        Fiduciary risk

2.5       Fiduciary assessments of the MHUD and LSA were undertaken and the overall
          fiduciary risks have been ranked as Medium. The main fiduciary risk identified, as
          described in Annex III, is that limited fiduciary capacity within the PMCEU and LSA
          may create bottlenecks and delays in addressing fiduciary matters. Mitigating
          actions are being addressed through: (i) recruitment or appointment of a
          procurement specialist and for LSA as well as one for MHUD/PMCEU and, a
          Financial Specialist for the MHUD/PMCEU; and (ii) training sessions on Bank’s
          policies and procedures for both PMCEU and LSA.

D.        Other risks and key issues

2.6       Institutional Capacity Assessments for the MHUD and the LSA were conducted
          and identified mitigations measures for various public management and
          governance risks, and development risks. The high Public Management and
          Governance Risk of inadequate coordination between the MHUD and the LSA and
          the MHUD and the THA (for works conducted by the MHUD in Tobago) will be
          countered by inter-Agency MOUs and by a Steering Committee that will provide
          oversight of compliance with the terms of those agreements.19 Another high
          Public Management and Governance Risk that a change of administration after

19    The Steering Committee will include representation from: MPD; MHUD; LSA; THA; WASA; Trinidad and
      Tobago Electricity Corporation (T&TEC); Ministry of Works and Transport – Drainage Division; Ministry of
      Agriculture, Lands and Fisheries – Commissioner of State Lands and Lands and Surveys Division; and
      Habitat for Humanity. The role, responsibilities, and composition of the Steering Committee will be included
      in the OM.
                                          - 17 -


      the 2020 General Election can lead to reprioritization of intervention sites, causing
      delays, is countered by the MWP design and ESMF of TT-L1056 which provide
      some flexibility to adapt sub-project selection. A medium Public Management and
      Governance Risk, that if the Government maintains its fiscal conservatism, the
      MHUD may not receive enough budgetary allocations to facilitate the timely award
      of contracts and payment of contractors, is mitigated by the PMCEU committing
      project resources against fiscal space allocated in the national budget as early as
      possible through signed contracts. Intensive liaison with target communities, and
      explicit provisions for the use of community labor where appropriate, will help to
      counter the high Development Risk of contractors and authorities being denied
      free access to the site due to concerns about inadequate use of local labor.
      Additionally, clear and early demarcation of public rights of way and communal
      plots, as well as inter-Agency information sharing and coordination, will be used to
      counter the medium Development Risk of indiscriminate new squatting in project
      sites that can increase the cost of construction and delay execution.

2.7   Section 7(2)(b) of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Property
      (PPDPP) Act, 2015, could create challenges with the implementation of the
      program as it states that, in the event of a conflict between the Act and an
      agreement with an international financing institution, the procurement of goods,
      works or services shall be governed by the Act. However, the Act is not yet fully in
      force since several Sections, including Section 7, are not yet proclaimed, and
      approval of the Procurement Regulations by Parliament is still pending. The
      Government has also signaled its intention to propose an amendment to Section 7.
      Consequently, it is not clear what effect if any this Act will have on the program,
      however, the Bank is currently engaging the Government in order to address any
      potential conflict.

2.8   Sustainability. In comprehensive upgrading sites under Component 1, adherence
      to all pertinent local development standards would make ongoing operational and
      maintenance (O&M) needs in those sites, the responsibility of the respective local
      governments, who in turn can represent those needs in their annual budgetary
      requests. Sustainability in Component 2 investments is promoted by the
      incorporation of cost-saving green technologies and the requirements to produce
      and implement Operation and Maintenance Plans for the upgraded facilities.
      Subsidies granted under Component 3 are predominantly for sites where
      households are already living (either in a home that needs repair or in one in need
      of complete replacement), reducing the risk that has plagued many government
      housing programs in other countries (e.g. Mexico, Brazil, South Africa), whereby
      the effective demand for houses in locations picked by governments is often
      overestimated, leading to under-occupation, informal sub-letting, or even
      abandonment. Invested sweat equity is also likely to deepen the sense of
      ownership that usually drives maintenance. Finally, the capacity building efforts
      under Component 4 are expected to continue bearing fruit after the loan operations
      close since the LSA is a long-established institution of the Government with an
      ongoing mandate, and the PMCEU is being established to serve a wider and
      longer-term role within the MHUD.
                                          - 18 -


                     III.    IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements

3.1   Borrower and executing agency. The borrower is the Republic of Trinidad and
      Tobago. The executing agency will be the MHUD, through the PMCEU for all
      Components of the program, with the LSA as a sub-executing agency for
      Component 1 sites in Trinidad only. Among other responsibilities, the MHUD will
      be: (i) performing technical and operational coordination of the program;
      (ii) preparing and updating the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP), Annual
      Operational Program (AOP); Procurement Plan (PA); Risk Matrix (RM); and the
      Progress Monitoring Report (PMR). The MHUD will be responsible for maintaining
      all formal communication with the Bank.
3.2   The MHUD will assign responsibility for program coordination, monitoring, and
      financial and procurement management to the PMCEU, within the MHUD for the
      purposes of the Program. The PMCEU duties will include planning (including
      procurement planning for the entire program), coordination and monitoring of all
      aspects of the program implementation including social and environmental
      safeguards, as well as, report preparation, procurement management (except for
      some sites in Component 1), disbursement of program resources, and interface
      with the Bank, LSA, THA, and Government of Trinidad and Tobago officials.
3.3   For sites in Trinidad, implementation of Component 1 (Urban Upgrading and
      Serviced Sites) will be the main responsibility of the LSA under the coordination
      and monitoring of the PMCEU. In such cases, the LSA will be responsible for all
      procurement processes, supervision of all consultants and contractors working on
      the sites, as well as for the acquisition of all statutory approvals for the
      development of the sites. For some sites under Component 2, and for some sites
      in Tobago, under Component 1, MHUD has decided to hire the National Insurance
      Property Development Company Limited (NIPDEC) to provide project
      management and procurement management services (see ¶3.8 below and
      paragraph 5.1 (iv) of Annex III). In Tobago, the THA will participate in contract
      evaluation processes, provide technical input and general oversight.

3.4   Special Contractual Clauses prior to the First Disbursement: the executing
      agency will provide evidence to the satisfaction of the Bank of: (i) the
      establishment of the Program Management, Coordinating and Evaluation
      Unit (PMCEU) and of the assignment or hiring by the executing agency of a
      program director, a financial specialist, a monitoring and evaluation
      specialist, a procurement specialist, and an environmental and social
      specialist; and (ii) its approval of the Operating Manual (OM) of the program,
      in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank.
      Condition (i) will ensure that the EA has an execution unit with the adequate
      personnel in place to initiate and conduct program execution while condition (ii) will
      allow for the proper execution of the program by detailing the guiding principles for
      execution and coordination of activities.

3.5   Special Contractual Clauses of Execution: the executing agency will provide
      evidence to the satisfaction of the Bank: (i) prior to the disbursement of loan
      resources for Component 1 activities in Trinidad, that an agreement has been
                                           - 19 -


       entered into between the executing agency and the Land Settlement Agency (LSA)
       for the execution of such activities; and (ii) prior to the disbursement of loan
       resources for the execution of Components 1,2 and 3 activities in Tobago, that an
       agreement has been entered into between the executing agency and the Tobago
       House Assembly (THA) for the execution of such activities. These conditions are
       justified to ensure a clear understanding of responsibilities and reporting
       requirements to facilitate an efficient execution of the program. Condition (i) and
       (ii) are deemed important in order to establish the institutional framework between
       the entities collaborating in the program execution and the EA, and to expedite the
       program’s implementation.

3.6    The OM will establish standards and procedures for the EA with regards to
       programming activities, execution plan, coordination with other entities involved in
       the program, procurement, fiduciary management arrangements, environmental
       and social requirements, and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) arrangements,
       among others, which will govern program execution.

3.7    Procurement execution. Procurement activities will be carried out in
       accordance-with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed
       by the Inter-American Development Bank – IADB (GN-2349-15) of May 2019, and
       the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB
       (GN-2350-15) of May 2019. They will also be subject to the provisions established
       in the Loan contract.

3.8    Single sourcing. The National Insurance Property Development Company
       Limited (NIPDEC) will be hired through a Single-Source Selection to
       provide project management and procurement management services for some
       Component 2 projects and for some Component 1 sites in Tobago. NIPDEC is
       considered to have experience of exceptional worth for the assignment as the
       Company has collaborated with Government Ministries and the THA on
       infrastructure projects for more than four decades with satisfactory results. As
       such, a single-source selection is acceptable based on subsection (d) of paragraph
       3.11, GN-2350-15. Given that NIPDEC is a state-owned enterprise, the MHUD
       conducted a legal analysis to confirm that the IDB eligibility requirements stated in
       paragraph 1.13 (b) of the GN-2350-15 are met by NIPDEC.

3.9    Audits. The MHUD will be responsible for the recruitment of the external auditor,
       who will perform the financial audit of the program as outlined in Annex III.

3.10   Retroactive financing. It is anticipated that the project may finance retroactively
       under the loan, eligible expenses incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan
       approval up to the amount US$156,566 (0.31% of the proposed loan amount), for
       project management fees under Components 1 and 2; and project administration
       consultant remuneration expenses for the Financial Specialist, Monitoring and
       Evaluations Specialist, Procurement Specialist, Environmental/ Health and Safety
       Officer, Social/ Community Engagement Specialist, and Housing Development
       Inspectors). These expenses must have been incurred or on after September 13th,
       2019 (approval date of the Project Profile), and under no circumstances shall
       expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan approval date be
       included.
                                            - 20 -


B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results

3.11   Monitoring. The monitoring and evaluation of this program will be carried out
       based on verifiable and objective product indicators directly related to expected
       outcomes. These indicators will be measured annually during program
       implementation in order to determine the achievement of targets and the
       completion of products in the specific projected periods. Annex II - RM, contains
       the detailed annual programming of the result indicators, expected products, and
       their means of verification, consistent with the AOP and the PEP, including the
       baseline against which project execution will be measured; the units of measure,
       associated costs, annual targets and end-of-project targets. These targets have
       been defined based on the sample of representative investments identified for this
       program and the target value estimates for other investments that the executing
       agency could propose. Target values will be adjusted and updated as other
       specific investments are declared eligible for financing under this program. The
       evolution of the verifiable indicators, products and milestones will be collected
       semi-annually in the project progress reports submitted by the MHUD.
3.12   Evaluation. The evaluation of the investment works, and subsidies financed
       through this loan will seek to determine whether the program fulfilled its specific
       objectives. Two evaluations will be performed: a midterm and a final evaluation,
       which will be carried out by independent consultants upon the disbursement of
       50% and 90% of loan resources, respectively. The midterm report will include:
       (i) the outcomes of the physical-financial execution; (ii) the degree of fulfillment of
       targets in the RM; (iii) the degree of fulfillment of environmental requirements; (iv) a
       summary of the results of the audits and of the improvement plans; and (v) a
       summary of the main lessons learned. The final evaluation will also include an
       ex post-economic analysis (cost-effectiveness) (see REL#2).
                                                                                                                                                                            Annex I - TT-L1056; TT-L1057
                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 1




                                                                           Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                   Summary      TT-L1056 & TT-L1057
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
1. IDB Development Objectives                                                                                                          Yes

                                                                                               -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                               -Productivity and Innovation
                                                                                               -Gender Equality and Diversity
   Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes
                                                                                               -Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability
                                                                                               -Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law



                                                                                               -Households benefitting from housing solutions (#)*
                                                                                               -Households with new or upgraded access to drinking water (#)*
                                                                                               -Households with new or upgraded access to sanitation (#)*
   Country Development Results Indicators                                                      -Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and
                                                                                               managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*
                                                                                               -Households with new or improved access to electricity supply (#)*


2. Country Development Objectives                                                                                                      Yes


   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                     GN-2888          Increase access to quality housing.



                                                                                                                        The intervention is included in the 2020 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                     GN-2991-1
                                                                                                                        Program.



   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to
   country strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                           Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                 9.3
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                              3.0
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                            3.6
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                         2.7
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                            8.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                     3.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                   3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                         0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                           2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                0.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                            7.7
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                          1.8
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                6.0
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                   Medium
                               Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                          Yes
                                   Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks                                           Yes
                      Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                B for TT-L1056; C for TT-L1057
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                        Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, External Control.
                                                                Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)             Yes




                                                                               Non-Fiduciary



The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public
sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project


Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.


The objective of the program is to contribute to the improvement of the quality of the urban built environment. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the habitability in urban
settlements on State-owned lands; (ii) improve the physical quality and economic performance of urban public spaces; (iii) enhance housing conditions for low income
households; and (iv) strengthen the capacity of supply side stakeholders to satisfy effective housing demand and urban development needs.

The project presents a complete diagnosis; with a precise description of the challenges related to living conditions of households in urban settlements in State-owned lands,
public spaces, and access to housing for low-income households. The results indicators included in the results matrix reflect the vertical logic of the program and have means
of verification.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through separate cost-benefit analyses (CBA) that focus on expected benefits related to the valuation of real estate assets
in the area of intervention (habitability and access to housing), and benefits related to increase in jobs, sales and energy savings in the upgraded public spaces. The CBA has an
adequate sensitivity analysis. The analysis concludes that the urban upgrading components are economically viable with an ERR of 49% for the habitability component and an
ERR of 18% for the upgraded public spaces, using a rate 12% discount. The access to housing component analysis concludes that the housing improvement subsidies have a
benefit-cost ratio of 1.33.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is consistent with Bank standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured following an ex-
post cost-efficiency and a before and after analysis.
                                                                                                                              Annex II – TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                                                                                    Page 1 of 8
                                                                     RESULTS MATRIX
                                The general objective is to contribute to the improvement of the quality of the urban built environment. The specific objectives are to:
Project Objective:              (i) improve the habitability in urban settlements on State-owned lands; and (ii) improve the physical quality and economic performance
                                of urban public spaces; (iii) enhance housing conditions for low income households; and (iv) strengthen the capacity of supply-side
                                stakeholders to satisfy effective housing demand.

                                                                 EXPECTED OUTCOMES

                                                   Baseline       Baseline
       Indicators           Unit of measure                                     Final Target       Means of verification                   Observations
                                                    Value          Year

Component 1: Urban Residential Infrastructure

Specific Objective 1: Improve the habitability in informal settlements on State-owned lands
Average proportion of         Households in           74%            2019            90%          Surveys to be                See question 27 in LSA baseline
households with a water      comprehensive                                                        conducted by LSA in          socio-economic survey.
closet                      upgrading project                                                     the neighborhoods,
                            sites with a water                                                    before and after the         Contributes to CDRI #4:
                            closet toilet/ Total                                                  intervention.                ‘Households with improved access
                            of households in                                                                                   to water and sanitation (#)’.
                             comprehensive
                            upgrading project
                                   sites

Average proportion of        Households in            30%            2019            10%          Surveys to be                Inadequate access is defined as
households in the project     project sites                                                       conducted by LSA in          accessing the home by “Along
sites that have               without direct                                                      the neighborhoods,           drain or river” or “neighbor’s yard”
inadequate access to          access to the                                                       before and after the         or informal paths” (see question 23
their home                   road from their                                                      intervention.                in LSA baseline socio-economic
                            homes (earthen                                                                                     survey).
                            or paved)/ Total
                            of households in
                              project sites

Component 2: Urban Regeneration

Specific Objective 2: Improve the physical quality and economic performance of urban public spaces
Average weekly revenue             TT$               10,000          2019           13,000        Data collected during        Contributes to CRFI #4: Growth
of retail units                                                                                   the Survey of Tenants        rate of GDP per person employed
                                                                                                  of Eastside Plaza            (%).
                                                                                                                         Annex II – TT-L1056
                                                                                                                                  Page 2 of 8

                                                Baseline   Baseline
       Indicators          Unit of measure                            Final Target   Means of verification              Observations
                                                 Value      Year
Number of events per             Event             2        2018           4                                 Events with        20    or more
                                                                                     Management records
year hosted at each                                                                                          participants that require advanced
                                                                                     of the facilities
regenerated site                                                                                             authorization for use of the facility
                                                                                                             by management.

Water savings in the          m3 /month           520       2018          416        WASA bills based on     The baseline was set based on the
East-Side Plaza                                                                      installed meter         upper bound of water consumption
                                                                                                             for which the East-Side Plaza was
                                                                                                             billed in 2018.
Energy savings in the        MWh/ month           79        2018          63         T&TEC bills             The baseline was set with the
East-Side Plaza                                                                                              electricity consumption bill of the
                                                                                                             East-Side Plaza in 2018.

                                                                                                             Contributes to CRFI #12: “CO2
                                                                                                             emissions from fuel combustion
                                                                                                             (tons)”; and to: CDRI # 19:
                                                                                                             “Emissions avoided (annual tons
                                                                                                             CO2 equivalent)”.

Component 3: Affordable Housing Subsidies

Objective 3: Enhance housing conditions for low-income households
Proportion of low-income    Households in a      86%*       2016         87%         Nationally             Definition of adequate quality
households that live in         nationally                                           representative, annual houses:
houses with adequate         representative                                          Labor Force Survey     • Outerwall material: Brick
quality                     sample that live                                                                    (plastered or not plastered)
                              in houses of                                                                      /concrete; wood and
                           adequate quality /                                                                   brick/concrete
                           Total residents in                                                               • Toilet facilities: WC linked to
                               a nationally                                                                     the sewer; WC not linked to
                             representative                                                                     the sewer
                                 sample                                                                     • Water Supply: public piped into
                                                                                                                dwelling; public piped into
                                                                                                                yard; private piped into
                                                                                                                dwelling
                                                                                                            • Source of lighting: electricity
                                                                                                                             Annex II – TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 8

                                                     Baseline       Baseline
       Indicators             Unit of measure                                    Final Target      Means of verification                  Observations
                                                      Value          Year
                                                                                                                              Contributes to CDRI #4:
                                                                                                                              “Households with improved access
                                                                                                                              to water and sanitation”.

                                                                                                                              *Note that the baseline and target
                                                                                                                              values shown here are national
                                                                                                                              statistics and will be updated to
                                                                                                                              reflect low-income households
                                                                                                                              only.
Water savings in the new          m3 /month              36           2018            28.8        Savings proved in the       The baseline was calculated with
dwellings                                                                                         literature from the list    the following assumptions: 377
                                                                                                  of     eco-technologies     liters per capita/day 1 and average
                                                                                                  included in the loan        household size: 3.2. 2
                                                                                                  requirements       and
                                                                                                  guidelines.
Energy savings in the            kWh/month            1390            2018          1112                                      The baseline was calculated
new dwellings                                       kWh/month                     kWh/month                                   according to the electricity
                                                                                                  Savings proved in the       consumption in a typical
                                                                                                  literature from the list    household. 3
                                                                                                  of     eco-technologies
                                                                                                  included in the loan        Contributes to CRFI #12: “CO2
                                                                                                  requirements       and      emissions from fuel combustion
                                                                                                  guidelines.                 (tons)”; and to: CDRI # 19:
                                                                                                                              “Emissions avoided (annual tons
                                                                                                                              CO2 equivalent)”.
Component 4: Strengthening of Housing and Urban Development Sector Stakeholders’ Capacities

Specific Objective 4: Strengthen the capacity of supply-side stakeholders to satisfy effective housing demand
Average number of                  Months                6            2018            4.8         MHUD case                   Cycle is measured from approval
months in the project                                                                             management system           of the subsidy until verification of
cycle to complete housing                                                                                                     use and completion of the subsidy.



1   Castalia, “Business Plan and Price Control Proposal for the Water and Sewerage Authority,” 2019.
2   Ministry of Social Development and Family Services, Central Statistical Office, and UNICEF, “Trinidad and Tobago Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2011, Key
    Findings & Tables.,” Port of Spain, 2017.
3   N. C. M. Fernando, C. Cañeque, J. Klein, and D. Loy, “A Unique Approach for Sustainable Energy in Trinidad and Tobago,” 2015 and Renewable Energy
    Committee, “Framework for Development of a Renewable Energy Policy for Trinidad and Tobago,” no. January, pp. 1–74, 2011.
                                                                                                                       Annex II – TT-L1056
                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 8

                                              Baseline   Baseline
       Indicators           Unit of measure                         Final Target   Means of verification             Observations
                                               Value      Year
solutions (home                                                                                            Contributes to CFRI #15:
improvement subsidies)                                                                                     “Government effectiveness
                                                                                                           (average LAC percentile)”.
Average number of               Months           9        2018           7         MHUD case               Cycle is measured from approval
months in the project                                                              management system       of the subsidy until verification of
cycle to complete housing                                                                                  use and completion of the subsidy.
solutions (home
construction subsidies)                                                                                    Contributes to CFRI #15:
                                                                                                           “Government effectiveness
                                                                                                           (average LAC percentile)”.
Proportion of housing         Percentage        10**      2018          20         MHUD case               Low income household is defined
solutions developed by                                                             management system       as household income of TT$8,000
MHUD and its line                                                                                          or less per month. Affordable is
agencies that is                                                                                           defined as monthly payment at
affordable to low income                                                                                   prevailing interest rates not to
households                                                                                                 exceed 30% of gross monthly
                                                                                                           income.

                                                                                                           ** Note the baseline value is to be
                                                                                                           updated with more refined data
                                                                                                           from MHUD.
                                                                                                       Annex II – TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 8

                                                               OUTPUTS

                  Unit of    Baseline Baseline   Year   Year    Year   Year   Year   Year   End of     Means of
  Outputs                                                                                                                Observations
                 measure      Value    Year       1      2       3      4      5      6     project   verification

Component 1: Urban Residential Infrastructure
Resilient          Sites        0       2019      0      3       2       0     0      0       5        Program       Contributes to CDRI
sites built or                                                                                          reports      #21: “Habitat that is
upgraded                                                                                                             sustainably managed
                                                                                                                     using ecosystem-
                                                                                                                     based approaches
                                                                                                                     (hectares)”.
Early and        Contracts      0       2019      3      3       4       0     1      1       12       Program       Contributes to CDRI
emergency                                                                                               reports      #21: “Habitat that is
civil works                                                                                                          sustainably managed
investment                                                                                                           using ecosystem-
packages                                                                                                             based approaches
completed                                                                                                            (hectares)”.

Component 2: Urban Regeneration
Revitalization   Projects       0       2019      0      0       2       0     1      0       3        Program       Contributes to IDNGPI
Projects                                                                                                reports      # 2: “Projects
completed                                                                                                            supporting productivity
                                                                                                                     and innovation (%
                                                                                                                     of new approvals/
                                                                                                                     commitments)”.

Benchmark:         Plan         0       2019      0      0       2       0     1      0       3        Approved
Operations                                                                                               Plan
and
Maintenance
Plan
                                                                                                                   Annex II – TT-L1056
                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 8

                 Unit of    Baseline Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   End of     Means of
  Outputs                                                                                                               Observations
                measure      Value    Year       1      2      3      4      5      6     project   verification

Component 3: Affordable Housing Subsidies
Home            Subsidies      0       2019     492    492    492    492    492     0     2,460      Program       Criteria outlined in the
Improvement                                                                                           reports      OM.
Subsidies
                                                                                                                   Contributes to IDBGPI
                                                                                                                   #1: “Projects
                                                                                                                   supporting social
                                                                                                                   inclusion and equality
                                                                                                                   (% of new approvals/
                                                                                                                   commitments)”.

Benchmark:      Subsidies      0       2019     196    196    196    196    196     0      980       Program       40% of HIS.
Home                                                                                                  reports
Improvement
Subsidy
beneficiaries
(female led
households)
Home            Subsidies      0       2019     211    211    211    211    212     0     1,056      Program       Criteria defined in the
Construction                                                                                          reports      OM.
Subsidies
                                                                                                                   Contributes to IDBGPI
                                                                                                                   #1: “Projects
                                                                                                                   supporting social
                                                                                                                   inclusion and equality
                                                                                                                   (% of new approvals/
                                                                                                                   commitments)”.
Benchmark:      Subsidies      0       2019     84     84     84     84     84      0      420       Program       40% of HCS.
Home                                                                                                  reports
Construction
Subsidies
(female led
households)
                                                                                                     Annex II – TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 8

                 Unit of    Baseline Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   End of     Means of
  Outputs                                                                                                              Observations
                measure      Value    Year       1      2      3      4      5      6     project   verification
Benchmark:      Subsidies      0       2019     50     50     50     50     50      0      250       Program       10% of all HIS.
Home                                                                                                  reports
Improvement                                                                                                        Contributes to IDBGPI
Subsidies for                                                                                                      #1: “Projects
an additional                                                                                                      supporting social
housing                                                                                                            inclusion and equality
solution on                                                                                                        (% of new approvals/
the                                                                                                                commitments)”.
beneficiary
plot

Benchmark:      Subsidies      0       2019     528    528    527    527    527     0      2637      Program       75% of all subsidies.
Home                                                                                                  reports
Improvement
and Home
Construction
Subsidies for
housing
solutions
near a main
transport
network

Benchmark:      Subsidies      0       2019     50     50     50     50     50      0      250       Program       Approximately 25% of
Home                                                                                                  reports      HCS.
Construction
subsidies
paired with
credit from a
financial
intermediary
                                                                                                                    Annex II – TT-L1056
                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 8

                 Unit of    Baseline Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   End of     Means of
  Outputs                                                                                                                Observations
                measure      Value    Year       1      2      3      4      5      6     project   verification
Benchmark:      Subsidies      0       2019     232    232    232    232    233     0     1,161       Program       75% HCS, 15% HIS.
Home                                                                                                   reports
Construction
subsidies and
Home
Improvement
subsidies
incorporating
green
housing
solutions
Component 4: Strengthening of Housing and Urban Development Sector Stakeholders
Sector           Studies       0       2019      0      1      2      2      0      0        5       Approved
Studies                                                                                             documents

Training        Workshops      0       2019      0      1      1      1      0      0        3        Program       Contributes to CDRI
workshops                                                                                              reports      #26: “Government
                                                                                                                    agencies with
                                                                                                                    strengthened digital
                                                                                                                    technology
                                                                                                                    and managerial
                                                                                                                    capacity’’.

Nationwide       Survey        0       2019      0      1      0      0      -      -        1      Final version
survey of                                                                                              of the
squatters                                                                                              Survey
completed
                                                                  Annex III - TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                         Page 1 of 7



                                FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS

COUNTRY:                 Trinidad and Tobago
PROJECT #:               TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
NAME:                    Urban Upgrading and Revitalization Program
EXECUTING AGENCY:        Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (MHUD)


                                 I.    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.1   The executing agency is the MHUD through the Program Management and
      Coordinating Execution Unit (PMCEU) and with participation of the Land Settlement
      Agency (LSA) as a sub-executing agency. The PMCEU has successfully executed the
      recently concluded Neighborhood Upgrading Program - 2469/OC-TT.
1.2   Institutional assessments of the MHUD and LSA were conducted in September 2019
      using the PACI methodology. The assessments and the previous experiences of the
      Bank in working with MHUD and LSA concluded a medium fiduciary risk. Supervision
      and mitigation actions will be focused on efforts to strengthen the fiduciary capacity. A
      re-evaluation of the fiduciary risks will be conducted during execution to ensure efficient
      support to project execution.
1.3   Fiduciary context of the country. The most recent evaluations of the public financial
      management systems (PFMS) in Trinidad and Tobago were the 2013 Public
      Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) and the 2016 Supreme Audit
      Institution Performance Measurement Framework (SAI-PMF) assessments. The PEFA
      concluded that PFMS would require further improvements in the areas of accounting
      and reporting, internal controls and procurement to conform to levels consistent with
      fiduciary management of Bank-funded projects. The areas of budgeting, treasury and
      external control are considered satisfactory and are used in sovereign guaranteed
      operations. The SAI-PMF assessment concluded that the SAI is severely constrained
      by external factors related to its legal, financial and operational independence and
      mandate. The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Property (PPDPP) Act,
      2015, was assented to in January 2015 and was partially proclaimed in July 2015 to
      allow for the establishment of the Office of Procurement Regulation (OPR). The
      Regulations necessary to achieve its full proclamation were drafted in November 2018
      and are still pending from approval by Parliament. The full proclamation of the PPDPP
      Act will mean the disbandment of the Central Tenders Board (CTB). Although the
      implementation of the PPDPP Act is expected to commence once it is proclaimed, the
      OPR has indicated that there will be a transitional period to the decentralized
      procurement system established in the act in which the CTB will conclude any ongoing
      procurement processes. However, Section 7(2)(b) of the PPDPP could create
      challenges with the implementation of the program, since it states, that in the event of
      a conflict between the Act and an agreement with an international financing institution,
      the procurement of goods, works or services shall be governed by the Act. The Act is
      not yet fully in force since several Sections, including Section 7, are not yet proclaimed,
      and approval of the Procurement Regulations by Parliament is still pending. The
      Government has also signaled its intention to propose an amendment to Section 7.
      Consequently, it is not clear what effect if any this Act will have on the program,
      however, the Bank is currently engaging the Government in order to address any
                                                                Annex III - TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                       Page 2 of 7


      potential conflict. Since the national procurement system has not yet been validated by
      the Bank, its use is not contemplated for this operation.

                      II.   EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT

2.1   The MHUD through the PMCEU will be responsible for the overall execution of the
      Loan. The PMCEU was designed to execute the MHUD’s projects and to actively
      participate in the design of any new donor funded project, in order to improve the
      delivery and provide administrative savings and eventual knowledge transfer to the
      Ministry. In order to strengthen the execution capacity of PCMEU and LSA, a dedicated
      Financial Specialist and Procurement Specialist should be recruited or seconded to the
      PCMEU to discharge the expected fiduciary duties for the duration of the Loan.
2.2   The MHUD use a manual accounting system for the financial management of the
      MHUD. It Is recommended that this program use an automated integrated accounting
      system for the financial management of the Program.
2.3   The MHUD is subject to the CTB Act. All procurement activities with an estimated
      amount above the Permanent Secretary’s financial limits must be conducted by the
      CTB on behalf of the Ministry; contracts awarded by the CTB must be prepared by the
      Chief State Solicitor (CSS) Office for the Ministry’s signature. Section 20(A)(c) of the
      CTB Act allows the Government to act on its own behalf by entering into a contract with
      the National Insurance Property Development Company Limited or a company which
      is wholly owned by the State. LSA is a body corporate established under the State Land
      (Regularisation of Tenure) Act; it is not subject to the CTB Act. Procurement decisions
      are made by their Board (Land Settlement Committee) and contracts are signed by the
      LSA’s Corporate Secretary.

               III.    FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS

3.1   The Project Team in consultation with the MHUD and other stakeholders developed a
      Risk Matrix which is included in the documents of this operation. The Bank and MHUD
      will undertake joint reviews of the matrix on a yearly basis and introduce adjustments
      as deemed necessary.
3.2   The financial management risk has been classified as medium. The recruitment of a
      financial Specialist for PMCEU coupled with the provision of training on Bank policies
      and procedures for both PMCEU and LSA should mitigate the existing risk and
      strengthen the control environment.
3.3   Regarding procurement, it is estimated that the overall level of risk is also medium. The
      MHUD and LSA have experience following the IDB Procurement Policies. The risks
      associated to the procurement function will be mitigated through the recruitment of
      Procurement Specialists for both the MHUD and LSA. Additionally, training sessions
      on the IDB’s Procurement Policies will be conducted by the Bank with the participation
      of officials from the MHUD and LSA. The use of standardized bidding documents,
      contracts and templates will be a requirement to make sure all procurement activities
      are properly documented. Lastly, all national and international competitive bidding
      processes will be subject to ex-ante review by the Bank.
                                                                       Annex III - TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                              Page 3 of 7


                      IV.     ASPECTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE LOAN CONTRACT

4.1         Given the assessment, the following fiduciary arrangements should be considered in
            the Special Conditions: Exchange Rates, For purposes of accountability and
            justification of expenses to the Bank, the equivalent amount to be reported in the project
            currency, shall be determined using the effective exchange rate on the payment date,
            without regard to the source of the financing used. Applicable rate of exchange shall be
            the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago’s selling rate.

                V.          FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

5.1         Procurement execution: Procurement activities will be carried out in accordance with
            the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the Inter-American
            Development Bank (GN-2349-15), of May 2019, and the Policies for the Selection and
            Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank
            (GN-2350-15), of May 2019. They will also be subject to the provisions established in
            the Loan contract. In addition, the MHUD is required to prepare and submit to the Bank,
            a General Procurement Notice as well as an initial procurement plan which will be
            updated in accordance with the applicable sections of the Policies and the Loan
            Agreement.
       i.      Procurement of works, goods and non-consulting services: Contracts for
               works, goods, and non-consulting services subject to International Competitive
               Bidding will be carried out using the Standard Bidding Documents and standard
               contracts issued by the Bank. The procurement processes subject to National
               Competitive Bidding and Price Comparison will be carried out using bidding
               documents, request for quotations and form of contracts agreed to by the Bank.
               Templates of evaluation reports provided by the Bank will be used in conducting all
               procurement activities. The review of technical specifications is a responsibility of
               the Project Team Leader.
      ii.       Selection and contracting of consultants: The consulting services contracts will
                be executed using the Standard Request for Proposals and standard form of
                contracts issued by the Bank. Templates of evaluation reports provided by the
                Bank will be used in conducting all procurement activities. The review of terms of
                reference is a responsibility of the Project Team Leader.
      iii.      Selection of individual consultants: Individual consultants will be selected in
                accordance with Section V of GN-2350-15. The review of terms of reference is a
                responsibility of the Project Team Leader.
      iv.       The following Single-Source Selection is envisaged: National Insurance
                Property Development Company Limited (NIPDEC) at an estimated cost of
                US$1,014,000.00 to provide procurement and project management services for all
                civil works under Component 3, and for civil works in Tobago under Component 1.
                NIPDEC is considered to have experience of exceptional worth for the assignment
                given that for more than four decades it has successfully provided such services
                on numerous projects, including housing development projects, on behalf of the
                Government and the THA. As such, a single-source selection is acceptable based
                on subsection (d) of paragraph 3.11, GN-2350-15. Given that NIPDEC is a
                state-own enterprise, the MHUD conducted a legal analysis to confirm that the
                eligibility requirements stated in paragraph 1.13 (b) of the GN-2350-15 are met by
                NIPDEC.
                                                                                      Annex III - TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                                             Page 4 of 7


       v.        Recurrent expenses: The project may finance recurrent expenses for the
                 payment of utilities and office operating costs such as security, janitorial and
                 maintenance services related to the PMCEU office space, purchasing of office
                 supplies for the PMCEU, costs associated to advertisements of procurement
                 activities and contracts award notices in national newspapers, remuneration of the
                 consultants to be hired to strengthen the PMCEU and LSA’s capacity to implement
                 the program as well as the cost of air travel and per diem, and other transportation
                 costs for the PMCEU members.
      vi.        Retroactive financing: It is anticipated that the project may finance retroactively
                 under the loan, eligible expenses incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan
                 approval up to the amount US$156,566 (0.31% of the of eligible expenses
                 proposed loan amount), for project management fees under Components 1 and 2;
                 and project administration consultant remuneration expenses for the Financial
                 Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluations Specialist, Procurement Specialist,
                 Environmental/ Health and Safety Officer, Social/ Community Engagement
                 Specialist, and Housing Development Inspectors). These expenses must have
                 been incurred or on after September 13th, 2019 (approval date of the Project
                 Profile), and under no circumstances shall expenditures incurred more than 18
                 months prior to the loan approval date be included.

                              Table 1. Trinidad and Tobago’s thresholds Table (US$’000)
                                                                             Goods and non-
                     Procurement method                       Works                                   Consulting Firms
                                                                            consulting services
             International Competitive Bidding              > 3,000                > 250                       -
             National Competitive Bidding                   > 250 *               > 50 *                       -
             Price Comparison                                < 250                 < 50                        -
             International Shortlist                           -                     -                       > 200
             Shortlists solely by Nationals                    -                     -                       < 200
             * When procuring simple works and common goods and their amount is under the International Competitive
             Bidding thresholds, Price Comparison may be used

5.2         Procurement plan: The Procurement Plan for the operation covering the first
            18 months of project execution can be accessed through the following REL#4. The
            online Procurement Plan Execution System, or any other electronic tool developed by
            the Bank, will be used for the management and publication of the Procurement Plan
            during the implementation of the project. The MHUD/PMCEU will be responsible for
            preparing and maintaining up to date the procurement plan for the entire operation. The
            table below includes the list of the main procurement activities for this Loan.

                                            Table 2. Main procurement activities1
                          Activity                 Procurement           Estimated period for        Estimated amount
                                                     method               commencing the
                                                                              process
              Civil Works
              Sahadeen Trace                            NCB                     IQ 2020                    2,352.9
              Bois Bande C                              NCB                     IQ 2020                    2,647.06
              Factory Road*                             PC*                   I-IVQ 2020                    735.29
              Roads work at Wallerfield                 NCB                     IQ 2020                     1,500


1
    Components 1 and 2 will be executed as a Multiple Works Program (MWP). The details below only includes contracts
    identified as part of a sample.
                                                                                   Annex III - TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                                          Page 5 of 7


                    Activity                  Procurement            Estimated period for          Estimated amount
                                                method                commencing the
                                                                          process
        Guapo, Point Fortin                         ICB                     IVQ 2020                     4,029.41
        Diego Martin*                               PC*                IIQ 2020 – IQ 2023                2,478.56
        Riseland                                   NCB                       IIQ 2020                    1,256.71
        Eastside Plaza regeneration                 ICB                      IIQ 2023                    6,029.41
        Scarborough Esplanade                       ICB                      IQ 2022                     5,522.39
        Project 3                                   ICB                      IQ 2022                      2,934.2
        Consulting services
        Procurement services and                    SSS                     IIIQ 2020                      1,014
        project management services
        (NIPDEC)
        National Squatter Survey                   CQS                      IVQ 2020                        150
        Study on appropriate                       CQS                       IIQ 2020                        50
        development standards for
        hillside development
        Infrastructure Investment                  QCBS                      IIQ 2020                       250
        Plan for Tobago
        Wastewater Management                      QCBS                     IIIQ 2020                       300
        Plan and Drainage Plan for
        Diego Martin area
        National Housing Market                    QCBS                     IIIQ 2020                       250
        Study
        Information Systems (Real                  CQS                       IIQ 2020                       130
        Estate Management and
        Housing Market) updates
        Impact evaluation of squatter              CQS                       IIQ 2020                       100
        regularization
        *Several packages. Considering that this are simple works, separate procurement process will be carried out
        using Price Comparison method. The estimated amount for each one of the processes is below the ICB threshold

                                   Table 3. Threshold for ex-post review (US$’000)*

                                                    Goods and non-consulting
                      Works                                                                    Consulting services
                                                            services

                    Up to 250                                  Up to 50                                  N/A
        *The established threshold amounts for ex-post review are applied based on the fiduciary capacity of the
        executing agency and can be modified by the Bank, if the level of capacity varies during implementation


5.3   Procurement supervision. The following considerations will apply: (i) All procurement
      activities to be partially or in whole funded with loan resources will be listed in the
      procurement plan indicating the applicable supervision method; (ii) ICBs and NCBs
      processes will be subject to ex-ante review; (iii) Ex-post review visits will be performed
      every 6 months; the reports will be uploaded to the Supervision Plan in Convergence;
      and (iv) It will be conducted at least one physical inspection visit per year to verify the
      existence of works or goods; the sample covered by the visit will correspond at least to
      10% of the revised contracts.
5.4   Records and files. It has been agreed that the MHUD and LSA shall maintain the files
      and records of the project according to accepted best practices and be kept for up to
      three years beyond the end of the operation’s Last Disbursement Date. Contracts let to
                                                                    Annex III - TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                           Page 6 of 7


      third parties will require retention of documents and records related to the
      Bank-financed activities for seven (7) years after completion of the work contemplated
      in the relevant contract. The minimum content of procurement files will be established
      in the Operating Manual.

                               VI.    FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

6.1   Reports and audited financial statements: (i) annual financial statements of the
      project, audited by the Auditor General of Trinidad and Tobago or an eligible
      independent Audit firm are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of
      each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first project expenditures
      are incurred; and (ii) a final audited financial report of the program is to be submitted
      within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.
6.2   Programming and budget. The Ministry of Planning and Development will liaise with
      the MHUD to facilitate the assignment of a Budget Line in the National Budget. to allow
      for drawdowns under the proposed loan.
6.3   Accounting and information systems. An off-shelf automated accounting system will
      facilitate the recording and classification of all financial transactions.
6.4   Treasury (disbursements and flow of funds). The MoF will establish, a special
      account, denominated in US Dollars at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago for
      project resources. The main disbursement methodology will be the Advance of Funds
      based on a 6 month cash flow needs. The trigger for new advances will be
      80% justification of the previous advance. In order to request disbursements from the
      Bank, the EA will present the following:

                            Table 4. Forms and supporting documents
             Type of                                               Optional forms/ information that
                                     Mandatory Forms
          Disbursement                                                can be requested by the IDB
       Advance of Funds     Disbursement Request/ Financial Plan   List of Commitments
                                                                   Physical/Financial Progress
                                                                   Reports
       Reimbursements of    Disbursement Request/ Project          List of Commitments
       Payments Made        Execution Status/ Statement of         Physical/Financial Progress
       (Direct Payment to   Expenses                               Reports
       Borrower)
       Direct Payment to    Disbursement Request/ Statement of     List of Commitments
       Supplier             Expenses/Acceptable Supporting         Physical/Financial Progress
                            Documentation                          Reports


6.5   Supporting documentation for disbursements will be kept at the office of the EA and be
      reviewed by the Bank on an ex-post basis.
6.6   Internal controls and internal audit. The MHUD will assume the responsibility for
      designing and implementing internal controls for the project which will be documented
      in the OM and provide reasonable assurance that: (i) the project funds are used for
      their intended purpose; (ii) project assets are properly safeguarded; (iii) project
      transactions, decisions and activities are properly authorized, documented, recorded
      and supported; and (iv) project transactions are executed in accordance with the
      established policies, practices and procedures delineated in the legal agreements.
                                                               Annex III - TT-L1056 and TT-L1057
                                                                                      Page 7 of 7


6.7   External control and reporting. The MHUD through the PCMEU will submit annual
      Financial Reports of the Program and one final Audited Financial Report at the end of
      the Program, audited by the Auditor General of Trinidad and Tobago or an eligible
      independent audit firm.
6.8   Financial supervision. Financial Supervision will be developed based on the initial
      and subsequent risk assessments carried out for the project. Execution mechanism.
      MHUD through PMCEU will be the EA with responsibility for the financial administration
      of the program. The responsibilities will include: (i) preparation of required project
      reports; (ii) monitoring product, output and outcomes achievement using established
      indicators; (iii) preparation and submission of disbursement requests to the Bank and
      justification of expenses; (iv) preparation of financial reports; (v) ensure compliance
      with all aspects of the Operating Manual; and (vi) maintain adequate documentation
      filing system.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/20



        Trinidad and Tobago. Loan ____/OC-TT to the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
                        Urban Upgrading and Revitalization Program



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a
financing to cooperate in the execution of the Urban Upgrading and Revitalization Program. Such
financing will be for the amount of up to US$32,500,000 from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary
Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual
Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                              (Adopted on ___ ___________ 2020)



LEG/SGO/CCB/EZSHARE-1327018462-4051
TT-L1056
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/20



        Trinidad and Tobago. Loan ____/OC-TT to the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
                        Urban Upgrading and Revitalization Program



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a
financing to cooperate in the execution of the Urban Upgrading and Revitalization Program. Such
financing will be for the amount of up to US$17,500,000 from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary
Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual
Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                              (Adopted on ___ ___________ 2020)



LEG/SGO/CCB/EZSHARE-1327018462-4052
TT-L1057
