                                                                                         PUBLIC
                                                                       SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                           ECUADOR




   CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)
             CASA PARA TODOS SECTOR PROGRAM
                                         (EC-O0004)
FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CCLIP: HOUSING SOLUTIONS
             FOR POOR AND VULNERABLE HOUSEHOLDS

                                         (EC-L1245)


                                        LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Nora Libertun de Duren,
Project Team Leader; Beatriz Uribe, Alternate Project Team Leader; Patricio Zambrano,
Paloma Silva, Catarina Mastellaro, Dianela Avila, Beatriz González, and René Osorio
(CSD/HUD); Xiomara Alemán (SCL/SPH); Juan Carlos Dugand, and Carolina Escudero
(VPC/FMP); Karina Calahorrano (CAN/CEC); Javier Jimenez and Carolina Verissimo
(LEG/SGO); Paloma Acevedo and Ana Maria Cuesta (SPD/SDV); and Luz Fernández
(CSD/CCS).



This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding
and replacing the original version.
                                                    CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY


I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, rationale................................................... 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 8
       C.    Key results indicators ................................................................................. 11

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 12

       A.    Financing instruments ................................................................................ 12
       B.    Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 13
       C.    Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 14
       D.    Other risks and key issues .......................................................................... 14

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 15

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 15
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 16




                                                   APPENDIXES


Proposed resolution
                                                         - ii -



                                                      ANNEXES
Annex I             Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM)
Annex II            Results Matrix
Annex III           Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                  REQUIRED LINKS
1.   Multiyear Execution Plan/Annual Work Plan (AWP)
2.   Monitoring and Evaluation Plan
3.   Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)
4.   Procurement Plan


                                                  OPTIONAL LINKS
1.   Economic analysis
2.   Draft program Operating Regulations
3.   Incorporation of the gender approach for operation EC-L1245
4.   Analysis of access to housing for persons with a disability
5.   Impact assessment of the National Low-income Housing Program (operation EC-L1113; loan 2797/OC-EC)
6.   Program completion report (operation EC-L1113; loan 2797/OC-EC)
7.   Sector note on the urban development and housing sector in Ecuador
8.   AFD-IDB Framework Partnership Agreement
9.   Bibliography
10. Technical note on climate change for operation EC-L1245
11. Analysis of housing costs
12. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF)
                                     - iii -



                               ABBREVIATIONS


ADD         Acute diarrheal disease
AFD         Agence Française de Développement [French Development Agency]
AWP         Annual work plan
BCE         Central Bank of Ecuador
CCLIP       Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects
CGE         Office of the State Comptroller General
CONADIS     Consejo Nacional para la Igualdad de Discapacidades [National
            Disability Equality Board]
CPT         Casa para Todos [Housing for all]
CUT         Cuenta Única del Tesoro [Single Treasury Account]
DEM         Development effectiveness matrix
ENEMDU      Encuesta Nacional de Empleo, Desempleo y Subempleo [National
            Survey of Employment, Unemployment, and Underemployment]
e-SIGEF     Sistema de Administración Financiera [Integrated financial management
            system]
ESMR        Environmental and Social Management Report
ICB         International competitive bidding
IMF         International Monetary Fund
INEC        National Institute of Statistics of Ecuador
MEF         Ministry of Economy and Finance
MIDUVI      Ministry of Urban Development and Housing
MIES        Ministry of Economic and Social Inclusion
MPI         Multidimensional poverty index
NCB         National competitive bidding
NICQ        National individual consultant selection based on qualifications
PBME        Programa Bono Manuela Espejo [Manuela Espejo subsidy program]
PEV         Promotores o Ejecutores de Vivienda [Housing developers or builders]
QCBS        Quality- and cost-based selection
SBU         Salario Básico Unificado [Unified basic wage]
SDG         Sustainable Development Goal
SENPLADES   National Planning and Development Department
SIIDUVI     Sistema Integrado de Información de Desarrollo Urbano y Vivienda
            [Integrated Urban Development and Housing Information System]
SIV         Sistema de Incentivos de Vivienda [Housing incentives system]
SNCP        Sistema Nacional de Contratación Pública [National Public Procurement
            System]
SOE         State-owned enterprise
                                               PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                    ECUADOR
                            CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)
                                      CASA PARA TODOS SECTOR PROGRAM
                                                  (EC-O0004)
             FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION: HOUSING SOLUTIONS FOR POOR AND VULNERABLE HOUSEHOLDS
                                                  (EC-L1245)
                                                 Financial Terms and Conditions
Borrower: Republic of Ecuador                                                          Flexible Financing Facility(a)
                                                                        Amortization period:               25 years
                                                                        Disbursement period:               5 years
Executing agency: Ministry of Urban Development and Housing             Grace period:                      6 years (b)
(MIDUVI)                                                                Interest rate:                     LIBOR-based
                                                                                                           (c)
                                                                        Credit fee:
                               Amount         First
                                                             First
                                CCLIP       operation                                                          (c)
         Source                                            operation    Inspection and supervision fee:
                                (US$          (US$
                                                              (%)
                               million)      million)
IDB (Ordinary Capital):             200          93.9           53.8    Weighted average life:                 15.18 years
Agence Française de                   0          80.0           45.8    Currency of approval:                  U.S. dollar
Développement
(AFD):(d)
Local:(e)                             0         0.708            0.4
Total:                              200       174,608            100
                                                         Project at a glance
Project objectives: The general objectives of the sector CCLIP are to: (i) improve access for Ecuadorian households living in
a situation of poverty or vulnerability and without adequate housing, to affordable, sustainable, and universally accessible
housing; and (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Government of Ecuador to generate and implement long-term housing policies.
The specific objectives of the first operation are to: (i) reduce the quantitative housing deficit among households belonging to
the country’s two lowest income quintiles, living in rural areas, prioritizing those with specific vulnerability indicators; (ii) idem,
but targeted on urban households; and (iii) optimize MIDUVI institutional processes.
Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: The executing agency will present evidence, to
the Bank’s satisfaction, that: (i) the management team that will operate from its headquarters has been appointed, in accordance
with the profiles and terms of reference contained in the program Operating Regulations; (ii) the program Operating Regulations
have been approved and entered into force, under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.2).
Exceptions to Bank policies: None.
                                                        Strategic alignment
Challenges:(f)                                    SI                           PI                                EI

Crosscutting themes:(g)                         GD                            CC                                 IC
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes
    to the amortization schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, and commodity conversions. The Bank will take operational
    and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided

    that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented
    in the loan contract.
(c) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as

    part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies.
(d) AFD and the Bank will sign an agreement for parallel cofinancing with services, which will specify the terms and conditions

    of the cofinancing (see Framework Partnership Agreement signed on 11 October 2018 between AFD and the Bank).
(e) Amount equivalent to value-added tax.
(f) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(g) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity

    and Rule of Law).
                            I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, rationale
1.1       Background. Ecuador faces a complex macroeconomic situation. An ambitious
          program of fiscal consolidation and structural reform cut the total deficit of the
          nonfinancial public sector from 4.5% of GDP in 2017 to 0.9% in 2018. However,
          the country’s substantial financing needs in an adverse international context have
          led the government to negotiate an agreement with the International Monetary
          Fund (IMF). On 11 March, the IMF approved an arrangement under the Extended
          Fund Facility for US$4.2 billion, to be disbursed over a three-year period. This will
          be supplemented by approximately US$6 billion from other multilateral
          organizations, including the Bank. The IMF is forecasting an economic contraction
          of 0.5% in Ecuador’s GDP in the short term, followed by 3% growth over the
          medium term. The IDB recently approved the Emergency Program for
          Macroeconomic       Sustainability    and     Prosperity   (operation    EC-L1255;
          loan 4771/OC-EC), which is aligned with the IMF’s Extended Fund Facility.
1.2       In this context, the Ecuadorian government requested support from the Bank to
          implement its new Casa para Todos (CPT) (“A house for everyone”) low-income
          housing program, in order to increase tenure of decent housing to 95% of
          Ecuadorian households living in situations of poverty or vulnerability.1 The main
          target of the CPT2 is to improve access to housing for lower-income households.
          The CPT is an integral part of the 2017-2021 National Development Plan (subtitled
          Toda una Vida (Lifelong)), which articulates and coordinates the country’s social
          policy. The CPT program promotes the construction of homes priced at US$70,000
          or less to meet the housing deficit faced by 230,000 low-income households. In
          this price range, the CPT program distinguishes two segments according to
          household payment capacity, giving greater support to the poorest households
          with the lowest incomes: (i) it provides direct monetary subsidies to finance the
          construction of a new home or to complete the downpayment on a mortgage loan
          at a subsidized rate to acquire housing priced at up to US$40,000; and (ii) it
          provides broader access to credit for house purchases, or it subsidizes the interest
          rate on home loans to buy a home in the US$40,000 to US$70,000 range.
1.3       The implementation of the CPT deepens and improves the country’s housing
          incentives system (SIV). The SIV involves paying direct cash subsidies to
          households facing a housing deficit to help them gain access to adequate housing.
          The Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI) manages and
          regulates the SIV, which is national in scope and has specific mechanisms for




1    The legal basis for the CPT program is found in Articles 30, 31, 37/7, 47/6, and 375 of the Constitution of
     the Republic of Ecuador and Article 85 of the Organic Law on Territorial Planning, Land Use and
     Management.
2    See the Government Housing Plan of Spain 2018-2021, Ontario’s Poverty Reduction Strategy, and the
     European Union’s Erasmus Inclusion and Diversity Strategy.
                                                         -2-




          urban and rural areas,3 as well as being progressive.4 Since its creation in 1997,
          the SIV has generated housing solutions for over 30,000 low-income households.
          Since 2012 it has contributed to a reduction of nearly 11 percentage points in the
          housing deficit [1].5
1.4       The program will address poor and vulnerable households in the context of the first
          segment of the CPT program and through the SIV. Thus, it will supplement the
          guarantee under operation EC-U0001 (loan 4699/OC-EC, approved in 2018),
          which secures up to US$300 million in a Social Bond issue to originate mortgage
          loans for the second segment.
1.5       Problem: the housing deficit in Ecuador. Over 2 million Ecuadorian households
          do not have adequate housing. Of these, 1.2 million are located in urban areas
          (21% with a quantitative housing deficit) and 850,000 live in rural areas (38% with
          a quantitative deficit).6 Moreover, given the combination of rapid population growth,
          a small average household size, and low rates of house building, the deficit
          continues to grow. An additional 40,000 affordable homes7 would be needed each
          year just to maintain the deficit at its current level. In urban areas, the deficit is
          characterized by the absence of basic sanitation infrastructure and overcrowding.
          In rural areas, there are also coverage and quality shortfalls in the provision of
          drinking water and in basic house building standards.8 Both areas lack
          environmental-sustainability9 and universal-access10 criteria in the design of
          homes.
1.6       Households in situations of housing deficit in Ecuador are generally low-income.11
          The deficit affects 60% of households in the lowest income quintile but fewer than
          20% of those in the top quintile. A full 76% of the housing supply is sold in a price
          range that is above the payment capacity of the first four income deciles [1],12 while
          only households in the highest income decile show a positive savings rate [2]. To
          make matters worse, the recurrent informality and irregularity of work 13 restrict

3    The National Institute of Statistics of Ecuador (INEC) classifies areas as follows: (i) urban: provincial,
     cantonal capitals, or municipios; (ii) rural: scattered population, parish centers, and other population
     clusters (Social Indicators System of Ecuador (SIISE) definition).
4    Ecuador identifies multidimensional poverty on the basis of 12 indicators in the following dimensions:
     education; labor and social security; health, water, and food; and habitat, housing, and healthy
     environment.
5    Sector diagnostic performed by the Bank.
6    The INEC considers a household to be in a qualitative housing deficit situation if its dwelling has
     deficiencies in terms of structure, space, and public utilities; and in a quantitative deficit situation if it is
     living in improvised housing or in a dwelling shared with another household.
7    Affordable housing considers the needs of households with incomes below the median.
8    INEC, 2015.
9    Sustainable housing takes advantage of bioclimatic conditions to reduce consumption of energy, water,
     and construction materials.
10   Universal access allows the entire population, including pregnant women, children under five, the elderly,
     and the disabled to access the constructed area and participate in society as equals.
11   Un espacio para el desarrollo.
12   Optional link 9 contains the bibliography.
13   For an analysis of the mortgage credit market, see the background information on the guarantee approved
     by the Bank in the project “Financing Low-income Housing in Ecuador” (operation EC-U0001;
     loan 4699/OC-EC).
                                                       -3-




          access to the mortgage markets for the lowest income quintiles. Income poverty
          affects 24.5% of Ecuadorians, with rates of 43%14 in rural areas and 15.9% in urban
          zones—a similar distribution to that of the housing deficit.
1.7       Households in situations of housing deficit display worse health indicators owing
          to their exposure to environmental hazards, accidents, and disasters. They also
          generally have limited access to education, health, and transportation services,
          which restricts their chances of obtaining quality employment [3-5]. This situation
          is reflected in the level of the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), 15 which
          averages 3.5% nationwide, 1.5% in the urban zones and 7.7% in rural areas.
          Among households subject to multidimensional poverty, indicators associated with
          the housing deficit explain 11.7% of deficits in urban zones and 37.6% in rural
          areas.16
1.8       The affordable housing market has also been impacted by the magnitude and
          speed of recent migratory flows.17 Between 2015 and 2018 the number of
          immigrants grew to represent 3.73% of the total population, concentrated in just a
          few areas of the country. This reduces access to affordable housing in the
          receiving localities [6] and increases the demand for temporary rentals.
1.9       Rationale. This operation’s support for building homes for low-income and highly
          vulnerable households is explained by the lack of affordable housing stock for this
          population. For a given level of income, vulnerable households suffer most from
          the housing deficit. At the national level, this is reflected in an additional two
          percentage points on the deficit faced by households headed by women; six extra
          points in households containing persons with disabilities; and eight in those with
          three or more minors or older adults in their charge. In all cases, shortfalls are even
          more pronounced in rural areas, where the housing deficit in the two lowest
          quintiles is one point higher for households headed by a woman and 16 points
          higher if a family member has a disability. Currently, six out of ten persons with a
          disability18 in Ecuador live in extreme poverty.19 Households containing persons
          with disabilities, and those headed by women, along with single parents, and those
          with minors or older dependents, devote a large proportion of their resources to
          caring for their family members; but this means they have little chance of
          participating in the labor market, increasing their level of vulnerability.20
1.10      Tenant households headed by women spend a larger proportion of their income
          on housing than those headed by men: in the lowest income quintile, their annual
          rental expenditure absorbs 56.8% of their income compared to 40.8% in those

14   Poverty and inequality report, INEC, June 2018.
15   The MPI identifies the percentage of households with multiple deficiencies in health, education, and
     standard of living.
16   The housing indicators in the MPI for Ecuador are: cement flooring, drinking water, sanitation, electricity,
     and access to cooking fuel. Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, 2017.
17   The Ministry of Foreign Relations and Human Mobility estimates that adequately addressing the situation
     of migrants will require an investment of US$550 million between 2019 and 2021.
18   Includes people with catastrophic or rare diseases, and orphans, according to Ecuadorian regulations.
19   Disability Policies in Ecuador.
20   A vulnerable household is one that is highly likely to suffer a negative income shock in the next year.
     Hoogeveen et al. A Guide to the Analysis of Risk (2004) World Bank.
                                                       -4-




          headed by men. In the second quintile, rent absorbs 21.9% of their income versus
          17.9% in male-headed households. Moreover, households headed by women and
          those containing persons with disabilities tend to be larger than male headed
          households with similar characteristics, which decreases the household’s per
          capita income and its saving capacity.21 It is also estimated that half of women over
          15 years of age are victims of violence perpetrated by their partner or ex-partner;
          and that 9.7% of married women or those living in informal relationships who are
          victims of gender violence want to separate, but their income is insufficient to
          access a home of their own.22 Therefore, low-income women who are victims of
          gender-based violence are given preference in access to housing.23
1.11      The empirical evidence suggests that low-income, highly vulnerable households
          that access adequate housing experience improvements in their levels of health,
          particularly in rural areas; a reduction in the time devoted to unpaid work,
          especially in households that include minors, older adults, and persons with
          disabilities. In addition, when the housing is sustainable, the households spend
          less on electricity and water.
1.12      The use of adequate materials and access to water and sanitation in the home
          improves household health. Several impact assessments in Latin America have
          found that replacing an earth floor in a home with cement reduces the incidence of
          parasitic and acute diarrheal diseases (ADD) in children under five years of age
          [7,12]. Accordingly, ADD risks are likely to be higher in the 17% of Ecuadorian
          homes that lack adequate flooring.24 In addition, the consumption of contaminated
          food or water increases ADD incidence,25 while access to piped water reduces it
          [8,16]. Approximately 20% of Ecuadorian children under the age of five in the
          poorest consumption quintile suffer from ADD. Therefore, improving the quality of
          the floor in their home and providing access to clean water helps to reduce the
          incidence of ADD among children.
1.13      The quality of the home also affects the way a household distributes its time
          between paid and unpaid work. A well-designed home improves the autonomy and
          mobility of minors, the elderly, and persons with disabilities, and it also reduces the
          risks of falls and accidents [11,15].26 This increases the time that caregivers have
          available for paid work [13,17]. Eighty-nine percent of Ecuador’s senior citizens
          live with a close relative;27 and women spend more time than men caring for
          household members (nearly nine hours a week).28 For this reason, a universally
          accessible home could be expected to increase the autonomy of all household
          members and free up time for caregivers to engage in other activities.


21   Encuesta de Condiciones de Vida (2014). Urban Economics Calculations.
22   Survey of family relations and gender violence against women (2011).
23   National law to prevent, punish, and eradicate violence against women (2018).
24   Flooring is inadequate if it is made of earth, cane, or other materials in poor condition. National Survey on
     Employment, Unemployment, and Underemployment (ENEMDU, 2017).
25   Data and figures, World Health Organization (WHO).
26   Important Facts about Falls, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
27   Health, Welfare, and Aging 2009, INEC.
28   Specific Survey of the Use of Time 2012, INEC.
                                                     -5-




1.14      In turn, the homes delivered through the program will include measures to improve
          their energy efficiency, which should reduce the corresponding bills. Bioclimatic
          designs, improvements in construction materials and lighting sources enhance the
          energy efficiency of the home [13]. In Ecuador, a home that replaces incandescent
          bulbs with energy saving bulbs could reduce its electricity bill by 40% [14].29
          Another possible source of savings for households comes from having direct
          access to drinking water [18]. According to the INEC, 13% of homes in urban zones
          and 63% in rural areas do not receive water through a domestic plumbing system.
          These households have to use other less safe or more expensive sources, for
          example, buying water from delivery trucks costs three to five times more than
          paying the public network.30
1.15      In addition, in order to implement this operation in the context of the CPT, it is
          important to strengthen the implementation, monitoring, and evaluations
          processes of the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI). To this
          end, MIDUVI will enhance the functionality of the Integrated Urban Development
          and Housing Information System (SIIDUVI). The SIIDUVI will make it possible to
          optimize the management of housing demand and beneficiary allocation; manage
          supply, by promoting technical innovations among the housing developers or
          builders (PEVs); and integrate land management and cadasters. Lastly, MIDUVI
          needs to institutionalize collaboration with the Ministry of Economic and Social
          Inclusion (MIES) in serving households living in poverty and extreme poverty, and
          also with the National Disability Equality Board (CONADIS) in serving households
          containing persons with disabilities, thus enhancing the outcomes of housing and
          social inclusion policies.
1.16      Lessons learned. For more than two decades, the Bank has been the Ecuadorian
          government’s main multilateral partner in structuring and financing low-income
          housing programs.31 These programs have made continuous progress in their
          design and effectiveness. Thus far, MIDUVI has executed six consecutive
          operations, which, in addition to contributing to the creation and financing of the
          SIV, have also promoted private-sector participation in the supply of low-income
          housing and helped strengthen its management capacity. The Bank has also
          supported the Manuela Espejo subsidy program (PBME), which has pioneered
          subsidies to adapt housing to the needs of persons with disabilities.
1.17      The results of the final evaluation of the most recent sector operation, National
          Social Housing Program – Stage II (PNV-II) (operation EC-L1113;
          loan 2797/OC-EC) are satisfactory. The PNV-II, executed by MIDUVI during
          2013-2018, achieved its main objective of improving housing conditions for
          Ecuadorian households in the two lowest income quintiles, benefiting a total of
          16,320 households. The PNV-II granted a subsidy of US$6,000 per household

29   This assumes a monthly payment of US$40, half of which is for lighting, and the replacement of 200W
     incandescent bulbs for 20W energy savers, at US$0.10 per kWh.
30   Newspaper El Comercio (Ecuador).
31   Since 1997, the IDB has supported the sector through the following operations: (i) Housing Sector Support
     Program (loan 1002/SF-EC); (ii) Housing Sector Support Program II (loan 1416/OC-EC); (iii) Global Credit
     Program for Municipal Development (loan 596/OC-EC); (iv) National Program for Social Housing
     Infrastructure (loan 2279/OC-EC); (v) National Urban Development Program (loan 2679/OC-EC); and
     (vi) National Social Housing Program – Stage II (loan 2797/OC-EC).
                                                     -6-




          through the SIV, to be complemented with the beneficiaries’ savings—in money or
          in land—to buy a new home built by the private sector, mostly local
          microentrepreneurs. The program Operating Regulations established a system for
          prioritizing households headed by women, with three or more minors in their
          charge, or with persons with disabilities. According to the PNV-II project completion
          report submitted by MIDUVI to the Bank in January 2019 (optional link 6),
          US$94.99 million of the US$104 million approved by the Bank were used. Of these
          funds, 77.5% were allocated to rural areas and the remaining 22.5% to urban
          areas.32
1.18      The recent PNV-II impact assessment (optional link 5) applauds the targeting of
          the subsidies and the effective contribution made to reducing the quantitative
          housing deficit at the national level. It also finds statistically significant evidence of
          the program’s contribution to improving the habitability of housing and reducing the
          overcrowding of beneficiary households in the 2015-201633 period. In terms of
          PNV-II targeting, 30% of female heads of households held title to their home34 and
          4% of the program amount was channeled to households containing persons with
          disabilities, together with the PBME. The qualitative evidence also indicates that
          the beneficiaries are satisfied with the quality of their home. The evaluation also
          shows the need to reduce the inconvenience caused to households by MIDUVI
          processes and shorten the time taken to fulfill the necessary procedures, and to
          improve the monitoring of beneficiary households. Lastly, the homes lack
          environmental sustainability criteria. This assessment also provides three lessons
          that are useful for this operation: (i) put a communication plan in place that
          reinforces and simplifies the links between the target population and MIDUVI;
          (ii) strengthen MIDUVI’s capacity to monitor and evaluate the results and impact
          of the program actions, especially in rural areas; and (iii) encourage the use of
          technologies that improve the homes’ environmental behavior.
1.19      Lastly, the IDB’s experience shows that programs have a greater impact when they
          use a comprehensive approach. For this reason, this operation is coordinated with
          work on other sectors in Ecuador: (i) with the financial markets sector by
          complementing the guarantee under operation EC-U0001 (loan 4699/OC-EC);
          (ii) with the social investment sector in coordination with loans 4614/OC-EC and
          4634/OC-EC to support households containing persons with disabilities; with
          technical cooperation operation RG-T3156 through a pilot study on the
          complementarity of providing information on rights together with subsidies; and
          (iii) with the transportation sector through technical cooperation operation
          RG-T2864 (ATN/OC-15847-RG) to document accessibility barriers facing housing
          beneficiaries.




32   These figures differ from those reported in impact evaluation of loan 2797/OC-EC because the latter only
     included the databases audited up to December 2017.
33   As 95% of the subsidies financed the construction of a new home on own land, this evaluation has external
     validity mainly for Component 1 of this operation (optional link 5).
34   Estimation based on the surveys conducted during the program’s midterm evaluation (2016).
                                                   -7-




1.20      Strategic alignment. The area of intervention of the sector Conditional Credit Line
          for Investment Projects (CCLIP), and of this first operation, is aligned with the
          Country Strategy with Ecuador (document GN-2924), which promotes access to
          housing to further the social progress made in the last decade; and it is included
          in the 2019 Operations Programming Report (document GN-2948). The CCLIP is
          also consistent with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (document AB-3008)
          and the 2016-2019 Corporate Results Framework (document GN-2727-6);
          responding to the challenge of social inclusion and equality by promoting access
          to quality housing for poor households. It is also aligned with the cross-cutting
          themes of: (i) Gender equality and diversity, by prioritizing households headed by
          women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups; and (ii) Climate
          change and environmental sustainability, by promoting sustainable housing. The
          operation will invest 51.32% of its funds in climate change mitigation and
          adaptation, as defined by the multilateral development banks’ joint methodology.
          The resources in question will contribute to the IDB Group’s goal of increasing the
          proportion of lending for projects related to climate change to 30% of all operations
          by the end of 2020. The operation is also aligned with the Integrated Strategy for
          Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable
          Energy (document GN-2609-1) by promoting the reduction of CO2 emissions in the
          construction sector. It is also aligned with the following sector framework
          documents: Urban Development and Housing (document GN-2732-6) by
          promoting access to housing for households in the two poorest income quintiles;
          Climate Change (document GN-2835-8) by promoting housing with bioclimatic
          adaptations; Gender and Diversity (document GN-2800-8) by prioritizing property
          titling for women and universal-access housing. It is also coordinated with Bank-
          led efforts to improve living conditions among migrant-receiving communities in its
          territorial criteria.35 Lastly, this operation contributes to Goal 11 of the Sustainable
          Development Goals (SDGs), by promoting adequate, safe and affordable housing.
1.21      Gender and diversity approach. For this operation, vulnerable households are
          considered those with low incomes, with older adults or minors, headed by women,
          with persons with disabilities, victims of domestic or sexual violence, or belonging
          to indigenous peoples, afro-Ecuadorians, or Montubios. In line with IDB policy, the
          program will explicitly require women to be included in housing property titles when
          they are heads of household, or jointly with their partner if they are married or in
          informal unions. This is necessary since legal certainty is fundamental for
          accessing the economic and social benefits that come from property tenure. In
          turn, access to housing makes it easier for victims of gender-based violence to get
          out of abusive relationships and domestic violence [18] (optional link 3). As part of
          the exceptions defined in the legal regulation,36 the program will prioritize persons
          with severe and very severe disabilities, allowing them to receive subsidies and/or
          mortgage loans to adapt their homes. This promotes their autonomy and
          guarantees their rights under the International Convention on the Rights of
          Persons with Disabilities, to which Ecuador is a party37 (optional link 4). The IDB


35   The reference to the relevant regulation will be added once approved by the IDB.
36   Ministerial Decision 029-18-Article 7.5- dated 28 November 2018.
37   Decree 681 of 25 February 2019 and Ministerial Decision MIDUVI 002-2018-05-16, Article 7.
                                                      -8-




          will work with MIDUVI to raise awareness and train civil servants on issues of
          gender and diversity and to develop a communication plan with beneficiaries.
1.22      Alignment with the country’s regulations. This operation is consistent with
          national regulations on addressing the needs of vulnerable populations. The
          Constitution of Ecuador provides that the elderly, minors, pregnant women,
          persons with disabilities, victims of domestic and sexual violence, indigenous
          peoples, Afro-Ecuadorians and Montubios, among others, shall receive priority
          attention in social and economic inclusion actions. The Organic Law on Territorial
          Organization, Land Use and Management (LOOTUGS) defines social interest
          housing as adequate, decent housing provided for population groups living in
          situations of poverty or vulnerability.
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.23      Objectives. The general objectives of the sector CCLIP are to: (i) expand access
          for Ecuadorian households living in a situation of poverty or vulnerability and
          without adequate housing, to affordable, sustainable and universally accessible
          housing; and (ii) strengthen the Ecuadorian government’s capacity to generate
          and implement long-term housing policies. Investment programs will be financed
          under the CCLIP in the following areas: (1) Management of the supply of and
          demand for housing for low-income households. The objective is to help
          reduce the housing deficit among low-income households in Ecuador. Financing
          will be provided for activities to encourage private-sector production of affordable,
          sustainable, and universally accessible housing in urban and rural areas. The
          direct demand subsidy systems will be maintained, prioritizing households
          displaying high levels of vulnerability; (2) Strengthening of MIDUVI management
          capacities. The objective is to finance activities that improve MIDUVI capacities
          to design and manage the country’s housing policy, including: monitoring of
          beneficiary households, regulation and promotion of technologies for
          environmental sustainability, universal accessibility in low-income housing and
          inclusive habitat, and strengthening of MIDUVI’s provincial directorates and their
          coordination with the decentralized autonomous governments.
1.24      The specific objectives of this operation are to: (i) reduce the quantitative housing
          deficit among households belonging to the country’s two lowest income quintiles,
          living in rural areas, prioritizing those with specific vulnerability indicators;38 (ii) idem,
          but targeted on urban households; and (iii) optimize MIDUVI institutional processes.
1.25      Coordination with other development agencies. One of the priority areas under
          the framework agreement for collaboration between the French development
          agency (AFD) and the Bank is the area of sustainable cities and urban
          development. In this context, AFD will contribute US$80 million in the form of
          parallel cofinancing39 to achieve the objectives of this operation. It will also provide
          nonreimbursable technical support to improve energy efficiency in low-income
          housing construction.


38   For this operation, households with specific vulnerability indicators are considered those that include the
     elderly, minors, are headed by women, include persons with disabilities, victims of domestic or sexual
     violence, or those belonging to indigenous peoples, Afro-Ecuadorians, and Montubios.
39   Under a loan contract between AFD and Ecuador.
                                                    -9-




1.26      Program strategy. The program will continue with MIDUVI as executing agency
          and with the housing incentives system (SIV). It is proposed to supplement the
          beneficiary households’ contributions with a single, nonreimbursable monetary
          subsidy for the construction or purchase of adequate housing developed by PEV.
          This encourages private sector participation in the low-income housing market,
          improves the characteristics of the stock of affordable housing, and supports job
          creation in the construction industry. To facilitate execution, especially in rural
          areas, eligible households will be organized into groups of up to 50 family units
          and prioritized according to the percentage of vulnerable households they contain.
          This approach achieves economies of scale in transportation and materials; and it
          promotes inclusive community groups. The program consists of three components:
1.27      Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of new housing on own land in
          rural and urban areas (IDB: US$44 million, AFD: US$40 million). This
          component will finance direct monetary subsidies to family units living in conditions
          of extreme and moderate poverty, according to their score on the social register.40
          The amount of the subsidy will be up to 41.12 times the unified basic wage (SBU).
          Financing will be provided for the construction of sustainable and universally
          accessible home on the beneficiary’s own land, for a value of up to 41.12 SBU.
          The home will have two or three bedrooms (depending on the family structure);
          and it will observe architectural criteria adapted to the bioclimatic zone.41 MIDUVI
          will organize and prioritize demand by groups, pursuant to the program Operating
          Regulations. The beneficiaries of this program may request an additional subsidy
          of US$1,500 to finance works or equipment for the provision of services (water,
          wastewater disposal, and electricity) when these are lacking; and US$600 for titling
          processes. With the Bank funding for this component, it is estimated that about
          2,404 subsidies will be granted to an equal number of families.
1.28      Component 2. Partial subsidies for the purchase of urban housing (IDB:
          US$44 million, AFD: US$40 million). This component will finance direct
          monetary subsidies to households living in poverty or moderate poverty, according
          to their social register score, to purchase sustainable housing of universal
          accessibility in the price range from 57.57 to 101.52 SBU. The homes will include
          mitigation measures to reduce their energy and water consumption. Individual or
          group applications are submitted to MIDUVI and may be done directly by the
          eligible household. All households making up a committee42 will be prioritized
          according to the criteria of the program Operating Regulations. The value of the
          subsidy will be US$6,000, and in conjunction with credits from the financial or
          cooperative sector and/or household savings, this will enable the beneficiaries to
          purchase their home. The Bank’s funding for this component is expected to finance
          7,333 subsidies awarded to an equal number of family units.




40   The Social Register is a social, economic, and demographic cadaster of families, which aims to identify
     populations living in poverty.
41   These have demonstrated savings of 20% in energy use, 20% in water use and 20% in materials energy,
     relative to conventional construction.
42   A group of households that apply jointly for the housing subsidy.
                                                            - 10 -



                                     Table 1. Housing Finance (Components 1 and 2)
                                         Financing                      Amount (US$)                    Number of
                                                                                         Investment
              Component                        Household                                               households
                                  Subsidy                            Minimum   Maximum     modality
                                              contribution                                              benefited
           Component 1.          Up to 41.12
           Subsidies for the        SBU
           construction of       US$1,500*
                                                Own land                -       22,680     Group         2,404
           new housing on        US$600**
           own land in rural
           and urban areas
           Component 2.           US$6,000          Mortgage
           Partial subsidies                       credit note                            Individual
                                                                      22,680    40,000                   7,333
           for the purchase                           and/or                               or group
           of urban housing                          savings
           Total                                                                                         9,737
           * Additional subsidy for the provision of utilities.
           ** Additional subsidy for home titling processes.


1.29      Component 3. MIDUVI strengthening (IDB: US$3.9 million, Local:
          US$470,000). This component will finance technical and technological
          improvements in the SIIDUVI, in: (i) the access module, for the registration,
          eligibility, and prioritization of beneficiaries, and delivery of subsidies; (ii) the supply
          module, to register, qualify, award, and evaluate the PEVs; and (iii) to optimize the
          property database (identification and selection of available land parcels, based on
          criteria of accessibility and vulnerability to risks). The activities are based on an
          initial plan of improvements that include programming, systems, equipment, and
          human talent. An algorithm will be designed to improve beneficiary selection and
          enhance coordination with the autonomous governments, and their training in land
          management.
1.30      Other costs (IDB: US$2 million, Local: US$230,000). Project resources will be
          used to finance evaluation and monitoring costs, as well as audits, administration,
          and contingencies.
1.31      Subsidy award system. The homes will fulfill MIDUVI technical specifications and
          those of the program Operating Regulations, including maximum prices and
          architectural, urban, energy efficiency and universal accessibility standards
          (required link 3). The subsidies will be awarded once the required contracts have
          been signed and the guarantees corresponding to MIDUVI have been delivered.
          MIDUVI will return the guarantees once the beneficiaries have ownership of the
          house and are in possession of the corresponding title deed. Current national
          regulations govern all contracting and supervision processes in the production of
          housing. The program will also use official and updated data from the Ministry of
          Economy and Finance (MEF), MIDUVI, MIES,43 and the Social Register of the
          National Planning and Development Department (SENPLADES).44




43   The MIES contains about 30,000 records of the current beneficiaries of the Joaquín Gallegos Lara Subsidy
     program, which pays US$240 to a family member who cares for a person with a severe disability or
     catastrophic disease, or for someone under 14 years of age suffering from HIV/AIDS.
44   Operation EC-L1238; loan 4614/OC-EC strengthens the Social Register.
                                                    - 11 -




1.32      Household eligibility. Households living in poverty (as classified in the Social
          Register)45 and subject to housing deficit are eligible, unless they are beneficiaries
          of other MIDUVI housing programs. Homes lacking basic services (water,
          sanitation, and electricity), built with deficient materials, precarious construction,
          overcrowding (more than three people per room), without formal title, or occupied
          jointly by more than one household, are considered to be in a housing deficit
          situation. For Component 1, eligible households will present evidence of owning
          the land on which the home will be built, pursuant to local legislation. For
          Component 2, eligible households will provide evidence of a mortgage credit
          access note and/or sufficient savings. Eligibility is determined individually per
          household, and the subsidy is awarded in accordance with the mode of
          presentation of the application.
1.33      Household prioritization. With more eligible households than subsidies, the
          provincial directorates will prioritize households on the basis of specific
          vulnerability indicators: the presence of elderly persons, minors, female heads of
          household, persons with disabilities, victims of domestic or sexual violence, and/or
          persons belonging to indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian or Montubio ethnic groups,
          according to the program Operating Regulations. Moreover, no less than 6% of
          total of program subsidies will be awarded to households with persons with
          disabilities,46 considering that the prevalence of disability in Ecuador is 5.64%.47
          Similarly, no less than 22% will benefit women heads of household, given that
          21.6% of all households in poverty or extreme poverty are headed by women.48 In
          all cases, women will be included on the homes’ titles of ownership.
1.34      Territorial eligibility and prioritization. All of Ecuador’s provinces and cantons
          will be eligible to participate in the program. Priority will be given to the territories
          with the greatest needs according to the level of poverty and vulnerability of their
          population.
C.        Key results indicators
1.35      At the impact level, achievement of the first operation’s objectives will be measured
          by indicators attributed to: (i) improvements in the levels of health in the rural
          areas; (ii) reduction in the time devoted to unpaid work in vulnerable households;
          (iii) reduction in household spending on electricity and water; and (iv) saving on
          water and construction material energy.
1.36      At the outcome level, achievement of this operation’s objectives will be measured
          through the following: (i) a reduction in the housing deficit49 for the rural population
          within the corresponding social register, especially in households with specific
          vulnerability indicators; (ii) a reduction in the housing deficit for the urban


45   The first income quintile corresponds to household income of US$257 per month and the second to
     US$460 (National Survey of Employment, Unemployment and Underemployment, latest edition 2017).
46   In loan 2797/OC-EC, 4% of the total amount (roughly US$3.3 million) was used to support households
     containing persons with disabilities (optional link 5).
47   INEC (2010).
48   SENPLADES, March 2019.
49   This indicator checks that the subsidies received have been used to build a house in accordance with the
     program specifications.
                                           - 12 -




       population within the corresponding social register; and (iii) improvement of
       MIDUVI institutional processes.
1.37   The program’s economic analysis was untertaken by means of an analysis of the
       costs and benefit expected under Components 1 and 2. Considering a period of
       20 years and a discount rate of 12%, the net present value of program benefits is
       almost US$133 million, with an internal rate of return of 22.4%, and a benefit-cost
       ratio of 1.63 (optional link 1).

                      II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.     Financing instruments
2.1    Rationale for the CCLIP. A sector CCLIP is proposed for an amount of up to
       US$200 million, with a term of five years, through two individual operations. The
       Ecuadorian government has requested that MIDUVI serve as executing agency of
       the CCLIP and of each of the individual operations. MIDUVI satisfies all the
       eligibility requirements established for the CCLIP (document GN-2246-9) and the
       Operational Guidelines (paragraph 3.6 of document GN-2246-11), since:
       (i) MIDUVI has solid experience executing IDB-financed projects (paragraph 1.16),
       and it has successfully executed at least two similar projects with the Bank in the
       housing and social sector over the last five years (loans 2279/OC-EC and
       2797/OC-EC); (ii) in both projects: (a) the overall performance of execution and
       progress in achieving the expected outcomes were satisfactory; (b) the borrower
       and the executing agency fulfilled the terms of the loan contract; (c) the financial
       and operating reports, including the audited financial statements, and reports on
       accounts, budget execution, and operational management, were prepared and
       submitted on time and have an acceptable level of quality in terms of financial
       management and operational control of the projects; and (d) the operation and
       maintenance of the investments made and completed with project funding are
       adequate; (iii) the Bank has verified MIDUVI’s institutional soundness, which
       makes it possible to assume that this satisfactory performance will be maintained
       during execution of the first operation under the CCLIP; and (iv) the areas of action
       of the CCLIP are aligned with the Country Strategy and its objective of
       consolidating social progress.
2.2    The sector CCLIP is a strategic instrument for providing sustained financial and
       technical support to the national housing policy. It will thus make it possible to
       consolidate over two decades of Bank support to the housing sector and to
       MIDUVI, its lead agency. The CCLIP will also streamline the process of preparing
       subsequent operations, thus decreasing their transaction costs. It will also help
       mitigate the risk of an increase in the poverty rate, which was an issue identified in
       the country strategy.
2.3    The Bank has agreed with the Government of Ecuador that the first operation
       under the sector CCLIP will be a Specific Investment Loan (ESP) for up to
       US$174,608,000, of which US$93.9 million will come from a loan financed from
       the Bank’s Ordinary Capital resources; US$80 million will come from AFD under a
       Parallel Cofinancing with Services agreement, and US$708,000 will be a local
       contribution (paragraph 1.25). The funds contributed by AFD to this operation will
       also be governed by the program Operating Regulations. The Bank will charge
                                               - 13 -




         AFD a fee of US$376,185 for the services it would be providing in its capacity as
         lead cofinancier. The Bank’s Board of Executive Directors has been asked that this
         service fee be distributed among the divisions that will execute the operation in
         order to cover implementation costs. A cost center will be set up for this purpose.

                               Table 2. Estimated program costs (US$ million)
                                                                         AFD parallel
                   Components                          IDB      Local                 Total     %
                                                                         cofinancing
 Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of a new home on own land in rural and urban areas
 Subsidies for housing construction                      39.0        0.0        35.0     74.0     42.2
 Subsidies for water connection                           3.6        0.0          3.0     6.6      3.9
 Subsidy for administrative and legal expenses            1.4        0.0          2.0     3.4      2.0
 Total Component 1                                       44.0        0.0        40.0     84.0     48.1
 Component 2. Partial subsidies for the purchase of an urban home
 Subsidies for home purchase                             44.0        0.0        40.0     84.0     48.1
 Component 3. MIDUVI strengthening
 Support for MIDUVI                                       3.9       0.47          0.0    4.37      2.5
 Total Component 3                                        3.9       0.47          0.0    4.37      2.5
 Other costs
 Administration                                           1.2       0.14          0.0    1.34      0.8
 Evaluation and monitoring                                0.5       0.06          0.0    0.56      0.3
 Audits                                                   0.3       0.04          0.0    0.33      0.3
 Total other costs                                        2.0       0.23          0.0    2.23      1.3
 Total                                                   93.9      0.708         80.0 174.608    100.0
Sums rounded to the nearest decimal.

 2.4     Deadline and disbursement schedule. The disbursement period will be five
         years from the signing of the loan contract, according to the following schedule:

                             Table 3. Disbursement schedule (US$ million)
   Financing source       Year 1         Year 2      Year 3       Year 4     Year 5       Total
          IDB            26,597,628    37,604,226   24,447,346   4,781,000   469,800    93,900,000
         Local               23,715       288,507      293,682      45,720    56,376       708,000
    AFD cofinancing      24,000,000    24,000,000   16,000,000  16,000,000         -    80,000,000
         Total           50,621,343    61,892,733   40,741,027  20,826,720   526,176   174,608,000
        % IDB                 28.3%        40.0%        26.0%         5.1%     0.5%          100%
       % Local                 3.3%        40.7%        41.5%         6.5%     8.0%          100%
   % AFD cofinancing          30.0%        30.0%        20.0%        20.0%         -         100%


 B.      Environmental and social risks
 2.5     In accordance with the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy
         (Operational Policy OP-703), the first operation is classified as a “B.13” operation,
         which means that neither environmental and social analyses nor consultations are
         required. Potential environmental, social, health, and safety impacts associated
         with the program are considered to be minor. Effective mitigation measures
         already exist, mainly through compliance with applicable local regulations and with
         a long list of exclusions (required link 3). The operation does not involve household
         resettlement.
                                           - 14 -




C.    Fiduciary risks
2.6   A medium risk is identified in the potential for delays in program disbursements
      owing to insufficient budget appropriation and/or the lack of an audit firm to verify
      compliance with the criteria governing the award and use of subsidies. As a
      mitigation measure, MIDUVI will: (i) take steps with the MEF to ensure budgetary
      appropriations are received on a timely basis; and (ii) contract an audit firm to
      perform the annual financial audits and the periodic verifications on subsidies, from
      the start of the program and throughout its execution.
D.    Other risks and key issues
2.7   There are two public management risks: (i) a medium risk associated with
      inadequate targeting of the subsidies; to mitigate this risk, the program will include
      all the eligibility criteria in the program Operating Regulations and work with the
      MIES to identify vulnerable households; and (ii) a high risk associated with
      MIDUVI’s limited capacity to monitor and evaluate the outcomes of the
      interventions; to mitigate this monitoring risk and strengthen MIDUVI monitoring
      and evaluation capacity, the following measures will be adopted: (a) independent
      audits under previously agreed-upon procedures, including the delivery of
      guarantees by the executing agencies; (b) financial audits of the program; and
      (c) sample-based inspections of the quality of the homes built. In addition, a
      fiduciary specialist will be included on the MIDUVI management team. The project
      team also identified a medium macroeconomic risk in Component 2, relating to the
      potential lack of interest among financial institutions in granting credits if resource
      availability is uncertain. To mitigate this, the program Operating Regulations will
      include legal mechanisms to guarantee the availability of resources, such as
      setting up a trust to manage them (for further details, see Annex III, 7.7).
2.8   Technical analysis of the projects. The homes built with the program’s subsidies
      will meet the SDG criteria: adequate materials and construction; access to drinking
      water, electricity, and sanitation services; fewer than three people per room; and
      a kitchen separated from bedrooms. The homes will also be universally accessible
      and adapted to the bioclimatic conditions of each region (coast, highlands, Amazon
      region, and Galápagos). They will also fulfill construction specifications that
      demonstrate savings in terms of energy and water consumption, and also energy
      savings in the materials used; and they can only be located on land that satisfies
      the criteria specified in the environmental and social management report (ESMR)
      (required link 3). MIDUVI will issue regulations governing the project qualification
      process and the validation of housing typologies and generic plans. All these
      requirements will be included in the program Operating Regulations.
2.9   Analysis of housing costs. An analysis of minimum construction costs in rural
      and urban areas, for single-family and multi-family housing typologies, has verified
      the viability of producing a home according to the program’s costs; below which it
      would be impossible to build a home with the required specifications (optional
      link 11).
                                          - 15 -




                   III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1   Execution. MIDUVI will serve as executing agency and will appoint a full-time
      management team for the program, based at its headquarters. The team will
      consist of six people: a general coordinator and specialists in management and
      finance, housing construction, data management and procurement, low-income
      housing, and inclusion of persons with disabilities. Pursuant to Executive
      Decree 681, MIDUVI may use public firms to build the homes planned under
      Component 1. The program Operating Regulations will specify the conditions
      required for such firms to participate.
3.2   Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: The
      executing agency will present evidence, to the Bank’s satisfaction, that:
      (i) the management team that will operate out of the executing agency’s
      headquarters has been appointed, in accordance with the profiles and terms
      of reference contained in the program Operating Regulations; and (ii) the
      Operating Regulations have been approved and entered into force, under the
      terms previously agreed upon with the Bank. The first condition ensures an
      efficient start of program execution; and the second is critical because the program
      Operating Regulations will contain the technical and operational guidelines needed
      to ensure proper project execution.
3.3   MIDUVI headquarters will be responsible for: (i) administering the loan proceeds
      and supervising fiduciary issues; (ii) planning execution of the loan, preparing the
      annual work plans (AWPs), and updating the procurement plan; (iii) procuring and
      supervising consulting and nonconsulting services, goods, and works;
      (iv) supervising and monitoring the progress of program execution; (v) preparing
      and processing payments; (vi) preparing financial statements and disbursement
      requests: (vii) maintaining and monitoring the data system; (viii) evaluating the
      program’s impact; and (ix) supervising compliance with the program Operating
      Regulations, etc. The provincial directorates will be responsible for: (i) managing
      the subsidies using the SIIDUVI and registering potential beneficiaries;
      (ii) supervising compliance with the program Operating Regulations in coordination
      with MUDIVI headquarters; and (iii) monitoring the quality of the homes built.
3.4   Procurement. The procurement processes under Component 3 will follow the
      Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American
      Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and
      Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank
      (document GN-2350-9).
3.5   Annual work plan. The program components will be implemented according to
      the AWP. This will contain the program’s physical and financial targets and will
      form the basis for periodic program status reviews.
3.6   Program Operating Regulations. Everything related to program implementation
      will be guided by the program Operating Regulations, which will include the
      following: (i) institutional capacities required of the executing agency; (ii) process
      of awarding and delivering subsidies, including beneficiary eligibility and
      prioritization; (iii) PEV selection and qualification processes; (iv) minimum
                                                     - 16 -




          construction and urban standards; (v) procurement and supervision processes;
          (vi) specific implementation arrangements for each component; (vii) fiduciary
          agreements and requirements (Annex III); and (viii) environmental and social
          requirements (required link 3).
3.7       Retroactive financing and recognition of expenditures. The Bank may
          retroactively finance up to US$18.78 million (20% of the proposed loan amount),
          from the loan proceeds, and recognize up to US$141,600 from the local
          contribution (20% of the estimated counterpart contribution), for eligible expenses
          incurred by the borrower prior to the loan approval date. To be eligible, such
          expenses will relate to subsidies awarded to eligible households, as defined in the
          program Operating Regulations, and will satisfy requirements substantially similar
          to those specified in the loan contract. The expenses in question will have been
          incurred on or after 28 January 2019 (the project profile approval date), but will
          under no circumstances include expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior
          to the loan approval date.
3.8       Delivery of homes. To deliver the home, a delivery and occupancy document will
          be drawn up and signed by MIDUVI, the PEV, and the beneficiary, pursuant to the
          program Operating Regulations. This will contain the certificate of habitability, the
          obligations of the beneficiary to occupy and not sell or assign the house for five
          years, the policy that guarantees the quality of the works and protection of the
          beneficiary for ten years, the grounds on which the home can be returned, the
          deed of ownership and the certification of constitution of unattachable family
          patrimony, as established in the Ecuadorian Civil Code. MIDUVI will be responsible
          for overseeing proper use of the homes.
3.9       Financial management and audits. Financial management will adhere to the
          Financial      Management        Guidelines       for     IDB-financed     Projects
          (document OP-273-6). Annual audited financial statements will be requested,
          within 120 days following the close of each fiscal year, or 120 days from the date
          of the last disbursement in the case of the final audit. The terms of reference will
          also include independent and concurrent validation of compliance with the
          requirements for awarding subsidies and the delivery of the homes, as specified in
          the program Operating Regulations. The audits will include the payments financed
          by AFD50 under Components 1 and 2, as provided for in the parallel cofinancing
          with services agreement between AFD and the Bank. Greater flexibility will be
          permitted in the percentage to be justified in order to request new disbursements,
          and this percentage will be 70%51 (permanent flexibility) rather than 80%, pursuant
          to document OP-273-6 (Annex I, 2.4 and 3.3).
B.        Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.10      Monitoring arrangements. Program progress will be monitored through six
          instruments: (i) semiannual execution status reports for each output, prepared by
          MIDUVI and analyzed jointly with the Bank within 60 days following the end of the

50   The contribution of funds by AFD increases the number of households benefitted under Components 1
     and 2 of this operation. However, the achievement of the operation’s objectives is not dependent on these
     funds, since Components 1 and 2 can be scaled, and Component 3 is financed in its entirety by the IDB.
51   AFD will also establish this percentage for accountability of advances in order to make a new
     disbursement.
                                           - 17 -




       six-month period, according to the schedule agreed upon between the Bank and
       MIDUVI; (ii) financial audits using agreed-upon procedures, performed by an
       independent firm acceptable to the Bank; (iii) sample-based inspection of the
       works executed, by MIDUVI; (iv) technical audits by the Bank, which will include
       inspections of the quality of the homes built (in addition, MIDUVI will present an
       updated AWP and procurement plan every year, 30 days prior to the end of the
       Bank’s fiscal year); (v) quarterly execution reports; and (vi) a final report prepared
       by MIDUVI, which will be submitted to the Bank within 90 days following the last
       justification of funds for the program’s first operation.
3.11   The monitoring of the outputs of Components 1 and 2 will be broken down by
       component, location, gender of the head of household, and vulnerability indicators.
       The progress of the actions to strengthen MIDUVI will be measured with a binary
       indicator for each action implemented.
3.12   Arrangements for evaluation of results. A midterm evaluation will be performed
       to verify that the program is proceeding properly and to make improvements if
       necessary. Given the mismatch that exists between the subsidy disbursement and
       housebuilding periods; the evaluation will start when 25% of the subsidies have
       been delivered, and it will conclude before 50% of them have been disbursed.
3.13   In addition, a quasi-experimental final evaluation will be undertaken to measure
       the program’s impact. The evaluation’s strategy will include a difference-in-
       differences methodology with matching, in which the variation is measured with
       respect to beneficiary households living in a new home, versus beneficiary
       households still living in deficient housing. This evaluation will be done by an
       independent consultant, financed by the IDB. This evaluation will be presented
       180 days after the last program disbursement. The evaluation will include lessons
       learned and specific recommendations for the design of future operations
       (supplementing that of operation EC-L1113) and will specify impacts on
       environmental sustainability and outcomes in the women-headed households and
       those including persons with disabilities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Annex I - EC-L1245
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 1




                                                                                 Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                          Summary
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
1. IDB Development Objectives                                                                                                                        Yes


                                                                                                      -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                      -Gender Equality and Diversity
   Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes
                                                                                                      -Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability




                                                                                                      -Reduction of emissions with support of IDBG financing (annual million tons CO2 e)*
                                                                                                      -Beneficiaries of targeted anti-poverty programs (#)*
                                                                                                      -Households benefitting from housing solutions (#)*
                                                                                                      -Jobs created by supported firms (#)*
                                                                                                      -Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*
                                                                                                      -Households with new or upgraded access to drinking water (#)*
                                                                                                      -Households with new or upgraded access to sanitation (#)*
   Country Development Results Indicators                                                             -Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and
                                                                                                      managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*
                                                                                                      -Households with wastewater treatment (#)*
                                                                                                      -Households with solid waste disposed in a sanitary landfill (#)*
                                                                                                      -Households protected from flood risk (#)*
                                                                                                      -Households with new or improved access to electricity supply (#)*
                                                                                                      -Urban rail and bus mass transit systems built or upgraded (km)*




2. Country Development Objectives                                                                                                                    Yes


   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                             GN-2924             Financing for low-income housing




   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                              GN-2948             The intervention is included in the 2019 Operational Program.



 Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
 strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                                        Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                               9.5
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                            3.0
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                                          4.0
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                                       2.5
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                                          9.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                                   3.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                                 3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                                       1.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                                         2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                              0.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                         10.0
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                                        2.5
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                              7.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                                   Low
                                Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                                        Yes
                                    Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks
                       Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                           B.13
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                                   Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and
                                                                                                                                   Reporting, External Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                      Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)                Yes
                                                                                                                                   Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison,
                                                                                                                                   Contracting Individual Consultant, National Public Bidding.



                                                                                                                                   Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and
                                                                                      Non-Fiduciary               Yes
                                                                                                                                   Evaluation National System.


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                                  Yes                                                0
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project



Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.


The objectives of the CCLIP are: (i) to expand the access to affordable, sustainable and universally accessible housing of Ecuadorian households in housing deficit and in a situation of
poverty or vulnerability; and (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Government of Ecuador to generate and implement long-term housing policies. The specific objectives of the First Individual
Operation of the CCLIP "Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable Households" are: (i) to reduce the quantitative housing deficit among households in rural and urban-marginal areas of the two
bottom quintiles of income in the country, prioritizing specific vulnerability indicators; (ii) same as the first, but focused on households in urban areas; and (iii) optimize the institutional
processes of MIDUVI.

The project presents a complete diagnosis; with an accurate description of the current situation of the housing deficit in Ecuador. The results indicators included in the results matrix are
SMART and have means of verification.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) and focused on expected benefits related to the valuation of real estate assets and the profitability
of the housing market. The CBA has reasonable assumptions, uses a rigorous methodology and has an adequate sensitivity analysis. The analysis concludes that the project is economically
viable, with an IRR of 22.4%, using a discount rate of 12%.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is in line with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured according to several
approaches: an experimental evaluation, a difference-in-differences analysis, and matching.
                                                                                                                                                              Annex II
                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 6


                                                                       RESULTS MATRIX

Project objectives:   The general objectives of the sector CCLIP are to: (i) improve access for Ecuadorian households living in a situation of poverty or vulnerability
                      and without adequate housing, to affordable, sustainable, and universally accessible housing; and (ii) strengthen the capacity of the
                      Government of Ecuador to generate and implement long-term housing policies. The specific objectives of the first operation are to: (i) reduce
                      the quantitative housing deficit among households belonging to the country’s two lowest income quintiles, living in rural areas, prioritizing those
                      with specific vulnerability indicators; (ii) idem, but targeted on urban households; and (iii) optimize the institutional processes of the Ministry of
                      Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI).


                                                                         EXPECTED IMPACT

                           Unit of                      Baseline                        Means of
    Indicators                           Baseline                    Final target                                                        Comments
                         measure                          year                         verification
Impact 1: Health improvement among the beneficiary rural households
Presence of acute Children under          19.5%           2020      To be defined Impact evaluation                19.5% of children under in the poorest quintile
diarrheal disease five years of age                                                survey applied to               suffered from ADD, (Survey of Living Conditions
(ADD)                with ADD / Total                                                treatment and                 2013-2014).
                     children under                                                   control group                Access to a cement floor and drinking water service
                     five years of age                                                                             are the key factors in reducing childhood ADD.
                     (annual)
Impact 2: Reduction in time spent on unpaid work in the beneficiary vulnerable households
Time spent on        Hours per week       9 hours         2020      To be defined Impact evaluation                The universal-access design improves the autonomy
unpaid work by the                                                                 survey applied to               and mobility of minors, the elderly, and persons with
head of household                                                                    treatment and                 disabilities; and it also reduces the risks of falls and
                                                                                      control group                accidents. This means that their caregivers have time
                                                                                                                   for other activities. Unpaid work in the home includes
                                                                                                                   caring for relatives and domestic chores. Caring for
                                                                                                                   dependents in the home takes nine hours per week
                                                                                                                   (Survey of the Use of Time 2012).
Impact 3: Reduction in housing expenses among the beneficiary households
Savings on water      US$ per month   Standardized     2020      20% reduction                Impact evaluation    A 55 gallon tank of water (US$0.80 and US$2) costs
and electricity bills                    average                                              survey applied to    3 to 6 times more than obtaining water from the public
                                        household                                               treatment and      network.
                                       expenditure                                               control group     A house with electricity bill of US$40 per month (50%
                                        within the                                                                 for lighting), could be reduced by 40% by replacing
                                      social register                                                              200W incandescent bulbs with 20W energy savers, at
                                      corresponding                                                                US$0.1 per kWh.
                                          to the                                                                   The target reduction of 20% reflects the fact that
                                       component                                                                   improving access to water and electricity also tends
                                                                                                                   to increase their use.
Annex II
Page 2 of 6


                              Unit of                       Baseline                          Means of
        Indicators                           Baseline                    Final target                                             Comments
                            measure                           year                           verification
    Impact 4: Energy, water, and energy savings in construction materials
    Energy savings            MJ/m2             EDGE          2020     20% reduction         EDGE data       Energy “incorporated” into construction materials: the
    incorporated into                      (Excellence in                                                    buildings will use materials that have consumed less
    the construction                         design for                                                      energy in their manufacture and transportation. Thus,
    materials                                  greater                                                       once built, there will be 20% saving on energy
                                            efficiencies)                                                    expenditure associated with the manufacture and
                                                data**                                                       transportation of the materials used.
                                                                                                             This is associated with the use of local materials in
                                                                                                             rural housing.
                                                                                                             The 20% energy savings in the materials will be
                                                                                                             measured relative to the baseline.

                                                                     EXPECTED OUTCOMES

                                Unit of                        Baseline    Intermediate                           Means of
        Indicators                               Baseline                                   Final target                                  Comments2
                               measure                           year         target1                            verification
    Specific objective 1: Reduction of the quantitative housing deficit among the rural population of the country’s two lowest income quintiles, prioritizing
    those with specific vulnerability indicators
    Outcome 1.1: Reduction of the housing deficit in rural areas
    Number of                 Number of             0            2019            --             2,404        Delivery-acceptance By vulnerability status.
    beneficiary               households                                                                          certificates
    households with
    new homes built
    according to the
    program Operating
    Regulations
    Outcome 1.2: Better access to water services
    Percentage of             Number of            0%            2019          100%             100%         Delivery-acceptance Idem.
    homes delivered        homes delivered                                                                        certificates
    that are connected          that are
    to domestic drinking     connected to
    water service              domestic
                            drinking water
                            service / Total
                               number of
                           homes delivered




1     Intermediate target measured when 50% of program funds have been disbursed.
2
      The numbers should be reported by vulnerability status.
                                                                                                                                                Annex II
                                                                                                                                              Page 3 of 6


                           Unit of                   Baseline           Intermediate                          Means of
    Indicators                            Baseline                                       Final target                                   Comments2
                          measure                      year                target1                           verification
Outcome 1.3: Increase in property titling
% of homes            Number of new         0%         2019                100%             100%          Municipal records     Idem.
delivered, with full   homes titled /
property titles      Total number of
                        new homes
% of property titles     Number of          0%         2019                 57%             57%           Municipal records     57% of households that are
in the name of       property titles in                                                                                         eligible under the social
women or shared         the name of                                                                                             register are headed by
with their partner       women or                                                                                               women, or by women jointly
                     shared with their                                                                                          with their partners.
                      partner / Total
                         number of
                       property titles
                          delivered
Outcome 1.4: Reduction of household energy consumption
Efficient use of     kWh consumed           88.9       2012                  50              50            Ministry of Urban  Baseline of the Environmental
electric energy           (monthly)                                                                       Development and     Information Module of the
                                                                                                          Housing (MIDUVI)    National Survey of
                                                                                                         records (through the Employment, Unemployment,
                                                                                                           Energy Ministry)   and Underemployment
                                                                                                                              (ENEMDU 2012); Monthly
                                                                                                                              electricity consumption –
                                                                                                                              Rural.
                                                                                                                              The intermediate result is the
                                                                                                                              same as the final outcome
                                                                                                                              because savings are
                                                                                                                              expected in each home
                                                                                                                              delivered.
Specific objective 2: Reduction in the quantitative housing deficit among the urban population of the country’s two lowest income quintiles
Outcome 2.1: Reduction of the housing deficit among low-income households in the urban area
Number of                Number of               0           2019            --            7,333        Delivery-acceptance
beneficiary                homes                                                                             certificates
households with
new homes built
according to the
program Operating
Regulations
Outcome 2.2: Reduction of the energy consumption of affordable housing
Efficient use of          Monthly             155.4          2012           100             100          MIDUVI records       Baseline of the Environmental
electric energy        consumption in                                                                                         Information Module of
                            kWh                                                                                               ENEMDU 2012; Monthly
                                                                                                                              electricity consumption-
                                                                                                                              Urban.
Annex II
Page 4 of 6


                            Unit of                         Baseline    Intermediate                          Means of
      Indicators                             Baseline                                   Final target                                       Comments2
                           measure                            year         target1                           verification
 Specific objective 3: Optimize MIDUVI institutional processes
 Simplification of the    Time taken      To be defined      2019       To be defined   To be defined       MIDUVI records
 beneficiary               (minutes)
 registration process
 Simplification of the       idem              idem          2019           idem              idem              idem
 registration process
 for housing
 developers and
 builders (PEVs)
 Simplification of the       idem              idem          2019           idem              idem              idem
 procedure for
 technical verification
 of land parcels

                                                                        OUTPUTS

                                                                                                               2024
                            Unit of                 Baseline                                                                 Means of
        Outputs                         Baseline                 2020        2021       2022         2023      Final                           Comments
                           measure                    year                                                                  verification
                                                                                                              target
 Component 1. Subsidies for new house building on own land in rural and urban areas
 Number of subsidies         Subsidies    0        2019        962        721           962             -      2,404    MIDUVI records
 awarded.
 Number of additional        Subsidies    0        2019        962        721           962             -      2,404    MIDUVI records
 subsidies for
 connection to piped
 water delivered on
 land without services.
 Number of additional        Subsidies    0        2019        962        721           962             -      2,404    MIDUVI records
 subsidies for titling
 processes in
 households with
 vulnerability indicators.
 Subindicator:               Number of    0        2019        159        212           159                    22%      MIDUVI records      Subindicator.
 Percentage of               subsidies                                                                                                      21.6% of
 subsidies awarded to       awarded to                                                                                                      households in
 female heads of               women                                                                                                        poverty or
 household.                   heads of                                                                                                      extreme poverty
                            household /                                                                                                     are headed by
                           Total number                                                                                                     women (Living
                            of subsidies                                                                                                    Conditions
                              awarded                                                                                                       Survey, 2014).
                                                                                                                               Annex II
                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 6


                                                                                                2024
                           Unit of                   Baseline                                             Means of
      Outputs                             Baseline              2020    2021    2022    2023    Final                       Comments
                          measure                      year                                              verification
                                                                                               target
Subindicator:             Number of          0        2019       43      58      43              6%     MIDUVI records   Subindicator. The
Percentage of             subsidies                                                                                      prevalence of
subsidies awarded to     awarded to                                                                                      disability in
households containing    households                                                                                      Ecuador is 5.64%;
persons with              containing                                                                                     the rate is higher
disabilities.           persons with                                                                                     among
                         disabilities /                                                                                  households living
                        Total number                                                                                     in poverty
                         of subsidies                                                                                    (National Institute
                           awarded                                                                                       of Statistics of
                                                                                                                         Ecuador – INEC
                                                                                                                         2010).
Component 2. Partial subsidies for urban home purchases
Number of subsidies         Number of      0       2019         2,200   2,933   1,467   733    7,333        idem
awarded for home            subsidies
purchase.
Subindicator:               Number of      0       2019         484     645     323     161    22%      MIDUVI records   Subindicator
Percentage of               subsidies
subsidies awarded to       awarded to
female heads of               women
household.                   heads of
                           household /
                          Total number
                           of subsidies
                             awarded
Subindicator:               Number of      0       2019         132     176      88      44     6%      MIDUVI records   Subindicator.
Percentage of               subsidies
subsidies awarded for      awarded to
households with            households
people with disabilities.  with people
                               with
                           disabilities /
                          Total number
                            subsidies
                             awarded
Annex II
Page 6 of 6


                                                                                          2024
                           Unit of                Baseline                                           Means of
        Outputs                        Baseline              2020   2021   2022   2023    Final                        Comments
                          measure                   year                                            verification
                                                                                         target
 Component 3: MIDUVI strengthening
 Integrated Urban            Systems      0        2019       1                                   SIIDUVI reports   To be
 Development and                                                                                  on households     implemented in
 Housing Information                                                                              registered and    year 1.
 System (SIIDUVI 1)                                                                               subsidies
 modules: Access to                                                                               awarded
 housing; and feasibility
 and viability analysis
 (access, registration,
 eligibility, qualification,
 prioritization,
 allocation, and award
 of subsidies to
 beneficiaries,
 registration of builders/
 developers, and
 qualification and
 registration of low-
 income housing
 projects).
 SIIDUVI 2 Land bank         Systems      0        2019       1                                   SIIDUVI reports   idem
 modules: Construction                                                                               on PEVs
 issues and financing
 models (land bank,
 cartographic data,
 accessibility, and
 environmental risks.
 Monitoring of house
 construction and
 inspection, types of
 subsidies).
 SIIDUVI 3 Habitat           Systems      0        2019       1                                   SIIDUVI reports   idem
 formation and                                                                                    on land parcels
 monitoring and control
 modules. (Monitoring of
 the delivery of homes
 and observance of
 norms of coexistence).
                                                                                 Annex III
                                                                               Page 1 of 8




                     FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS


 Country:                Ecuador
 Project number:         EC-L1245
 Project name:           Housing Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable Households
 Executing agency:       Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI)
 Prepared by:            Carolina Escudero and Juan Carlos Dugand (FMP/CEC)


                              I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

      The fiduciary agreements for the program’s procurement and financial
      management take account of: (i) the country’s fiduciary context; (ii) an evaluation
      of fiduciary risks; (iii) supervision activities for the loans executed by MIDUVI;
      (iv) an analysis of MIDUVI’s institutional capacity; and (v) inputs from meetings
      held with the teams and entities involved in project execution.

                      II. THE COUNTRY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT

      Country procurement system. On 13 May 2014 the Ministry of Economy and
      Finance (MEF), the National Public Procurement Service (SERCOP – the
      governing body), and the Bank signed the Agreement on the Use of the National
      Public Procurement System of the Republic of Ecuador (SNCP) in IDB-financed
      projects. Section 3.2 of this agreement provides for the SNCP to be used in seven
      projects, and for its use to be gradually expanded. The agreement is based on
      document GN-2680-2, approved by the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors.
      Financial management system. Central government agencies use the online
      Integrated Financial Management System (e-SIGEF), which integrates budget,
      accounting, and cash management processes. Government entities are subject to
      control and supervision by the Office of the Comptroller General (CGE). In general,
      the national financial management systems display an adequate level of
      development, but they need to be complemented for the execution Bank-financed
      projects, with respect to financial reports with nonaccounting records and external
      auditing by audit firms acceptable to the Bank. The government plans to replace
      e-SIGEF with a new system in 2020.

                 III. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT

3.1   MIDUVI will serve as executing agency; and, in some housing segments, it may
      be supported by state-owned enterprises (SOEs), the Casa para Todos program
      (CPT) and Ecuador Estratégico, which are attached to MIDUVI.
3.2   MIDUVI has served as executing agency in IDB-financed programs since 1997.
      The National Urban Development Program (loan 2679/OC-EC) and the National
      Social Housing Program – Stage II (loan 2797/OC-EC) have both recently
Annex III
Page 2 of 8




         completed execution. The Ministry is also responsible for a component of the
         Support Program for the Social Inclusion of People with Disabilities in Ecuador
         (loan 4634/OC-EC), which is currently in execution.
3.3      MIDUVI executes Bank-financed programs through its internal administrative
         structure; but, it requires staff to support procurement, financial management, and
         planning and monitoring tasks.
3.4      MIDUVI uses the country procurement systems and records in the public
         procurement portal; and it uses the national e-SIGEF system for financial
         management. It has an internal control unit and is subject to CGE external
         oversight.
3.5      The IDB-funded programs have mainly financed demand subsidies for low-income
         housing; and they have included provisions for external auditing firms to verify the
         fulfillment of subsidy award criteria and compliance with the program Operating
         Regulations.
3.6      This operation has parallel financing from the French Development Agency (AFD),
         under a framework agreement signed between AFD and the Bank. Under the
         parallel cofinancing with services agreement, the Bank will provide services to AFD
         for the housing segments that it will finance jointly with AFD. As parallel financing
         is involved, each institution will apply its own procurement policies.

                IV. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS

         A medium risk is identified in the potential for delays in program disbursements
         owing to insufficient budget appropriation and/or the lack of an audit firm to verify
         compliance with the criteria governing the award and use of the subsidies. As a
         mitigation measure: (i) MIDUVI will take the necessary steps with the MEF to
         ensure budgetary appropriations are received on a timely basis; and (ii) it will
         contract an audit firm to perform the annual financial audits and the periodic
         verifications on subsidies, from the start of program execution until loan closure.

V. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS OR THE PROGRAM
                           OPERATING REGULATIONS

         There are no specific considerations to be included in the special provisions of the
         loan contract.
         The program Operating Regulations will specify the following: (i) Advances of
         funds will be made to cover a period of up to 12 months, instead of six; and the
         percentage justification needed to request a new disbursement will be 70%1
         (permanent flexibility), instead of 80%, pursuant to Annex I, 2.4 and 3.3 of
         document OP-273-6; and (ii) the audit firm that will conduct the annual financial
         audits and the periodic verifications on the subsidies will be contracted from the
         start of the program and throughout execution, including the loan closure period.



1   AFD would also require the same percentage of previous fund advances to be justified before making a
    new disbursement.
                                                                                                   Annex III
                                                                                                 Page 3 of 8




          VI. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

         Execution of Component 3 procurement. The procurement plan will be updated
         at least once a year, through the Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA).
         The main program procurement items are shown in Table 2.
         a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services:2 These
            contracts will require international competitive bidding (ICB),3 as per Table 1,
            and will use the Bank’s Standard Bidding Documents.
         b. Selection and contracting of consulting services (firms): These will be
            executed using the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals, and any of the
            methods described in the policies for selecting and contracting consultants
            may be used. Table 1 indicates the threshold for including international
            consultants on the shortlist.4
         c. Selection of individual consultants: These will abide by the provisions of the
            policies for selecting and contracting consultants, Section V (paragraphs 5.1-
            5.4).
         d. Selection of service providers (individuals): Some professionals will be
            hired on a contract basis for systems development and technical services;
            cadaster and management of land banks; beneficiary registration and
            monitoring, onsite works supervision; and business analytics. In view of the
            number of professionals needed, in conjunction with the characteristics and
            geographic dispersion of the services in question, the national “Service
            Delivery Contractors” method is applicable, pursuant to paragraph 3.21 of the
            policies for selecting and contracting consultants (document GN-2350-9). The
            corresponding verification and control procedure and mechanisms will be
            included in the program Operating Regulations.
         e. Use of country procurement system: Application of the SNCP5 will be
            included as an addendum to the agreement mentioned in paragraph 2.1.
         f.   Retroactive financing and recognition of expenditures: The Bank may
              retroactively finance up to US$18.78 million (20% of the proposed loan
              amount), from the loan proceeds, and recognize up to US$141,600 from the
              local contribution (20% of the estimated counterpart contribution), for eligible
              expenses incurred by the borrower prior to the loan approval date. To be
              eligible, such expenses will relate to subsidies awarded to eligible households,
              as defined in the program Operating Regulations, and will satisfy requirements
              substantially similar to those specified in the loan contract. The expenses in
              question will have been incurred on or after 28 January 2019 (the project profile
              approval date), but will under no circumstances include expenditures incurred
              more than 18 months prior to the loan approval date.

2   According to document GN-2349-9, paragraph 1.1, nonconsulting services are treated as goods.
3   The ICB threshold is US$3 million or more for works and US$250,000 or more for goods.
4   When contracting consulting firms, the threshold is US$200,000 or more; for smaller amounts the shortlist
    may consist entirely of national consulting firms.
5   Should the Bank validate another system or subsystem, this will be applicable to the operation, as
    established in the loan agreement and in the agreement for the use of the country procurement system.
Annex III
Page 4 of 8




          g. Advance procurement eligible for financing. None foreseen.
          h. National preference: Bids for goods originating in the borrower’s country will
             have a 15% price preference6 in contracts subject to ICB.

                                        Table 1. Thresholds (US$)
                Works                                  Goods                            Consulting services
               National
                                                                                                        100%
              competitive                                                             International
    ICB                     Shopping         ICB           NCB          Shopping                       national
                bidding                                                                 publicity
                                                                                                       shortlist
                 (NCB)

              <3,000,000                                 < 250,000
>3,000,000                  < 250,000     >250,000                      < 50,000        >200,000      <200,000
               >250,000                                   >50,000


                                    Table 2. Main procurement items
                                                                              Estimated          Estimated
                                                             Selection
                       Activity                                                date of          amount (US$
                                                              method
                                                                               tender            thousand)
Consulting services (firms)
Maintenance and improvements of the existing                 Quality and
Integrated Urban Development and Housing                     cost-based             To be
                                                                                                      231
Information System (SIIDUVI)                                  selection            defined
                                                              (QCBS)
Development of new SIIDUVI and support                                              To be
                                                               QCBS                                   934
                                                                                   defined
Implementation of the National Land Bank in the                                     To be
                                                               QCBS                                   313
SIIDUVI                                                                            defined
Migration of the current SIIDUVI information system to                              To be
                                                               QCBS                                   262
the new system                                                                     defined
External training and tutorials to ensure adequate                                  To be
                                                               QCBS                                   217
implementation of the program                                                      defined
Strengthening of technical capacities for social                                    To be
                                                               QCBS                                   978
monitoring and field work                                                          defined
Financial audits                                                                    To be
                                                               QCBS                                   560
                                                                                   defined
Goods and nonconsulting services
Training of internal staff in the new program                                       To be
                                                              Shopping                                112
management model                                                                   defined
Individual consulting services
Six professionals to join the program management team         National
                                                             individual
                                                             consultant             To be
                                                                                                      672
                                                          selection based          defined
                                                          on qualifications
                                                               (NICQ)
Technical support for implementation and management           National
of cadastral systems and databases                            method:               To be
                                                                                                      952
                                                            Occasional             defined
                                                          service contract
Four consultants to conduct the evaluation of the
                                                                                    To be
National Land Management System (SINAT), midterm,                NICQ                                 700
                                                                                   defined
final and impact evaluation


6   Document GN-2349-9, Appendix II, and loan contract.
                                                                                                  Annex III
                                                                                                Page 5 of 8




         Procurement supervision. The procurement plan will specify the supervision
         method to be used by the Bank. Ex post reviews will be performed annually as
         established in Appendix 1 of the Policies, and will include physical inspections if
         the Bank considered such action warranted.

                                  Table 3. Threshold for ex post review (US$)
                                                                                            Individual
                  Works                   Goods            Consulting services
                                                                                           consultant
               < 3,000,000                <250,000                 < 200,000                 < 50,000
          Note: Defined in light of the executing agency’s fiduciary execution capacity. Thresholds may be
          altered if said capacity changes.


         Records and files. The executing agency will maintain the integrity and order of
         all files, organized independently by process and funding source.

           VII.     FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

         Programming and budget. The Organic Code of Planning and Public Finance
         (COPYFP) provides rules governing budgetary programming, formulation,
         approval, execution, control, evaluation, and reporting. These rules are applied to
         the execution of Bank-financed programs in Ecuador. The online integrated
         financial management system (e-SIGEF) and the new one being developed by the
         government, instrumentalize and standardize the application of these rules
         throughout national public administration. MIDUVI will incorporate and/or update
         the investment program if necessary7 to secure the respective budgetary
         appropriations.
         For the funds to be transferred by MIDUVI to the state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
         under Component 1, the budgets of the enterprises in question will include the
         income received and the payments to be made to housing developers or builders
         (PEVs), with authorization from their Boards of Directors.
         Accounting and information systems. Project accounts will be kept in e-SIGEF,
         or the system replacing it; and all program commitments and payments will be
         recorded therein. Nonaccounting records will be needed to generate the program’s
         financial reports. The nonaccounting records will include the payments made to
         the SOEs.
         Disbursements and cash flow. Since 2008, the Government of Ecuador has
         operated the National Single Treasury Account (CUT) as a way of unifying cash
         management across all central government entities. SOEs are not included in the
         CUT.
         The implementation of this mechanism did not eliminate the system of special or
         specific-purpose accounts, which are managed by the Central Bank of Ecuador
         (BCE) to receive financing from multilateral loans. The program will maintain an


7   The program is included in the Casa para Todos (CPT) program. The CPT has a ceiling of US$535 million
    for 2019, including all segments and funding sources (such as AFD and the bond issue under
    operation EC-U0001).
Annex III
Page 6 of 8




        exclusive account at the BCE, into which the loan proceeds will be disbursed, as
        well as several additional accounts, based on the needs of each component.
        In Component 1, MIDUVI will order fund transfers from the CUT to its participating
        SOEs. Each of these will have an exclusive bank account, separate from the
        accounts used for the firm’s ordinary business, from which they will pay 70% of the
        subsidy amount as an advance to the PEVs, with the remaining 30% payable upon
        delivery of the home to the beneficiary. MIDUVI will also be able to pay subsidies
        directly to the PEVs.
        In Component 2, if MIDUVI chooses to use a trust, it will order transfers from the
        CUT to a bank account held by the subsidy trust, in which the funds in question
        will be held while the subsidy payments are made to the financial institutions that
        make the mortgage loans to the beneficiaries. Should it not opt for a trust, MIDUVI
        will order the transfer of subsidies from the CUT directly to the accounts held by
        the financial institutions in question.
        Program payments in Component 3 will be executed through the e-SIGEF, or the
        new system, by debiting the CUT.
        The Bank will advance funds to satisfy the project’s actual liquidity needs, including
        the payment commitments of MIDUVI, the SOEs, and/or the Trust, pursuant to the
        financial plan. Considering the timeframes involved in the execution of
        Component 1, while MIDUVI (and/or the SOEs) hire the PEVs, the houses are built
        and delivered to the beneficiaries; the period for which the amount of the advance
        is estimated will be extended to 12 months, pursuant to document OP-273-6
        (Annex I, 2.4). If so requested by the borrower, the Bank may also make direct
        payments to suppliers or reimburse expenses. MIDUVI will manage program
        disbursements.
        For the reason indicated in the foregoing paragraph and to standardize procedures
        with AFD in its parallel financing, 70% of the amount of previous advances of funds
        will need to be justified before a new disbursement can be made (Permanent
        flexibility, pursuant to document OP-273-6, Annex I, 3.3, i).
        For Components 1 and 2, subsidies that have been awarded for the construction
        or purchase of homes that have already been delivered to the beneficiaries may
        be justified as program expenses, in accordance with the program Operating
        Regulations. The subsidies in question will be reviewed by the external auditors
        contracted by MIDUVI, through the completion of pre-agreed procedures that will
        accompany each expense justification.
        Supporting documentation for payments will be reviewed on an ex post basis after
        the funds have been disbursed by the Bank and/or the external auditors.
        Internal control and internal auditing. The Constitution of the Republic of
        Ecuador appoints the CGE as director of the public sector control system. As part
        of this sector, the executing agency has its own internal audit area that reports
        directly to the CGE.
        External control and reporting. Although the CGE has the authority to audit
        public sector entities, projects are not necessarily included in the annual audit plan.
        In this case, the project will be audited by an external firm of independent auditors
                                                                                               Annex III
                                                                                             Page 7 of 8




        acceptable to the Bank, pursuant to document OP-273-6. The firm will be
        contracted by MIDUVI to audit the entire program, including the subsidies that AFD
        finances under the same components that the Bank is financing, based on
        previously agreed terms of reference; and it will be financed out of program funds.
        During execution, annual audited financial statements will be submitted within
        120 days following the closing date of each fiscal year or the date of the last
        disbursement in the case of the final audit. As noted in paragraph 7.11, the external
        audit firm will also verify compliance with the requirements for awarding subsidies
        and delivering the homes that will accompany the expense justifications. The Bank
        may also request additional unaudited financial statements or other reports related
        to the project, whenever it deems necessary.
        There is no national policy mandating the publication of audit reports. Nonetheless,
        under the Bank’s current access to information policy, audited project reports will
        be published in the Bank’s systems.
        Cofinancing with the French Development Agency (AFD). The Bank will
        provide the services to AFD pursuant to the parallel cofinancing with services
        agreement to be entered into between the parties. This means that the annual
        financial audits will also cover the program expenses financed by AFD in
        Components 1 and 2. Similarly, the reviews of subsidy awards will also include the
        program expenses financed by AFD, as explained in paragraph 7.11.

                                     Table 4. Supervision plan
                                                  Supervision plan
  Supervision                                                               Responsible entity
    activity        Nature and scope              Frequency                                     Third
                                                                             Bank
                                                                                                party
                  Review of status report         Semiannual             Project team
Operational       Review of portfolio with     According to MEF          Project team
                  executing agencies and         requirements                                  MIDUVI
                           MEF
                    Review of cash flow      At the Bank’s request,      Project Team          MIDUVI
                     programming and         with each request for
                  disbursement execution      advance of funds, in
                                              portfolio reviews, or
                                                supervision visits
                     Supervision visits              Annual           Fiduciary specialist     MIDUVI
Financial
                   Review of audited and             Annual           Fiduciary Specialist     MIDUVI
                    unaudited financial                                and Project Team
                        statements                                          Leader
                  Review of disbursement           Periodic              Fiduciary and        MIDUVI /
                         requests                                         sector team         Auditors

                     Ex post review of           According to             Project Team         MIDUVI
                       procurement             supervision plan         Leader and Trust
                                                                            Specialist
Procurement          Ex ante review of         According to the           Project Team         MIDUVI
                       procurement             procurement plan       Leader with support
                                                                       from procurement
                                                                            specialist
Annex III
Page 8 of 8




                                                 Supervision plan
 Supervision                                                              Responsible entity
   activity          Nature and scope            Frequency                                  Third
                                                                           Bank
                                                                                            party
                   Update of procurement           Annual               Project Team       MIDUVI
                           plan                                     Leader with support
                                                                     from procurement
                                                                          specialist
                  Fulfillment of conditions      Once only              Project team       MIDUVI
                          precedent
                  Budgetary appropriation          Annual              Project team        MIDUVI
Compliance                  review
                   Submission of audited           Annual              Project Team        MIDUVI /
                    financial statements                                Leader and         Auditors
                                                                    Fiduciary Specialist


        Execution arrangements. All items related to program implementation will be
        guided by the program Operating Regulations, including the following:
        (i) institutional capacities required of the executing agency; (ii) process of awarding
        and delivering subsidies, including beneficiary eligibility and prioritization; (iii) PEV
        selection and qualification processes; (iv) minimum construction and urban
        development standards; (v) contracting and supervision processes; (vi) specific
        execution arrangements for each component; (vii) fiduciary requirements; and
        (viii) environmental and social requirements.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/19



          Ecuador. Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) EC-O0004
                              Casa Para Todos Sector Program



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        1.     To authorize the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall
designate, to enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Republic
of Ecuador to establish the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) EC-O0004,
for an amount of up to US$200,000,000 chargeable to the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary
Capital, to cooperate in the execution of the Casa Para Todos Sector Program.

        2.     To determine that the resources allocated to the above-mentioned Conditional
Credit Line (CCLIP) EC-O0004 shall be used to finance individual loan operations in accordance
with: (a) the objectives and regulations of the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects
approved by Resolution DE-58/03, as amended by Resolutions DE-10/07, DE-164/07, and
DE-86/16; (b) the provisions set forth in documents GN-2246-9 and GN-2564-3; and (c) the terms
and conditions included in the Loan Proposal for the corresponding individual operation.



                              (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2019)



LEG/SGO/CAN/EZSHARE-263631146-18502
EC-O0004
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/19



    Ecuador. Loan ____/OC-EC to the Republic of Ecuador. Housing Solutions for Poor and
    Vulnerable Households. First Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit Line for
                         Investment Projects (CCLIP) EC-O0004



           The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

       That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Republic of Ecuador, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing
aimed at cooperating in the execution of the project “Housing Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable
Households”, which constitutes the first individual operation under the Conditional Credit Line for
Investment Projects (CCLIP) EC-O0004 approved on ___ ____________ 2019 by Resolution
DE-__/19. Such financing will be in the amount of up to US$93,900,000, from the resources of
the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                              (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2019)



LEG/SGO/CAN/EZSHARE-263631146-18504
EC-L1245
