                                                                                             PUBLIC
                                                                     SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                       ARGENTINA



                     BARRIO IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM

                                          (AR-L1179)



        THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE
   CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS

                                          (AR-X1004)



                                     LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Francisca Rojas
(FMM/CAR), Project Team Leader; Verónica Adler (FMM/CUR); José Brakarz
(IFD/FMM); Carolina Piedrafita (IFD/FMM); Henry Moreno (WSA/CAR); Florencia
Serale (CSC/CAR); Brenda Alvarez Junco (FMP/CAR); Teodoro Noel (FMP/CAR);
Melissa Barandiaran (VPS/ESG); Alonso Chaverri-Suarez (LEG/SGO); Sebastian
Rocha, Pedro Ivanoski, Eduardo Reese (consultants); María del Carmen Perrier
(IFD/FMM).


This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus
superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                       CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY


I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .....................................................................1

       A.    Background, problems addressed, and rationale ..................................................1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost .........................................................................7
       C.    Key outcome indicators ........................................................................................9

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ....................................................................10

       A.    Financing instruments .........................................................................................10
       B.    Environmental and social risks ...........................................................................10
       C.    Fiduciary risks .....................................................................................................11
       D.    Other risks ...........................................................................................................11

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ...............................................................13

       A.    Summary of the implementation arrangements..................................................13
       B.    Summary of results monitoring arrangements....................................................14
                                                - ii -


                                            ANNEXES
Annex I      Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary
Annex II     Results Matrix
Annex III    Fiduciary agreements and requirements


                                      ELECTRONIC LINKS
REQUIRED
1.   Annual work plan (AWP) and program execution plan (PEP)
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39460678
2.   Monitoring and evaluation plan
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542461
3.   Procurement plan
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39459441
4.   Environmental and Social Management Report
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39460672

OPTIONAL
1.   Economic assessment
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39459433
2.   Evaluation of the Barrio Improvement Program—CLP-2 (2662/OC-AR)
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39459425
3.   Program Operating Regulations
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39459429
4.   Commitments under the Barrio Improvement Program—CLP-2 (2662/OC-AR)
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39459439
5.   Analysis of compliance with the Public Utilities Policy
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39550916
6.   Evaluation of the Barrio Improvement Program—CLP-1 (1842/OC-AR)
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=36398670

7.   Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) and Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF)
     http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39466824
                                    - iii -


                             ABBREVIATIONS


CCLIP     Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects
CIP       Community initiative project
CLP-1     First individual operation under the CCLIP
CLP-2     Second individual operation under the CCLIP
CLP-3     Third individual operation under the CCLIP
FPA       Framework participation agreement
MEU       Municipal executing unit
NCU       National Coordination Unit
OEL       Optional electronic link
PCR       Project completion report
PEU       Provincial executing unit
PROMEBA   Programa de Mejoramiento de Barrios [Barrio Improvement Program]
REL       Required electronic link
SDUV      Subsecretaría de Desarrollo Urbano y Vivienda [Urban Development and
          Housing Division]
SEPA      Procurement Plan Execution System
UBN       Unmet basic needs
UEPEX     Unidades Ejecutoras de Préstamos Externos [Executing units for external
          loans]
                                                         PROJECT SUMMARY

                                                         ARGENTINA
                                                BARRIO IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
                                                         (AR-L1179)
                                       THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE
                                  CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS
                                                    (AR-X1004)

                                                     Financial Terms and Conditions
Borrower: The Argentine Republic                                                             Flexible Financing Facility*
Executing agency: Urban Development and Housing Division                 Amortization period:                25 years
(SDUV) of the Public Works Department of the Ministry of Federal Original WAL:                               15.25 years
Planning, Public Investment, and Services                                Disbursement period:                5 years
                                            Amount                       Grace  period:                      5.5 years
                Source                                           %
                                         (US$ million)                   Inspection and supervision fee: **
IDB (Ordinary Capital)***                      200               90      Interest rate:                      LIBOR-based
Local                                          22                10      Credit fee:                         **
                                                                         Loan approval currency:             U.S. dollars from the Ordinary
Total                                          222              100
                                                                                                             capital
                                                             Project at a Glance
Project objective:
The objective of this operation is to improve the habitability of dwellings located in the country’s shantytowns and unregulated settlements
by legalizing land tenure, providing basic infrastructure, and fostering community development. This proposed third individual operation
(CLP-3) is part of Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) AR-X1004, which aims to improve the quality of life and
contribute to the urban and social inclusion of Argentine households in the poorest population groups residing in shantytowns and
unregulated settlements.
Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement:
Entry into force of the Program Operating Regulations and annexes thereto under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank
(paragraph 3.2).
Special contractual condition for execution: Prior to the first transfer of resources, which will be provided on a nonreimbursable basis,
the executing agency will have signed the framework participation agreement with the respective subexecuting agency, under the terms
agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4).
Exceptions to Bank policies: None
Project qualifies as:               SEQ [ X ]        PTI [ X ]            Sector [ X ]        Geographic [ X ]         Headcount [ X ]
(*) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the
      amortization schedule, as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management
      considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(**) The inspection and supervision fee and credit fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its
      review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the applicable policies.
(***) Disbursement of the loan proceeds will be subject to the following maximum limits: (i) up to 15% in the first 12 months; (ii) up to
      30% in the first 24 months; and (iii) up to 50% in the first 36 months, in all cases as of the date the loan is approved by the Bank’s
      Board of Executive Directors.
                      I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problems addressed, and rationale
1.1       Argentina is one of the most urbanized countries in Latin America. According to
          estimates by the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, in 2014 more than
          92% of Argentina’s 40 million people lived in population centers of more than
          2,000 inhabitants. The country’s land settlement pattern has favored the
          concentration of inhabitants in major urban areas, including Greater Buenos Aires,
          with more than 14 million inhabitants, and other cities such as Córdoba, Mendoza,
          Rosario, and Tucumán. These population centers account for close to 50% of the
          country’s urban population.1
1.2       Argentina is contending with quantitative and qualitative deficits related to the
          provision of housing services, partly as a result of insufficient response by the
          formal housing market to growth in demand, particularly in low-income segments.
          The quantitative deficit, defined as unmet demand for housing arising from a
          combination of new households, households whose dwellings need to be replaced,
          and families that share housing, totals 1,256,000 households,2 or 10.3% of existing
          households. As for the qualitative deficit, 2,157,000 households, or 17.7% of the
          total, are affected, meaning that their dwellings are built with substandard materials
          and lack basic services.3
1.3       Informal neighborhoods in Argentina provide access to housing to those who are
          not served by the formal housing market. These neighborhoods may be classified
          into two types: (i) shantytowns or villas, which are erected on illegally occupied
          public or private land, are generally located within cities, have irregular urban
          layouts, and lack basic services and public spaces; and (ii) unregulated settlements,
          which are generally located in the periphery of cities and are the result of illegal
          occupation or subdivision processes, generally having accessible urban layouts
          while lacking basic services and public spaces.
1.4       According to 2011 data from the Urban Development and Housing Division
          (SDUV), more than 430,000 families (or 3.5% of Argentine households) reside in
          shantytowns and unregulated settlements.4 These inhabitants have limited access to
          urban benefits, since informal neighborhoods are not recognized by provincial or
          municipal authorities and therefore lack land tenure security, basic urban services,
          green spaces, and social services. Many settlements are located in areas that are
          subject to environmental risks and their inhabitants are the most vulnerable and

1
     National Statistics and Censuses Institute, National Population, Household, and Housing Census, 2010.
2
     A dwelling needs to be replaced when it is deemed inadequate by virtue of being temporary or makeshift
     (UN, State of the World’s Cities Report 2010).
3
     Urban Development and Housing Division, Report on Argentina for the United Nations Human Settlements
     Programme, January 2015.
4
     The number of families in shantytowns and unregulated settlements does not include the families that
     benefited from the preceding operations under the CCLIP, since, with the program’s intervention, the
     neighborhoods are no longer informal.
                                                        -2-




          socially excluded population group. In these informal neighborhoods, 46% of
          households have legal possession of their lots, but only 9% have property titles.5
          Basic service coverage rates are 42% for water, 15% for sewerage, 16% for gas,
          41% for public lighting, and 37% for paving.6 Trash collection is provided on a
          regular basis in 32% of informal neighborhoods. These areas also lack community
          amenities such as multipurpose rooms and sports facilities, which exist in 50% of
          the shantytowns and settlements. Only 24% of these neighborhoods include a plaza
          or park, which hinders community building and harmonious relations among
          neighbors. Furthermore, social services are also inadequate: primary education is
          available in 72% of informal neighborhoods, and health centers in 61% of these
          neighborhoods. Lastly, 64% of shantytowns and unregulated settlements flood at
          least once a year and 25% of them are located less than 10 meters away from a
          dump.7
1.5       The scarcity of basic urban services in shantytowns and unregulated settlements is
          primarily due to the limited capacity of provinces and municipios to invest in
          expanding the coverage of services under their responsibility.8 While arrangements
          vary among provinces, the municipios are generally in charge of providing water,
          drainage, sewerage, road infrastructure, public lighting, and trash collection
          services. Municipios execute only 8.3% of total consolidated public expenditure
          and this has proven insufficient to cover their urban responsibilities, since these
          funds have to finance 86% of the delivery of the above-described urban services.9
1.6       In short, although informal neighborhoods in Argentina face a multitude of
          problems, noteworthy among them are the lack of basic infrastructure,
          environmental sanitation, and community facilities, aggravated by legal uncertainty
          over land tenure for most families.10 These problems can be addressed through the
          comprehensive interventions promoted by this program, which involve regularizing
          neighborhoods, titling lots, implementing basic infrastructure works, and promoting
          community action. As shown by the previous operations under the Barrio

5
     Acquiring legal possession of lots is the administrative process of registering the sales agreement for the lot
     at the municipio or at the office of the Provincial Housing Institute (IPV). A property title is defined as a
     title deed notarized by a notary public in National Property Registry. There have been cases in which, in
     order to provide land tenure security, the IPV and the National Public Land Commission have accepted
     sales agreements originating from illegal occupation and subdivision processes without regularization of the
     informal neighborhoods in question.
6
     National Statistics and Censuses Institute, National Population, Household, and Housing Census, 2010.
7
     Techo Argentina, Survey of Informal Settlements, 2013.
8
     In addition, there are few incentives for public utilities companies to serve informal neighborhoods in view
     of their inhabitants’ limited ability to pay.
9
     Based on data from the National Office of Consolidated Public Expenditure. Ministry of Economy of
     Argentina, 2005. Most recent information available. Consolidated public expenditure is understood to refer
     to total national government spending (net of transfers to provinces and municipios), plus total spending by
     provincial governments (net of transfers to municipios), plus total municipal spending.
10
     Difficulties for families in obtaining legal certainty include: legal costs, knowledge of procedures, and
     willingness to go through the process.
                                                      -3-




          Improvement Program (PROMEBA), a comprehensive project approach is essential
          for the success and sustainability of investments, ensuring that families can remain
          in their homes and guaranteeing their access to the benefits of the city.
1.7       Experience of PROMEBA. In Argentina, the Bank has been supporting this type
          of neighborhood intervention through CCLIP AR-X1004.11 The general objective
          of the CCLIP is to improve the quality of life and contribute to the urban and social
          inclusion of Argentine households in the poorest population groups residing in
          shantytowns and unregulated settlements, with a view to benefiting 250,000
          households. Two loan operations (1842/OC-AR and 2662/OC-AR) have been
          financed under the CCLIP for a total amount of US$750 million. Prior to the
          CCLIP, the Bank financed PROMEBA I (940/OC-AR) in the amount of
          US$102 million.
1.8       The first PROMEBA operation benefited 60,569 families. CLP-1 (1842/OC-AR),
          completed in 2012, benefited 71,888 families residing in 105 shantytowns and
          settlements through a total investment of US$350 million. CLP-2 (2662/OC-AR),
          currently in execution, has total financing of US$400 million and is expected to
          benefit 67,087 families in 91 settlements.
1.9       Outcomes of previous programs. All neighborhoods benefitting from the program
          to date show positive outcomes. The Project Completion Report for CLP-1 and the
          external evaluation of CLP-212 highlight the reduction in the unmet basic needs
          (UBN) indexes in the examined neighborhoods.13 In the CLP-1 projects, the UBN
          index fell from 88.2% to 54% of households, while in CLP-2 the index fell from
          85.6% to 42% of households. The titling results indicate that this is a long-term
          process implemented in successive stages. With CLP-1, 68% of households in the
          targeted neighborhoods achieved legal possession of lots; with CLP-2, 44% of
          households achieved legal possession. In the two operations combined, property
          titles were obtained by 27% of households in the targeted neighborhoods. Health
          and morbidity indicators in the beneficiary communities improved in all cases,
          meeting the expected 15% reduction in households affected by these problems. The
          residential satisfaction indexes improved by more than 25%, while the rootedness
          indexes show that more than 77% of households wish to remain in the
          neighborhood following the intervention. Lastly, more than 90% of the works are
          properly maintained.



11
     Approved by means of resolution DE-5/07 for US$1.5 billion, with a 25-year term for use of the line of
     credit through four individual operations.
12
     The evaluation of operation 2662/OC-AR examines 10 interventions initiated under loan 1842/OC-AR and
     completed under loan 2662/OC-AR.
13
     Argentina’s unmet basic needs index considers the following indicators: overcrowding, housing quality,
     household sanitation services, school attendance, and income and education level of the head of household.
     The figure of 88.2% indicates the percentage of households with at least one of these indicators of
     deprivation.
                                                      -4-




1.10      Advances to date on operation 2662/OC-AR show that 125 neighborhoods have
          been regularized and 22,550 dwellings are connected to water, sewerage, gas, and
          electricity services (26% of the program’s final target). The provincial and
          municipal executing units (PEUs and MEUs, respectively) have produced 2,300
          final design documents, with detailed drawings and technical specifications, for the
          bidding process for works under the comprehensive projects14 (31% of the final
          target). Community development activities have been carried out in connection
          with the works, with field work teams conducting close to 3,000 workshops,
          training courses, and other events.15 The bidding processes for works have been
          completed ahead of schedule by 1.5 months. However, the average deviation in
          project completion time was 43%.16
1.11      The evaluations confirm the main characteristics of the program’s intervention
          model: (i) adopt a multisector and interagency management approach, coordinating
          with other government agencies in the territory, making use of the field work teams
          and the neighborhood management boards; (ii) rely on the direct participation of
          municipios as the parties responsible for the design, implementation, and
          monitoring of the investments; (iii) promote coordination with provincial and
          municipal service providers to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the
          newly deployed public services; and (iv) use community initiative projects17 to
          address critical issues, such as the social and urban integration of the community
          and promotion of gender equity.
1.12      Lessons learned from the CCLIP. Starting with CLP-1, the interventions sought
          to cover larger urban areas in order to encompass pockets of urban exclusion that
          have historically been neglected. To achieve greater impact, the program modified
          its intervention model, developing general strategic projects for an entire area and
          defining the actions to be implemented in stages with financing from various
          tranches of the CCLIP and other supplementary resources.18 In addition,
          recognizing that interventions designed and carried out with community
          participation are more effective, proposals for community initiative projects are
          now targeted to the needs of each neighborhood. With regard to land tenure,
          obtaining property title requires an investment in time and resources that many
          beneficiaries are unable to make. However, legal certainty, defined as State

14
     Comprehensive projects are multisector interventions in neighborhoods, including basic urban infrastructure
     works and connections, public spaces, community facilities, and supplementary works.
15
     Analysis of the Project Monitoring Report for loan 2662/OC-AR at December 2014.
16
     Deviations are measured on the basis of scheduled and actual execution time. The greatest deviations are
     observed in three projects delayed due to environmental conditions and in the final acceptance of works
     (Evaluation of the Barrio Improvement Program III (2662/OC-AR) , p.49)
17
     Community initiative projects are participatory activities that provide technical and social support for
     community groups and organizations and are designed in keeping with the specific needs of each
     neighborhood based on a diagnostic assessment. Such projects support works implemented under
     comprehensive projects. See the Operating Regulations for more details.
18
     See Project Completion Report, AR-L1019 and Construir Ciudades, Chapter 4, p. 131.
                                                       -5-




          recognition of land tenure, is enough for the families to gain access to the city’s
          formal processes.
1.13      Challenges of PROMEBA. The size of the informal urbanization problem in
          Argentina drives the program’s continuity. It is estimated that close to 200,000
          families have been served in earlier stages of the program and an additional 31,000
          families will be served in the current stage.19 The program must continue to move
          forward in the process of physically and legally regularizing neighborhoods,
          promoting, in particular, land tenure by women and by both spouses in the case of
          couples.20 It must also improve the environmental aspects, applying knowledge of
          sustainable urban development strategies to the comprehensive projects so as to
          include climate change adaptation components in addition to environmental
          mitigation. In view of the key role played by community participation, success
          factors associated with each type of community initiative project (CIP) should be
          identified in order to maximize outcomes and incorporate these factors into any
          new projects. Lastly, the performance of the subexecuting units must continue to
          improve in order to achieve greater efficiency in the execution of projects and
          ensure their sustainability.
1.14      Rationale. The third individual operation under the CCLIP is justified by the
          positive outcomes of PROMEBA in improving the habitability of dwellings in
          shantytowns and unregulated settlements in the country. The Argentine
          government’s decision to give this program priority is based on these outcomes and
          on the program’s success in reducing the qualitative housing deficit. The program’s
          effectiveness is based on comprehensive and crosscutting interventions in the
          territory, supported by field work teams that address the urban, legal, social, and
          environmental aspects of project execution. The program is considered an example
          of good targeting of public expenditure, since it operates in the country’s most
          disadvantaged urban areas, serving the poorest population groups. The program’s
          executing unit has demonstrated its institutional capacity through the effective
          execution of CLP-1 and CLP-2. The program is also an example of effective
          collaboration between the national government and the provincial and municipal
          governments, complementing federal new housing construction programs
          (Techo Digno [Decent Roof] and Villas) and existing home improvement programs
          (Mejor Vivir) [Better Living].
1.15      The experience accumulated over the course of more than 25 years of support for
          neighborhood improvement programs in the region, through PROMEBA or others
          such as Rosario Habitat (1307/OC-AR), has been recognized in Bank publications

19
     It is worth noting that the total number of settlements is not static; each year going forward new settlements
     may be created.
20
     Previously, the program did not address the gender dimension in titling. Studies have identified a gap in
     land tenure by women, estimating that women account for only 20% of property owners worldwide. Deere
     and Leon. 2001. Who owns the land? Gender and land-titling programmes in Latin America. Journal of
     Agrarian Change 1 (3), 440-467 and Ayalew et al. 2013. The Price of Empowerment: Experimental
     Evidence on the Demand for Land Titles & Female Co-Titling in Urban Tanzania.
                                                      -6-




          and in external literature.21 Multiple studies confirm the positive impacts of basic
          infrastructure works and titling initiatives in marginal neighborhoods,22 particularly
          on real estate prices, increasing not only the investments that residents make in their
          homes but also the price of houses by 25% to 31% compared with a control group.23
          Studies examining the impact of titling on real estate values observe an average
          increase of 18% in Argentina compared with a control group and 23.5% in
          Ecuador.24
1.16      Consistency with Bank policies. CLP-2 has fulfilled the requirements set forth in
          document GN-2246-4 for processing a new individual operation: (i) execution
          performance has been satisfactory and it is likely that the development objectives
          will be achieved (paragraphs 1.9 and 1.10); (ii) the borrower has complied with the
          contractual conditions and the fiduciary policies of the Bank; and (iii) the audited
          financial statements have been presented on a timely basis without qualification.
          Loan 2662/OC-AR has committed 75.2% of the proceeds, with signed contracts for
          US$300.6 million (OEL 4) and 34.5% of the financing has been disbursed
          (US$138 million). The difference between the committed and disbursed amounts is
          attributable to the execution of works with an 18- to 24-month time frame and
          decentralized management, which affects justification of funds.
1.17      The program complies with the financial sustainability conditions and economic
          assessment of the Public Utilities Policy (document GN-2716-4) and is consistent
          with the principles of that policy. The basic infrastructure works are
          socioeconomically viable (paragraph 1.28). The investment costs are covered by
          State transfers that are transparently allocated (paragraphs 2.8 and 2.9) and the
          purpose of which is to expand capacity in order to provide greater access

21
     For example, IDB, 2009. Construir Ciudades. Mejoramiento de barrios y calidad de vida urbana [Building
     Cities. Improvement of informal neighborhoods and urban quality of life] Eduardo Rojas, editor;
     Almansi, F. 2009. Regularizing Land Tenure within Upgrading Programmes in Argentina; the cases of
     PROMEBA and Rosario Habitat. Environment and Urbanization, 21 (2) 389-413; Evaluación Final del
     Programa de Mejoramiento de Barrios II, 2011 [Final evaluation of the Barrio Improvement Program II].
22
     González-Navarro, M. and C. Quintana-Domeque. 2010. Urban infrastructure and economic development:
     experimental evidence from street pavement, IZA Discussion Paper 5346, November. Cattaneo, M.et al
     2009. Housing, Health, and Happiness, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1 (1): 75–105;
     Moraes, LRS, et al. 2003. Impact of drainage and sewerage on diarrhoea in poor urban areas in Salvador,
     Brazil. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 97 (2): 153-158. Impact evaluation of the Habitat Program in Mexico,
     2012, IDB; An Impact Evaluation Study of the Upgrading of Informal Settlements Programme in selected
     projects in South Africa, 2011, World Bank; Indonesia: Evaluation of the Urban Community Driven
     Development Program, 2013, World Bank.
23
     Increase in land value is a good proxy for improvements in neighborhood habitability. Hourie, E. et al.
     2015. The social value of municipal services. Journal of Policy Modeling 37:1 (in press); Hill, R.J. 2013.
     Hedonic price indexes for residential housing: a survey, evaluation and taxonomy. Journal of Economic
     Surveys 27:5 879-914; Chiarazzo, Vincenza, et al. 2014. The Effects of Environmental Quality on
     Residential Choice Location. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 162: 178-187.
24
     Galiani, S. and E. Schargrodsky. 2010. Property Rights for the Poor: Effects of Land Titling. Journal of
     Public Economics 94 (9-10): 700–29. Lanjouw J. and P. Levy. 2002. Untitled: A Study of Formal and
     Informal Property Rights in Urban Ecuador, Economic Journal, 112, 986-1019.
                                                      -7-




          (paragraph 1.21). To expand public services to eligible neighborhoods, the PEUs
          and MEUs obtain the necessary approvals and licenses of the service providers in
          each province and municipio. Once the works are completed, the subexecuting
          agencies sign works transfer agreements with the service providers (paragraph 3.4).
          The agreements include the commitment to operate and maintain the investments in
          accordance with the regulatory framework in force in the respective province or
          municipio and in terms consistent with the Bank’s policies set out in the program’s
          Operating Regulations (OEL 5).
1.18      Strategic alignment. The operation is included in the 2015 operations program and
          is aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with Argentina 2012-2015 (document
          GN-2687), which identifies urban development as a priority area and underscores
          that the Bank’s actions will be focused on support for neighborhood improvement
          programs that benefit low-income groups living in shantytowns and settlements. In
          addition, the Urban Development and Housing Sector Framework Document
          (document GN-2732-2) identifies comprehensive urban interventions with citizen
          participation as one of the Bank’s operational lines of action. The program will
          contribute to the lending priorities under the Report on the Ninth General Increase
          in the Resources of the IDB (GCI-9) (document AB-2764) in terms of loans for
          (i) poverty reduction and equity enhancement, by addressing the basic infrastructure
          and social services deficits of the population with UBN, and (ii) climate change,
          renewable energy, and environmental sustainability initiatives, by incorporating
          sustainable urban development measures and environmental education actions. It
          will also contribute to the regional goals of: (i) infrastructure for competitiveness
          and social welfare by increasing paved road coverage and the number of
          households with electricity; and (ii) institutions for growth and social welfare by
          supporting subnational governments. Through these actions, the program is aligned
          with the sector strategies of Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and
          Inclusive Growth (document GN-2710-5) and Institutions for Growth and Social
          Welfare (document GN-2587-2).
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.19      The objective of this operation is to improve the habitability of dwellings located in
          the country’s shantytowns and unregulated settlements by legalizing land tenure,
          providing basic infrastructure, and fostering community development. This
          objective is consistent with CCLIP AR-X1004 (paragraph 1.7). The program is
          divided into four components:25
1.20      Component I. Legalization of land tenure (US$2.5 million). In order to address
          the property titles deficits and provide land tenure security, this component will
          finance technical assistance and other services aimed at achieving: (i) the physical
          regularization of the target area through legal studies, property surveys, and
          registration of new lots; (ii) legal regularization of lots as needed to transfer title to
          beneficiaries, including registration; and (iii) delivery of property titles to

25
     A detailed description of components and eligible expenditures is included in the Operating Regulations.
                                                      -8-




          beneficiaries of this program and the previous operations under the CCLIP
          (1842/OC-AR and 2662/OC-AR). Priority will be given to titling for women or for
          couples, with legal possession in the name of both spouses.
1.21      Component II. Provision of infrastructure, environmental sanitation, and
          social facilities (US$196 million). This component involves implementing urban
          infrastructure for basic services in program eligible neighborhoods (paragraphs 2.8
          and 2.9) by: (i) formulating final project designs, which consist of detailed drawings
          and technical specifications for the bidding processes for comprehensive project
          works; and (ii) executing the comprehensive projects, which are comprised of basic
          urban infrastructure networks and connections for water, sewerage, storm drainage,
          gas distribution, and electrification, along with the respective residential
          connections, and public lighting, sidewalk and road paving, public spaces and green
          areas such as plazas and parks, urban facilities such as bus stops and garbage bins,
          community facilities such as multipurpose rooms and child care centers, and
          supplementary and environmental mitigation works. When feasible, public lighting
          and community facilities will incorporate energy efficiency criteria designed in
          accordance with the bioclimatic conditions in the various regions of the country.26
          As a pilot experience, a comprehensive project will apply green infrastructure
          alternatives.
1.22      Component III. Community development (US$15.5 million). In order to
          strengthen grassroots community organizations and ensure neighborhood residents’
          participation in all project phases, advisory services will be provided to the
          communities through community initiative projects aimed at: (i) providing sanitary,
          environmental, and urban development education (drainage maintenance, trash
          collection and disposal); (ii) encouraging neighborhood activities that foster social
          and urban integration (recreational, sports, and cultural activities); and
          (iii) containing and preventing risks in vulnerable groups (addiction prevention and
          preventive health promotion activities). Interdisciplinary field work teams will
          work on-site conducting participatory workshops and providing training, as well as
          facilitating coordination with government agencies, with a view to promoting
          access to social services.
1.23      Component IV. Strengthening of management capacity (US$4.5 million). In
          order to strengthen the performance of the National Coordination Unit (NCU),
          PEU, and MEU teams, this component will finance technical assistance to train and
          strengthen the units in the technical and fiduciary processes related to the
          programming and execution of the comprehensive urban development projects
          financed by the program. Resources will be allocated for improving the information
          systems, particularly the program website, and for discussing and disseminating the
          program’s experiences through an international seminar.

26
     Since 2013, elements to ensure energy efficiency in public lighting are being used in the execution of loan
     2662/OC-AR, in a manner consistent with the National Program for Rational and Efficient Energy Use
     (PRONUREE) created by Decree 0140/2007.
                                                 -9-




1.24   Management and administration (US$3.5 million). This includes NCU operating
       expenses, equipment, and management; specific consulting services required by the
       NCU; external auditing expenses; and consulting services for the evaluations.
1.25   Cost and financing. The proposed loan will be made to the Argentine Republic
       from Ordinary Capital resources. This program is the third individual operation
       under the CCLIP, for a total of US$222 million, of which US$200 will be financed
       by the Bank and US$22 million will be provided by the local counterpart. (See
       Table 1, Cost).
                              Table 1. Cost and financing (in US$ million)
                            Components                          Bank        Local    Total    %
        I.    Legalization of land tenure                        2.25       0.25     2.50     1.1
        II. Provision of infrastructure, environmental
                                                               178.10      17.90    196.00   88.3
              sanitation, and social facilities
        III. Community development                              14.00       1.50     15.50   7.3
        IV. Strengthening of management capacity                 4.05       0.45      4.50   2.0
        Management and administration                            1.60       1.90      3.50   1.6
        Total                                                  200.00      22.00    222.00   100
        %                                                          90         10       100   100

C.     Key outcome indicators
1.26   This program will serve 31,000 families living in 39 shantytowns and unregulated
       settlements. The impact indicator for assessing improvement in the habitability of
       shantytowns and informal neighborhoods will be the average value of property lots
       in the targeted neighborhoods. Other outcome indicators include: (i) number of
       families in the program neighborhoods that receive property titles and percentage of
       families that attain legal certainty in their land tenure situation, with lots recorded in
       the name of women or of both spouses in the case of couples; (ii) percentage of
       households with actual use of public services; (iii) percentage of community
       initiative projects satisfactorily implemented; and (iv) slippage between the time
       scheduled and actual time required to complete the works. The “beneficiaries of
       improved housing solutions” core sector indicator was added as a milestone for the
       output “comprehensive projects completed.” All other indicators and their
       respective projected values are shown in the Results Matrix (Annex II).
1.27   Economic feasibility. A cost-benefit analysis of a representative sample of the
       projects was conducted for the program’s economic assessment (OEL 1). This
       evaluation is based on a comparison of incremental costs and benefits, at efficiency
       prices, in with- and without-project scenarios. Benefits were estimated on the basis
       of the theory that an improvement in infrastructure conditions in the neighborhoods
       will lead to an increase in land value, and that this improvement is a proxy for the
       benefits generated by the comprehensive investments. The rise in value of the lots
       as a result of program interventions was estimated on this basis.
1.28   The analysis performed on the sample, using a discount rate of 12% and an
       evaluation horizon of 25 years, yielded a positive net present value equivalent to
                                             - 10 -




      US$11.2 million (on an investment of US$28.8 million at efficiency prices and total
      appreciation of US$58.8 million) and an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
      38.2%. In addition, the sensitivity analysis showed that, faced with cost increases of
      up to 15% and reductions in the impact of land appreciation of up to a similar
      percentage, the EIRR for the sample remains equal to or higher than the discount
      rate of 12%, confirming the robustness of these results in the face of unfavorable
      scenarios (OEL 1, Table 6).

                II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.    Financing instruments
2.1   Modality and disbursement schedule. This third operation under CCLIP
      AR-X1004 will be structured as a multiple works program, since it will finance
      several physically similar but independent projects, applying the eligibility and
      prioritization criteria described in paragraphs 2.8 and 2.9. The analyzed sample
      includes 17 projects that represent a total investment of US$71 million, or 35.5% of
      the financing (paragraph 2.7), confirming that the program properly reflects the
      demand for investments in the 39 beneficiary neighborhoods. The planned period
      for commencing the works will be four years, and the disbursement period will be
      five years from the effective date of the loan contract (Table 2).
                         Table 2. Disbursement schedule (US$ million)
        Source of financing/ Year         1        2        3          4    5    TOTAL
      IDB                                30       30       40         80   20     200
      %                                  15       15       20         40   10     100

2.2   In accordance with document AB-2990, the Bank’s disbursement of the Ordinary
      Capital resources will be subject to the following maximum limits: (i) up to 15%
      during the first 12 months; (ii) up to 30% during the first 24 months; and (iii) up to
      50% during the first 36 months, in all cases as of the date the loan is approved by
      the Board of Executive Directors. These limits may become inapplicable in the
      event that the Bank’s policy requirements regarding such limits are fulfilled,
      provided that the borrower has been notified in writing.
B.    Environmental and social risks
2.3   The program complies with the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance
      Policy (OP-703); Disaster Risk Management Policy (OP-704); and Involuntary
      Resettlement Policy (OP-710), and has been classified as a category “B” operation.
      During the design stage, a social and environmental assessment of the program was
      performed jointly with the NCU to assess the environmental safeguards system
      implemented during CLP-2 (2662/OC-AR). The evaluation reported satisfactory
      compliance with the program’s environmental and social procedures and the
      resolution of all environmental risk situations, such as landslide- and flood-prone
      areas. The procedures already specified in the Operating Regulations for loan
      2662/OC-AR used for the environmental and social analyses of projects, the design
                                                     - 11 -




          of the environmental management monitoring and supervision routines, as well as
          family resettlement procedures will apply when relevant.27 Expected adverse
          impacts from the program will be temporary and moderate, and will be limited
          primarily to the execution of works phase. The program provides for the
          implementation of the relevant impact mitigation measures included in the
          Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)28 (REL 5).
C.        Fiduciary risks
2.4       The Urban Development and Housing Division (SDUV), which is the program’s
          executing agency, has created a National Coordination Unit (NCU) within its
          administrative structure for the purpose of managing PROMEBA. The NCU, which
          was created in 1997, has a structure and technical team that are consistent with the
          program’s execution needs and the Bank’s requirements. This operation is the third
          stage of the CCLIP in execution; consequently, the only fiduciary risk that was
          identified—assessed as medium—is the possibility of bookkeeping errors in
          execution expenditures charged to two sources of financing. To mitigate this risk,
          there will be: (i) controls to prevent changes in the source of financing once the
          payment source has been identified; (ii) reports indicating the total cost of the
          project, budget, and amount to be financed with each line and authorized by the
          project team leader; and (iii) reviews by the fiduciary sector.
D.        Other risks
2.5       Program risks. Two risks have been identified in addition to the fiduciary risk
          described in paragraph 2.3. One is that the changes in government authorities
          during the life cycle of the operation may lead to some delays in execution.29
          Nevertheless, the likelihood that these changes will affect the program is deemed
          low, since the program’s high degree of institutional entrenchment, citizen
          recognition, and transparency of operational information through its website ensure
          its continuity. In the event of political changes, it is common practice for the NCU
          to conduct onsite visits to acquaint the new authorities with the program.
2.6       Since the total program amount is smaller than originally anticipated for this
          tranche of the CCLIP and the pace of disbursements is limited in the first three
          years of execution (see Table 2), the demand for projects is likely to be greater than
          the supply of available resources, creating expectations that cannot be met. To
          mitigate this reputational risk, the NCU will conduct financial planning exercises
          with each of the subexecuting agencies to determine the pace of execution of the
          works, and will give them support in managing expectations at the territory level.
2.7       Technical considerations. The representative sample of projects analyzed is
          comprised of 17 projects with complete technical designs in the amount of

27
     The Operating Regulations (OEL 3) include guidelines for resettlement plans.
28
     The Operating Regulations will adopt the recommendations indicated in section VI of the ESMR.
29
     National, provincial, and municipal elections are scheduled for 2015 and 2020, when the program will be in
     execution.
                                            - 12 -




       US$71 million, which is equivalent to 35.5% of the anticipated financing. Nine
       projects from this sample, in the amount of US$38 million, are beginning their
       bidding process under loan 2662/OC-AR, while the remainder will be tendered
       under CLP-3. There is also a preliminary portfolio of projects for 20
       neighborhoods in 15 provinces for an estimated investment of US$75 million
       (see REL 1). These projects provide continuity to comprehensive interventions
       carried out under previous phases of the program by moving forward on the
       remaining stages of infrastructure works, environmental sanitation, community
       facilities, and actions to regularize property. The average values of the
       interventions by lot and by region, set forth in Annex II to the Operating
       Regulations, are aligned with the experience from previous stages, and the
       mechanisms for updating these values are suitable.
2.8    Eligibility criteria. The projects should be viable in technical, economic, legal,
       environmental, urban, and social terms. In order to be able to participate in the
       program, projects will have to meet the following eligibility criteria, among others:
       (i) they combine physical and social interventions in the territory; (ii) resettlements
       affect a minimum of the families in the neighborhood; (iii) a majority of the
       neighborhood population is poor; (iv) investment costs per lot do not exceed the
       threshold value equivalent to the average cost per lot and per region; and
       (v) legalization of land tenure is feasible.
2.9    Prioritization criteria. Projects will be ranked according to the extent of
       infrastructure deficits, the social and urban impact of the intervention, the degree of
       consolidation and demographic density of the neighborhood, and the feasibility of
       resolving land tenure issues, including activation of services, resolution of
       environmental restrictions, and availability of land when resettlement is required.
       The Bank will verify compliance with the eligibility and prioritization criteria,
       which are specified in Annex II to the Operating Regulations.
2.10   Financial and institutional feasibility. The analysis performed by the Bank’s
       fiduciary sector has concluded that the NCU does not have significant institutional,
       technical, or financial weaknesses; its human resources are well qualified and have
       the experience necessary to manage the operation with the PEUs and MEUs. The
       analysis of current and projected financial resources shows that program execution
       and the counterpart contribution are feasible since the counterpart funds will be
       provided by the national government and by the participating provinces.
2.11   Sustainability of the interventions. The program supports the sustainability of the
       interventions by: (i) transferring methodology and creating capacities to address
       unregulated settlement issues, which the provinces and municipios then replicate
       with their own resources for other informal neighborhoods; (ii) strengthening
       community organizations in the neighborhoods, promoting their coordination with
       social services; and (iii) signing agreements with the provincial and municipal
       authorities and the service providers to ensure the subsequent operation and
       maintenance of the works.
                                                  - 13 -




                   III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.        Summary of the implementation arrangements
3.1       The borrower will be the Argentine Republic. The executing agency will be the
          Urban Development and Housing Division (SDUV) of the Public Works
          Department of the Ministry of Federal Planning, Public Investment, and Services,
          through its National Coordination Unit (NCU), which will be the core entity
          responsible for program coordination and execution of all the components.
3.2       The program will be executed in a decentralized manner by the participating
          provinces and municipios, as program subexecuting agencies. The provinces and
          municipios will propose projects for potential financing by the program in
          accordance with the criteria and conditions set out in the Operating Regulations,
          which will incorporate lessons learned in the execution of loan 2662/OC-AR. A
          special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement will be the
          entry into force of the Operating Regulations and annexes thereto under terms
          previously agreed upon with the Bank. The Operating Regulations define the
          responsibilities of the subexecuting agencies to be included in the framework
          participation agreements, through which the provincial or municipal executive
          branch will accept the terms and conditions of the program and of the contract that
          the borrower will sign with the Bank.
3.3       The NCU will be responsible for coordinating and implementing the different
          actions and interventions and for serving as the SDUV’s direct interlocutor with the
          Bank. It will also be responsible for the financial and accounting management of
          the operation. The NCU’s principal functions and structure will be described in the
          Operating Regulations. The functions will include: technical and operational
          coordination, scheduling of interventions, project approval and financing, and
          supervision of formulation, execution, and evaluation.30
3.4       In the subexecuting agencies, project management will be the responsibility of the
          PEUs as the management agencies of the provinces, or of the MEUs for municipal
          agencies, provided they have the institutional and technical capacity to do so, as
          assessed by the executing agency. The PEUs and MEUs may be strengthened with
          program resources. A special contractual condition of execution precedent to the
          first transfer of resources, which will be nonreimbursable, is the executing agency’s
          signature of the framework participation agreement with the relevant subexecuting
          agency, under terms agreed upon with the Bank. The subexecuting agencies will
          sign a works transfer agreement with the service providers that will include a
          commitment to operate and maintain the investments in terms consistent with the
          Bank’s policies (paragraph 1.17).31



30
     More details in the Operating Regulations.
31
     See Operating Regulations, Annex IV.5.
                                                      - 14 -




3.5       Financial management. The loan proceeds may be disbursed in the form of
          advances, reimbursements, and/or direct payments.32 In the case of advances,
          disbursements will be based on a financial plan33 to cover program needs for up to
          six months, and the minimum percentage required for replenishment of advances
          will be 70%. The Executing Units for External Loans (UEPEX) system will be used
          both at the NCU level and at the level of subexecuting agencies, thereby improving
          the efficiency and effectiveness of financial management. The UEPEX system is
          already in operation.
3.6       Procurement. The procurement plan will be managed through the Procurement
          Plan Execution System (SEPA), which has already been implemented. Works,
          goods, and consulting services will be procured in accordance with the Policies for
          the procurement of works and goods financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9)
          and the Policies for selection and contracting of consultants financed by the IDB
          (document GN-2350-9), both of March 2011, as well as with the provisions of the
          loan contract and the fiduciary agreements and requirements (Annex III).
3.7       Audits. During the execution period, the NCU will present audited financial
          statements for the program on an annual basis, pursuant to the requirements
          established by the Bank in its policies. The audited financial statements will be
          presented within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year. The program’s closing
          audit reports will be delivered within 120 days after the last disbursement. Audits
          for this program and previous programs under the CCLIP will be performed by an
          independent auditing firm pursuant to terms of reference prepared by the Bank.
B.        Summary of results monitoring arrangements34
3.8       The NCU has a tracking and monitoring system that makes it possible to determine
          agreed-upon output and outcome indicators at the project level, as well as the
          associated targets for each period. The PROMEBA website provides access to the
          master project files for all projects.
3.9       The following instruments will be used to monitor the program: the multiyear
          execution plan, annual work plans, annual execution and planning reports, and on-
          site supervision plans. To monitor fiduciary matters, the unit will continue to use
          the country systems implemented in previous stages, which were satisfactory to the
          Bank. All project transactions will be performed using the UEPEX system. The
          required financial reports are: (i) financial execution plan for the six months
          following the request for an advance; (ii) annual audited financial statements; and
          (iii) other reports that may be required by the Bank. Procurement will be monitored
          through the SEPA.

32
     IDB Disbursement Manual, March 2015. Annex III. Disbursement methods (pages 1 and 2).
33
     For the Bank’s loan, all the estimated month-to-month costs/expenditures, by investment category, for the
     period covered by the disbursement request; for the local counterpart and other sources, the resources they
     will contribute to the project during that same period (by investment category).
34
     The actions summarized in this section are described in greater detail in the monitoring and evaluation plan.
                                           - 15 -




3.10   The midterm and final reviews are the key milestones of the monitoring process.
       These reviews will include: (i) the financial execution results; (ii) the achievement
       of output and outcome targets; (iii) the degree of fulfillment of the environmental
       and operation and maintenance requirements for works; (iv) the degree of
       fulfillment of contractual commitments; (v) a summary of the findings of audits
       performed during execution; (vi) verification of compliance with the investment
       limits per lot; and (vii) a summary of lessons learned. The final report will include
       an ex post economic assessment using the same methodology as the ex ante
       assessment. The outcome indicators will be evaluated using the reflexive method.
       The basis for information will be the master project files, which are prepared for
       each neighborhood and monitor all interventions carried out during the program
       execution period through neighborhood surveys. Once accepted by the Bank, these
       reports will be made available to the public through the PROMEBA website.
3.11   The appreciation of lots (taking the effect of titling into account) will be measured
       as a program impact, using a quasi-experimental differences-in-differences method
       and measuring the indicator in a sample of lots both in targeted neighborhoods and
       in control neighborhoods before and after the works. A specialized firm will be
       contracted to determine the baseline of the impact indicator and to perform the final
       evaluation of the program.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Annex I - AR-L1179
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 1




                                                                                        Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                                       Summary
I. Strategic Alignment
1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives                                                                                                                  Aligned
                                                                                                    -Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement
  Lending Program                                                                                   -Lending to support climate change initiatives, renewable energy and environmental sustainability


                                                                                                    -Paved road coverage (Km/Km2)
  Regional Development Goals                                                                        -Percent of households with electricity


                                                                                                    -Households with new or upgraded water supply
                                                                                                    -Households with new or upgraded sanitary connections
  Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)                               -Number of households with new or upgraded dwellings
                                                                                                    -Municipal or other sub-national governments supported


2. Country Strategy Development Objectives                                                                                                               Aligned


  Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                              GN-2687               Urban development: integral improvement of neighborhoods.



  Country Program Results Matrix                                                                               GN-2805               The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.


Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                    Highly Evaluable                          Weight                               Maximum Score
                                                                                                                  9.4                                                                          10
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                           9.6                                33.33%                                    10
   3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                          3.0
   3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                        3.6
   3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                     3.0
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                     10.0                                33.33%                                       10
  4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic
                                                                                                                  4.0
Analysis
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits                                                                       1.5
     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs                                                                          1.5
     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                   1.5
     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                     1.5
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                      8.6                                33.33%                                       10
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                    2.5
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                          6.1
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                                       Medium
                                  Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                                           Yes
                                       Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks                                                           Yes
                         Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation                                                            Yes
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                                 B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                                     Financial Management: Accounting and Reporting.
                                                                     Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)                 Yes
                                                                                                                                     Procurement: Information System.


                                                                                    Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:


                                                                                                                                     The program promotes gender equality by implementing actions to guarantee
                                                                                  Gender Equality                 Yes
                                                                                                                                     a gender-sensitive property titling process.




                                                                                            Labor



                                                                                                                                     Urban upgrading interventions will improve environmental quality in target
                                                                                     Environment                  Yes                neighborhoods by incorporating mitigation and adaptation measures in
                                                                                                                                     accordance with urban sustainability strategies.



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project


                                                                                                                                     The evaluation will generate data on land values in informal settlements for
                                                                                                                                     treatment neighborhoods both before and after the provision of basic
The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps                                           infrastructure, and in a sample of control groups of similar informal
                                                                                                                  Yes
in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan                                             settlments. This type of data is currently not measured sistematically in
                                                                                                                                     Argentina and will provide further evidence on the influence of basic
                                                                                                                                     infrastructure and land titling in the valuation of urban land.


The "Neighborhood Improvement Program" in Argentina (AR-L1179) has the objective of improving the living conditions of households in marginalized informal settlements in the country through the legalization
of land tenure, provision of basic infrastructure and community development. This third operation falls within the CCLIP AR-X1004 line, which aims to improve the quality of life and contribute to the urban and
social inclusion of Argentine households in the poorest segments of the population living in urban settlements.

The project presents a cost-benefit analysis that underpins the economic viability of the proposed activities. The logical framework presented in the POD is consistent, covering inputs, outputs, outcomes and
impacts. The results matrix includes indicators for major outputs, outcomes and impacts of the program. The indicators in the results matrix meet SMART criteria and include baseline values and goals.

Based on the hedonic price theory, the program proposes the market value of land as a comprehensive indicator of final impact. The National Coordinating Unit will be responsible for performing or contracting the
monitoring and evaluation of each component. The monitoring and evaluation activities have been budgeted and planned. The data sources for monitoring include municipal data, reports and certificates of
completion of works, and reports generated by Integrated Information System Project PROMEBA. The program plans to implement a quasi-experimental evaluation of property prices using the methodology of
differences-in-differences, in addition to reflexive comparisons without attribution and an ex-post cost-benefit analysis. A baseline and follow-up survey will be collected in treatment and control neighborhoods for
the purposes of the evaluation.
                                                                                                                                                                   Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 5


                                                                          RESULTS MATRIX

                               The objective of this operation is to improve the habitability of dwellings located in the country’s shantytowns and
                               unregulated settlements by legalizing land tenure, providing basic infrastructure, and fostering community development.
    Program objective          This third individual operation is part of CCLIP AR-X1004, which aims to improve the quality of life and contribute to the
                               urban and social inclusion of Argentine households in the poorest population groups residing in shantytowns and
                               unregulated settlements.

                                       Unit of                Baseline    End of
Impact indicator                                  Baseline                                                   Comments and means of verification
                                       measure                 year       project
                                                                                     Source: Census surveys in targeted neighborhoods and in a sample of control
Average value of lots in the
                                          %           1        2015         1.2      neighborhood before and after the program interventions. The change is measured
targeted neighborhoods.
                                                                                     by the formula [(VT1-VT0) – (VC1-VC0)] / (VC1-VC0)


                                       Unit of                Baseline     End of
Outcome indicators                                 Baseline                                                   Comments and means of verification
                                       measure                 year        project
Component 1. Legalization of land tenure
                                                                                      Also includes property titles issued to beneficiaries who completed prior steps in
                          1                                                           the property titling process with support from previous loans (1842/OC-AR and
Property titles issued.                 Titles        0        2015         3000
                                                                                      2662/OC-AR). Source: Reports by the provincial executing units (PEUs) and
                                                                                      municipal executing units (MEUs) based on municipal and provincial records.

Families that attain legal certainty                                                  Measures the proportion of families with legal certainty, with the administrative
in land tenure situations in which                                                    document being in the name of a woman or of both spouses in the case of a couple.
the lot is listed in the name of          %           0        2015          30       Includes lots of beneficiary families that completed prior steps in the legal certainty
women or of men/women on a                                                            process under previous loans (1842/OC-AR and 2662/OC-AR). Source: Master
shared basis.2                                                                        project file based on municipal and provincial records.




1
    Possession of property title is defined as a title deed notarized by a public notary in the National Property Registry.
2
    Legal certainty means a document evidencing State recognition of tenure of a lot on the part of each of the families occupying it.
Annex II
Page 2 of 5

                                     Unit of          Baseline      End of
Outcome indicators                           Baseline                                                Comments and means of verification
                                     measure           year         project
Component 2. Provision of infrastructure, environmental sanitation, and social facilities.
                                                                              Once the works are completed the percentage of households that actually make
                                                                              regular use of basic services such as water, safe wastewater disposal, vehicular or
Households with actual use of          %         0        2015         90     pedestrian road access (including public transportation), trash collection, and public
public services.
                                                                              lighting in the main thoroughfares of the neighborhood is verified. Source: Master
                                                                              project files and final program evaluation surveys.
Component 3. Community development
                                                                              Considered satisfactory when the presence of up to 80% of participants has been
                                                                              recorded and the original objective of the activity or project has been achieved. The
                                                                              original number of registered participants is compared with the number of
Community initiative projects
                                       %         0        2015         90     participants who completed the CIP activities, and achievement of the CIP’s
(CIPs) satisfactorily implemented.
                                                                              original objective is verified. Source: Certificates of completion of each project
                                                                              prepared by the work team in the field and confirmed by the National Coordination
                                                                              Unit (NCU).
Component 4. Strengthening of management capacity
Slippage between time scheduled
                                                                              The baseline was determined on the basis of slippage times for current works under
and actual time required to            %         30       2015         25
                                                                              loan 2662/OC-AR. Source: PEU and MEU post-works reports.
complete the works.
                                                                                                                                                             Annex II
                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 5

                                                                         OUTPUT INDICATORS
 Component 1. Legalization of land tenure
                            Unit     Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5           Target                Comments and means of verification
 Neighborhoods with
                         Neighbor-                                                                  Neighborhood formally recorded at the municipio or province.
 regularized urban                      10        0       7        7        3       12       39
                          hoods                                                                     Source: Municipal or provincial registry.
 layout.
 Lots with program-                                                                               The titling processes include technical assistance, legal studies,
 supported titling          Lots         0      1,000   4,000   10,000 16,000 21,000       21,000 etc., and take at least three years; consequently, the target is
 processes.                                                                                       cumulative. Source: Master project files.

 Component 2. Provision of infrastructure, environmental sanitation, and community facilities
                            Unit     Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Target                          Comments and means of verification
Final project designs                                                                               They are considered produced once approved by the NCU. They
produced by the PEUs      Projects       0        6       6       12       20       6        50     include projects to be executed in the following stage of the
and MEUs.3                                                                                          CCLIP. Source: Project approval by the NCU.
                                                                                                    They are considered executed once preliminary delivery has been
Comprehensive            Neighbor-
                                         0        0       3        7       10       19       39     taken of the last works. Source: Certificates of works confirmed
projects executed.4       hoods
                                                                                                    and reported by the NCU.
                                                                                                  Measured by the number of families with improved housing in
                                                                                                  the form of regular water connection and use, safe wastewater
                                                                                                  disposal, vehicular or pedestrian road access, and public lighting
Beneficiaries of                                                                                  in the main neighborhood thoroughfares. This is a core sector
improved housing          Families       0        0     2,400    5,600    8,000   15,000   31,000 indicator and is included as a milestone for the comprehensive
solutions.                                                                                        projects output. The teams in the field verify the number of lots
                                                                                                  with connection and use of basic services in the master project
                                                                                                  files. Source: PEU and MEU post-works reports and master
                                                                                                  project files.
                                                                                                    Regular service means that the water is of good quality and the
Residential water
                                                                                                    frequency of service is at least four days per week. Milestone for
connections with            Lots         0        0     1,300    1,800    1,300   1,800     6,200
                                                                                                    the Comprehensive Projects output. Source: Certificates of works
regular service.
                                                                                                    confirmed and reported by the NCU.

  3
      Final project designs consist of a set of detailed drawings and technical specifications for the bidding processes for works under the comprehensive projects.
  4
      Comprehensive projects consist of multisector interventions in the neighborhoods, including basic urban infrastructure works and connections, public spaces,
      community facilities, and supplementary works.
  Annex II
  Page 4 of 5

                             Unit      Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Target                            Comments and means of verification
                                                                                                     The system is satisfactory when final disposal takes place in a
Satisfactory residential                                                                             regular network or through a safe treatment solution. Milestone
                             Lots         0         0     3,700    5,500    3,700    5,600    18,500
sewerage connections.                                                                                for the Comprehensive Projects output. Source: Certificates of
                                                                                                     works confirmed and reported by the NCU.
                                                                                                       System installation includes regularization of the works by the
Electricity systems        Neighbor-
                                          0         0       2        3        2        3        10     power companies. Milestone for the Comprehensive Projects
installed.                  hoods
                                                                                                       output. Source: Works transfer agreement.
                                                                                                       Main access roads are structural roads that establish connections
Public lighting in main    Neighbor-                                                                   with the city. Milestone for the Comprehensive Projects output.
                                          0         0       5        7        5        7        24
access roads installed.     hoods                                                                      Source: Certificates of works confirmed and reported by the
                                                                                                       NCU.
Road and pedestrian                                                                                    Road systems include surface or underground drainage networks.
networks built or             km          0         0      27        41       27       41       136    Milestone for the Comprehensive Projects output. Source:
improved.                                                                                              Certificates of works confirmed and reported by the NCU.
                                                                                                       These recreational spaces are considered completed when they
Plazas and parks                                                                                       are transferred to the respective municipios. Milestone for the
                           Number         0         0       6        9        7        9        31
completed.                                                                                             Comprehensive Projects output. Source: Certificates of works
                                                                                                       confirmed and reported by the NCU.
                                                                                                       They are considered installed when they are transferred to the
                                                                                                       respective municipios. They include garbage bins, landscaping,
Urban facilities           Neighbor-
                                          0         0       5        9        6        9        29     and bus stops. Milestone for the Comprehensive Projects output.
installed.                  hoods
                                                                                                       Source: Certificates of works confirmed and reported by the
                                                                                                       NCU.
                                                                                                       They are considered installed when they are transferred to the
Community facilities
                                                                                                       respective municipios. They include community centers,
installed and operating
                           Number         0         0       6        10       7        10       33     multipurpose rooms, child care centers, etc. Milestone for the
inside the
                                                                                                       Comprehensive Projects output. Source: Certificates of works
neighborhood.
                                                                                                       confirmed and reported by the NCU.
                                                                                                       They are considered completed when the relevant utility
Supplementary works
                           Number         0         0       3        5        3        4        15     companies are regularized. Milestone for the Comprehensive
completed.5
                                                                                                       Projects output. Source: Works transfer agreement.



  5
      Supplementary works are interventions aimed at connecting or supplementing the installed networks, such as sewage pumping stations and transformer substations.
                                                                                                                                                                   Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5

 Component 3. Community development

                             Unit       Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Target                            Comments and means of verification
Community initiative                                                                                    Source: Certificates of completion for each project, prepared by
projects (CIPs)            Projects        0        0        3       11       13        14       41     the work team in the field and confirmed by the NCU.
executed6
                             Unit       Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Target                            Comments and means of verification
                                                                                                        The master project files are opened at the start of each
                                                                                                        comprehensive project and are closed when the intervention is
Master project files
                                                                                                        completed in each neighborhood; accordingly, this indicator is
completed by the work        Files         0        8       18       28       32        39       39
                                                                                                        cumulative. The annual target includes the master project files
teams in the field.7
                                                                                                        opened in that period. Source: Master project files accessible
                                                                                                        through the program website.
 Component 4. Strengthening of management capacity

                             Unit       Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Target                            Comments and means of verification
Executing unit officials
and/or community         Participants      0       200     200       200      500      500      1,600   Source: Records of attendance at training events.
actors trained.
Executing unit with
                          Executing                                                                     * Non-cumulative target.
technical support                          0        12      24       27       15        15        *
           8                 unit                                                                       Source: Annual and final NCU reports.
installed.
                                                                                                        Add applications to the website for (i) loading master project
Program website
                         Applications      0        0        1        1        1        0         3     files; (ii) search filters; and (iii) information downloading system.
improved.
                                                                                                        Source: Annual and final NCU reports.
Seminar on experience
in neighborhood
                           Seminar         0        0        0        1        0        0         1     Source: Annual NCU report.
improvement in
Argentina.


  6
      Community initiative projects (CIPs) are projects that provide technical and social support to community organizations and groups and are designed in keeping with the
      specific needs of each neighborhood based on a diagnostic assessment. Examples of CIPs financed by the program include training for solid waste collectors,
      occupational certification for women, youth symphony orchestras, environmental education, and computer workshops.
  7
      Work teams in the field are multidisciplinary teams that address urban, social, environmental, and legal issues in the neighborhoods in which projects are being
      implemented.
  8
      Technical support for the executing units is provided by financing specific studies to complement the interventions and computer equipment.
                                                                                   Annex III
                                                                                  Page 1 of 7



                      FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Country:                  Argentina
Project number:           AR-L1179
Name:                     Barrio Improvement Program
Prepared by:              Teodoro Noel (FMP/CAR) and Brenda Álvarez Junco
                          (FMP/CAR)

                               I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.1     The Procedures Guide for Risk Management in Sovereign-guaranteed Projects
        was used for risk assessment purposes. The Bank evaluated the capacity of the
        executing agency to implement procurement actions and determined that the
        overall program risk associated with the management of procurement processes is
        low.
1.2     An institutional capacity assessment was not performed because this is the fourth
        program of the same type being financed with this executing unit, with very
        positive results. From the fiduciary point of view, the only difference is that this
        time the Barrio Improvement Program III (PROMEBA III) (2662/OC-AR) would
        be receiving financing in parallel with operation AR-L1179 (PROMEBA IV),
        with some of the investment projects receiving financing from both loans.
1.3     The program does not involve financing from other multilateral agencies.
        However, it will be executed in parallel with PROMEBA III (2662/OC-AR).

                II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

2.1     The National Coordination Unit (NCU) has experience in the execution of three
        programs financed by the Bank. At present, the Bank will be financing the fourth
        PROMEBA operation with the same executing unit. The fiduciary systems used
        for program execution are the budget system, through the Integrated Financial
        Information System (SIDIF), and the information and accounting system
        (UEPEX).

            III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS

3.1     The risk assessment exercise identified the following fiduciary risk, which was
        determined to be medium: bookkeeping errors in execution expenditures charged
        to two sources of financing (2662/OC-AR and AR-L1179). This risk will be
        mitigated through: (i) controls to prevent changes in source of financing once the
        payment source has been identified; (ii) periodic reports indicating the total cost
Annex III
Page 2 of 7


         of the project, budget, and amount to be financed through PROMEBA III or IV,
         authorized by the project team leader; and (iii) periodic review by the Fiduciary
         Sector.

         IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACTS

4.1      With a view to expediting contract negotiations by the project team and primarily
         by the Legal Department, below is a description of the agreements and
         requirements that should be considered in the special provisions or in the sole
         annex, as the case may be, and which may be updated or amended during program
         execution, if appropriate, once documented and authorized by the Bank:
         a.   Management of disbursements. The executing agency will present a
              financial plan for the program in accordance with the guidelines agreed upon
              by the Bank and the country. The minimum percentage required for
              replenishment of advances will be 70% due to the decentralized nature of this
              program and the complexity of its execution (permanent adjustment).
         b.   The exchange rate to be used for rendering of accounts will be the one
              indicated in Article 4.10 section (b) (i) of the loan contract. For purposes of
              determining the equivalence of expenses incurred in local currency and
              chargeable to the local counterpart contribution or the reimbursement of
              expenses chargeable to the loan proceeds, the agreed-upon exchange rate will
              be the exchange rate in effect on the first business day of the payment month,
              as provided for in Section 3.03, option A, of the loan contract.
         c.   The two programs being executed in parallel will be audited by an
              independent auditing firm.

        V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

A.       Procurement execution
5.1      The Policies for the procurement of goods and works financed by the Inter-
         American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9), of March 2011, and the
         Policies for the selection and contracting of consultants financed by the Inter-
         American Development Bank (document GN-2350-9), of March 2011, will apply.
         In addition, it was agreed with the executing agency that the Procurement Plan
         Execution System (SEPA) would be used for the administration and management
         of procurement planning under the program. In the event of temporary
         connectivity problems and/or problems loading information into the SEPA, a
         physical Excel format may be used on a provisional basis to ensure that an
         approved procurement plan is in effect at all times.
5.2      Since this operation provides for provincial execution, with the exception of the
         information system, the country subsystems will not be used.
                                                                                                Annex III
                                                                                               Page 3 of 7


5.3       Procurement of goods, works, and nonconsulting services. For procurement
          processes conducted in accordance with the Bank’s procurement policies, the
          procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services 1 subject to international
          competitive bidding (ICB) pursuant to the approved threshold amount for
          Argentina will be carried out using the standard bidding documents (SBD) issued
          by the Bank.
5.4       Selection and contracting of consultants. Consulting service contracts generated
          under the program will use the standard requests for proposals (RFP) issued by
          the Bank. For consulting services with an estimated budget of up to US$200,000,
          the executing agency will promote the use of the selection method based on the
          consultant’s qualifications, as provided for in the policies. The program’s sector
          specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical specifications for
          procurement during the preparation stage of selection processes.
          a.   Selection of individual consultants. In the case of individual consultants,
               selection will take into account the provisions of Section V, paragraphs 5.1
               through 5.4 of the Policies (document GN-2350-9). The direct selection method
               may be used for the contracting of consultants hired to assist the executing
               agency during the program execution period, as provided for in Section V,
               paragraph 5.4 (a) of the aforementioned policies. To this end, the executing
               agency will present to the Bank a list of the consultants who have been
               providing services at the central executing unit under loan 2662/OC-AR, along
               with the terms of reference for each position. For the renewal of service
               contracts, approval of the performance evaluation by the program’s executive
               coordinator, to at least a satisfactory level, will be sufficient.
          b.   Training. The procurement plan describes the procurement applicable to
               program components that include training, which is contracted as consulting
               and nonconsulting services.
5.5       Recurring expenses. Recurring costs or operating and maintenance expenses
          required for program operation and eligible for financing with Bank resources
          include: tickets; per diems, travel, office maintenance, mail service, stationery,
          and supplies, machinery and equipment maintenance, insurance, training
          expenses, graphic arts, printing, publications, and reproductions, rental
          equipment, and minor expenses required for operation of the NCU. These will be
          procured in accordance with the administrative procedures described in the
          program’s Operating Regulations, which have been reviewed and accepted by the
          Bank.
5.6       Advance procurement/ Retroactive financing. There are no expenditures
          eligible for retroactive financing or recognition against the local counterpart
          contribution.


1
      Policies for the procurement of goods and works financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9) paragraph
      1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods.
Annex III
Page 4 of 7


B.        Main procurement processes
                                                                                                     Estimated
                                                                            Selection    Estimated
              Activity                                                      method2         date
                                                                                                      amount
                                                                                                     US$ (000)
              Goods
              Furniture and hardware for the National Coordination Unit
                                                                                S        Oct 2015          30
              (NCU)
              Works
              Infrastructure, facilities, and environmental sanitation
                                                                              NCB        Oct 2015       4,960
              works in neighborhoods in the province of Mendoza
              Infrastructure and environmental sanitation works in
                                                                              NCB        Oct 2015       4,790
              neighborhoods in the province of Neuquén
              Nonconsulting services
              Surveys and subdivision of targeted neighborhoods in the
                                                                                S        Oct 2015           8
              province of Buenos Aires
              Surveys and subdivision of targeted neighborhoods in the
                                                                                S        Oct 2015           3
              province of Chubut
              Firms3
              External audit                                                 QCBS        Jul 2015          70
              Individuals
              Technical assistance to reinforce subexecuting units in the
                                                                            Short list   Jul 2015          64
              province of Buenos Aires


5.7       The activities listed in the table of main procurement processes are included by
          way of example. For the program’s 18-month procurement plan, see REL 3.
C.        Procurement supervision
5.8       The supervision method will be ex post, except in cases in which ex ante
          supervision is justified. In the event of procurement carried out through the
          country system, supervision will always be performed using the country system.
5.9       The supervision method will be determined for each selection process. Ex post
          reviews will be performed every 12 months in accordance with the program
          supervision plan. Ex post review reports will include at least one physical
          inspection, selected from among the procurement processes subject to ex post
          review. At least 10% of the contracts reviewed will be physically inspected.




2
      In the case of procurement performed through the country system, the selection method will be indicated in
      the relevant box.
3
      In the case of consulting services, this means that the short list is comprised of firms of various
      nationalities. See Policies for the selection and contracting of consultants financed by the IDB (document
      GN-2350-9) paragraph 2.6.
                                                                                                Annex III
                                                                                               Page 5 of 7


       Table of threshold amounts, types of process, and supervision method
                                                                    Procurement
             Expenditure category           Amount (US$000)                                 IDB review
                                                                       method
                                                  >5,000                 ICB                  Ex ante
        Works                                  <5,000  > 350             NCB                  Ex post
                                                   < 350                   S                  Ex post
                                                   >500                  ICB                  Ex ante
        Goods                                   <500 > 100               NCB                  Ex post
                                                   < 100                   S                  Ex post
                                                   > 500                 ICB                  Ex ante
        Nonconsulting services                  <500 > 100               NCB                  Ex post
                                                   < 50                    S                  Ex post
                                                   >500          International short          Ex ante
                                                                          list
        Consulting firms
                                                                   100% national
                                                   <500                                       Ex post
                                                                       short list
        Individual consultants             See Section V of the Policy (document              Ex post
                                           GN-2350-9)
       Note: The threshold amounts established for ex post review reflect the executing agency’s fiduciary
       capacity for execution and may be modified by the Bank should there be a change in that capacity.


5.10   Supervision of the country system will consist of reviewing and monitoring the
       stability of the system and the validated practices that gave rise to its approval.
D.     Records and files
5.11   The executing agency will keep the program records and files. Program reports
       will be prepared and filed using the agreed-upon formats or procedures set forth
       in the Operating Regulations.

       VI. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

A.     Programming and budget
6.1    The executing unit of the Barrio Improvement Program, responsible for
       formulating and programming the annual budget, is in charge of completing all
       procedures aimed at consolidating the annual budget for approval. As the need
       arises to expand or reallocate budget items, the executing unit requests the
       relevant changes and is responsible for processing their approval. Budget credits
       are executed by means of quarterly and monthly installments of accrual
       commitments, which are allocated by the National Budget Office (Finance
       Department of the Ministry of Economy and Public Finance).
6.2    No problems are expected in budget management, timeliness of counterpart
       contributions, or system delays capable of affecting program execution.
Annex III
Page 6 of 7


B.       Treasury and management of disbursements
6.3      The National Treasury transfers the local counterpart funds to the executing unit
         into an account opened by the program exclusively for this loan, since this
         program is being cofinanced with Bank resources.
6.4      Disbursements will be made on the basis of a detailed financial plan, a model of
         which has been agreed upon with the Minister of Economy and the Cabinet
         Office.
C.       Accounting, information systems, and reporting
6.5      The executing agency will use the UEPEX system as its financial management
         system. Accounting records will be cash-based and will observe International
         Financial Reporting Standards when applicable, in accordance with national
         accounting principles. The following financial reports will be required:
         (i) financial execution plan for up to 180 days following a request for an advance
         of funds; (ii) audited annual financial statements; and (iii) other reports as
         required by the fiduciary specialists.
D.       Internal control and internal audit
6.6      The national body responsible for internal control is the Sindicatura General de la
         Nación [Comptroller General of the Nation]. The internal audit of each executing
         agency is performed by the Internal Audit Unit. This unit reports directly to the
         minister and is responsible for performing audits and making recommendations in
         accordance with the authority conferred under Law 24,156 (Law on Financial
         Management and Control Systems) of 30 September 1992. The Internal Audit
         Unit of the Ministry of Federal Planning, Public Investment, and Services will
         perform the program’s internal audits.
E.       External control: external financial audit and project reports
6.7      In 2011, the Bank completed a diagnostic assessment of the governmental
         auditing practices of the Auditoría General de la Nación [Office of the Auditor
         General of the Nation] (AGN). This assessment was performed in accordance
         with Bank guidelines for determining the development level of public financial
         management systems, and led to the validation of the AGN as auditor of Bank
         projects. However, in October 2014, based on the AGN’s record in terms of
         timely presentation of audited financial statements in recent years, the Bank and
         the Government of Argentina agreed to reduce the AGN’s portfolio to reflect the
         entity’s actual capacity to comply. Loan 2662/OC-AR (PROMEBA III) is being
         audited by an independent auditing firm under a contract that expires at the end of
         the 2014 fiscal year. The executing unit should therefore tender the auditing of
         operations 2662/OC-AR and AR-L1179 (PROMEBA IV) jointly, so that the same
         firm can audit both programs.
6.8      The audit will be performed on the basis of the new terms of reference prepared
         by the Bank, 2014 version.
                                                                                                 Annex III
                                                                                                Page 7 of 7


F.        Financial supervision plan4
6.9       The initial financial supervision plan was based on the risk and fiduciary capacity
          assessments carried out in accordance with the on-site and desk reviews planned
          for the program. It includes the scope of operational, financial, and accounting
          actions, compliance and legality, frequency, and responsible parties.
6.10      The reports that will be required in order to perform financial supervision, in
          addition to those required to process disbursements and the annual audit report,
          are the financial plan and periodic reports indicating the total cost of the project,
          budget, and amount to be financed under loan 2662/OC-AR (PROMEBA III) or
          the loan under AR-L1179 (PROMEBA IV), authorized by the project team leader.
G.        Execution arrangements
6.11      The executing agency will be the Urban Development and Housing Division of
          the Public Works Department of the Ministry of Federal Planning, Public
          Investment, and Services, through its NCU, which will be the central entity
          responsible for coordinating the program and executing all program components.
6.12      Program execution will be decentralized and will be carried out through the
          participating provincial executing units and municipal executing units in their
          capacity as program subexecuting agencies. The provinces will propose potential
          investment projects to be financed through the loan in accordance with the criteria
          and terms described in the Operating Regulations.
H.        Other financial management agreements and requirements
6.13      N/A.




4
      See Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (OP-273-6) Annex I Applicability of
      financial management principles and requirements, Requirement 4 Financial supervision.
              DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/AR



                       Argentina. Loan ____/OC-AR to the Argentine Republic
                                    Barrio Improvement Program



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, in
the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary with
the Argentine Republic, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing aimed at cooperating
in the execution of a neighborhood improvement program, which constitutes the third individual
operation under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) AR-X1004 approved
on 31 January 2007 by Resolution DE-5/07. Such financing will be for an amount of up to
US$200,000,000 from the Ordinary Capital resources of the Bank, and will be subject to the
Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of
the Loan Proposal.



                                 (Adopted on ___ __________ 2015)



LEG/SGO/CSC/IDBDOCS: 39589971
Pipeline No. AR-L1179
