                                                                                         PUBLIC


                 DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                           ARGENTINA


                           BARRIO IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
                                          (AR-L1341)


FOURTH INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE
 FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) ESTABLISHED BY AGREEMENT
                     ON 29 MARCH 2007

                                          (AR-X1004)




                                         LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Felipe Vera (HUD/CAR), Project
Team Leader; Julieta Abad (TSP/CAR) and Dalve Alves (HUD/CAR), Alternate Project Team
Leaders; Verónica Adler (HUD/CUR); Martin Soulier (HUD/CAR); Jorge Oyamada (WSA/CAR);
Carolina Sepúlveda (HUD/CCH); Juliana Almeida and Hector Cordero (CSD/CCS); Cecilia Ares
(CSC/CAR); Ana Nuibó, Sofía García Bailón, and Natalia Pérez Fontela (FMP/CAR); Alejandra
Catacoli and Julia Miguez Morais (VPS/ESG); Viviana Maya and Alonso Chaverri (LEG/SGO);
Ana Cuesta, Laisa Rachter, and Gabriel Filc (SPD/SDV); Ana Cristina García, Dianela Avila,
Maria Alejandra Villota, and Silvia Perez (CSD/HUD).



Under the Access to Information Policy, this document is subject to public disclosure.
                                                     CONTENTS


PROJECT SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost ............................................................... 15
       C.    Key results indicators ................................................................................... 17

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 18

       A.    Financing instruments .................................................................................. 18
       B.    Environmental and social risks..................................................................... 19
       C.    Fiduciary risks .............................................................................................. 20
       D.    Other key issues and risks ........................................................................... 20

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................. 22

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................. 22
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ........................................ 24
                                                  - ii -



                                               ANNEXES
Annex I      Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix
Annex II     Results Matrix
Annex III    Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                            REQUIRED LINKS
     1      Multiyear execution plan and annual work plan
     2      Monitoring and evaluation plan
     3      Environmental and social review summary
     4      Procurement plan


                                             OPTIONAL LINKS
     1      Economic assessment
     2      Project completion report - CLP-2 (2662/OC-AR)
     3      Midterm evaluation of the Barrio Improvement Program - CLP-3 (3458/OC-AR)
     4      Evaluation of the Barrio Improvement Program - CLP-1 (1842/OC-AR)
     5      Impact evaluation of the Barrio Improvement Program - CLP-2
     6      Analysis of compliance with the Public Utilities Policy
     7      Gender and diversity analysis
     8      Atlas on risk and climate change - Argentina
     9      Lessons learned from Barrio Improvement Programs in the region
    10      Vertical logic
    11      Program Operating Regulations
    12      Analysis of the housing sector in Argentina. 2021 update
    13      Report on public transportation in the metropolitan region of Buenos Aires 2022
    14      Technical report on social infrastructure
    15      Environmental and social analysis of projects in the sample
    16      Environmental and social management framework for the program
    17      Annex to the atlas of risk in shantytowns, settlements, and degraded areas in Argentina
    18      Safeguard Policy Filter and Safeguard Screening Form for Classification of Projects
    19      Profiling of the urban housing problem in large low-income housing complexes in Argentina
    20      Bibliographic references
                                        - iii -




                                 ABBREVIATIONS
AGN          Auditoría General de la Nación [Office of the Auditor General]
CCLIP        Conditional credit line for investment projects
CLP-1        First individual operation under the CCLIP
CLP-2        Second individual operation under the CCLIP
CLP-3        Third individual operation under the CCLIP
CLP-4        Fourth individual operation under the CCLIP
DGPPSE       Dirección General de Programas y Proyectos Sectoriales y Especiales [Office
             of Sector and Special Programs and Projects]
EIP2         Comprehensive evaluation of project two
EIRR         Economic internal rate of return
PCR          Project completion report
PROMEBA      Programa de Mejoramiento de Barrios [Barrio Improvement Program]
PRONUREE     Programa Nacional de Uso Racional y Eficiente de la Energía [National
             Program for Rational and Efficient Energy Use]
RENABAP      Registro Nacional de Barrios Populares [National Registry of Low-income
             Neighborhoods]
SAE          Secretaría de Asuntos Estratégicos [Department of Strategic Matters]
SEPA         Sistema de Ejecución de Planes de Adquisición [Procurement Plan Execution
             System]
SUBE         Sistema único de boleto electrónico [single electronic ticket system]
UEPEX        Unidades Ejecutoras de Préstamos Externos [Executing units for external
             loans]
UN-Habitat   United Nations Human Settlement Programme
VAA          Villas, asentamientos y áreas degradadas [shantytowns, settlements, and
             degraded areas]
                                                                   PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                ARGENTINA
                                      BARRIO IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
                                               (AR-L1341)
      FOURTH INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)
                               ESTABLISHED BY AGREEMENT ON 29 MARCH 2007
                                               (AR-X1004)
                                                  Financial Terms and Conditions
                                                                              Flexible Financing Facility(a)
  Borrower: Argentine Republic
                                                           Amortization period:                  25 years
  Executing agency: Ministry of Territorial Development    Disbursement period:                  5 years
  and Habitat                                              Grace period:                         5.5 years (b)
                                 Amount                    Interest rate:                        SOFR-based
            Source                                 %                                             (c)
                              (US$ millions)               Credit fee:
                         (d)                                                                     (c)
  IDB (Ordinary Capital):              150.00       90.91 Inspection and supervision fee:
  Local:                                         15.00          9.09     Weighted average life:                            15.25 years
  Total:                                        165.00        100.00     Approval currency:                                U.S. dollars
                                                                     Project at a Glance
  Project objective/description: To sustainably improve the habitability of dwellings located in the country’s shantytowns, settlements,
  and degraded areas through actions that contribute to more secure land tenure, the provision of basic infrastructure, and community
  development. The specific objectives are: (i) to increase the security of land tenure for beneficiary households; (ii) to improve the
  quality of life of the inhabitants in each area targeted by the intervention and in the area of influence through different habitat
  improvement works; (iii) to strengthen grassroots community organizations and ensure the participation of neighborhood residents in
  all phases of the comprehensive project; and (iv) to enhance the performance of teams in the executing agency, the provincial
  execution units, and the municipal execution units. This fourth individual operation is part of conditional credit line for investment
  projects (CCLIP) AR-X1004, which aims to improve the quality of life and contribute to the urban and social inclusion of Argentine
  households in the poorest segments of the population residing in shantytowns and informal settlements.
  Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the financing: The borrower, through the executing
  agency, will provide evidence of: (i) the entry into effect of the program Operating Regulations, in accordance with the terms agreed
  upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.3); and (ii) the creation of the program implementation team, which will include, at a minimum, the
  technical officer and the environmental and social specialists for environmental and social management (paragraph 2.6).
  Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to the first transfer of proceeds to each subexecuting agency, the executing
  agency will sign a framework participation agreement or equivalent agreement with each subexecuting agency, under the terms
  previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.5). The executing agency will comply with the environmental and social legal
  requirements set out in Annex B to the environmental and social review summary.

  Exceptions to Bank policies: None
                                                                     Strategic Alignment
  Challenges:(e)                                                   SI    ☒                        PI    ☒                             EI    ☒
  Crosscutting themes:(f)                                GE ☒ and DI ☒                       CC ☒ and ES ☒                            IC    ☒
(a)
      Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization
      schedule as well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe protection conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management
      considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)
      Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any
      extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)
      The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s
      lending charges, in accordance with the applicable policies.
(d)
      Pursuant to document AB-2990, the disbursement of Bank loan proceeds will be subject to the following maximum limits: (i) up to 15% during the first
      12 months; (ii) up to 30% during the first 24 months; and (iii) up to 50% during the first 36 months, counting in all cases from the date on which the
      loan operation is approved by the Board of Executive Directors (paragraph 2.3).
(e)
      SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(f)
      GE (Gender Equality) and DI (Diversity); CC (Climate Change) and ES (Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law).
                             I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Background. Argentina is one of the most urbanized countries in Latin America,
          with 92% of its inhabitants residing in urban areas.1 It also has a high concentration
          of inhabitants in large cities: out of an estimated total of 45 million people,2 51%3
          live in 10 urban agglomerations4 with over 500,000 inhabitants.5 Due to the
          pressure on urban land to address the expansive growth of cities, combined with
          the difficulty of providing basic services and urban infrastructure, an increasing
          number of people are building their dwellings in shantytowns, settlements,6 and
          degraded areas7 (VAAs), without having proper access to these urban services
          and amenities.
1.2       The country’s housing deficit is equivalent to 3.62 million8 dwellings (2020), which
          accounts for 38.8% of the total.9 Of these dwellings, 61.6% (2,230,147 dwellings)
          are concentrated in VAAs, which is a qualitative deficit characterized by: (i) issues
          with housing quality (63%, or 1,405,547 dwellings); and (ii) overcrowding in
          dwellings (3.5%, or 79,000 dwellings) or lack of access to basic services (33.4%).
          VAAs are characterized by: (i) low access to basic services; (ii) issues with housing
          quality; (iii) informal land tenure; (iv) low quality or absence of community



1    Bibliographic references, optional link 20- [1].
2    Optional link 20- [2].
3    Optional link 20- [3].
4    “An agglomeration, technically known as a composite locality, is a specific type of locality. The definition of
     ‘locality’ is based on a physical criterion that establishes that a locality ‘is a portion of the earth’s surface
     characterized by the shape, quantity, size, and proximity of certain fixed, artificial, physical objects (buildings)
     and by certain artificial modifications to the land (streets) that are necessary to connect the buildings to each
     another.’ In other words, ‘localities are conceived as spatial concentrations of buildings connected to each
     other by a network of streets.’ If the locality extends across the territory of two or more provinces,
     encompassing two or more departments or local government areas; or if it extends across a single province,
     encompassing two or more departments; or if it extends across two or more local government areas within the
     same province and the same department, it is a composite locality or agglomeration” optional link 20- [3].
5    Greater Buenos Aires, Greater Córdoba, Greater Rosario, Greater Mendoza, Greater La Plata, Greater
     Tucumán-Tají Viejo, Mar del Plata, Greater Santa Fe, Greater Salta, and Greater San Juan. In all, 34% of the
     population is concentrated in the agglomeration of Greater Buenos Aires optional link 20- [3].
6    Shantytowns or villas are neighborhoods with an irregular urban fabric that do not have sufficient infrastructure,
     green spaces, or recreational areas. They are accessed by passageways and have high population density.
     Informal settlements are neighborhoods that seek to maintain the urban fabric as a continuation of the fabric
     of the formal city. Though subdivided, plots of land follow the layout of streets. Techo Argentina (2016),
     Relevamiento de Asentamientos Informales [Survey of Informal Settlements]. For the purpose of this program,
     the shantytown, settlement, and degraded area (VAA) unit will be treated as a comprehensive area of
     intervention that includes the contact zone between the formal and informal areas of the city.
7    A “degraded area” is understood as UN-Habitat’s definition of a slum, where a slum household is a group of
     individuals living under the same roof in an urban area who lack at least one of the following: (i) easy access
     to safe water in sufficient amounts at an affordable price; (ii) access to adequate sanitation: access to
     mechanisms for solid waste collection; (iii) sufficient living space; (iv) housing quality and durability; and
     (v) security of tenure.
8    Optional link 20- [4].
9    In all, 38.4% have a quantitative deficit. Of these, 81.4% are unrecoverable dwellings, and 18.6% are dwellings
     where two or more families are cohabitating.
                                                     -2-



          amenities; (v) poor physical connectivity (to the formal city) and digital
          connectivity;10 and (vi) low quality or lack of public spaces.
1.3       According to the National Registry of Low-income Neighborhoods,11 Argentina has
          4,561 low-income neighborhoods12 in which 961,128 families reside. Of these
          neighborhoods, 24% are shantytowns and 76% are settlements. In general, these
          housing developments have sprung up in urban fringe areas on polluted residual
          soils and are exposed to environmental risks and extreme weather events such as
          floods, which have intensified in recent years due to climate change. In addition,
          households in VAAs face more significant gaps in access to the formal economy,
          which puts greater limitations on their ability to generate revenue. In VAAs, 44.5%
          of the adult population is economically inactive,13 39.4% are experiencing
          employment vulnerability, 22% have a job that does not offer social security
          contributions, 9.4% are self-employed in precarious work, and 8% are
          unemployed. Only 16.1% of adults have a registered job.

                                     Map 1. Households in VAAs by province




       Source: IDB, based on RENABAP data.

10   Only 27% of households residing in VAAs have Internet service (National Survey on Social Structure, 2019).
11   The National Registry of Low-Income Neighborhoods (RENABAP) was created by Decree 358/2017 of the
     national executive branch. RENABAP defines a low-income neighborhood as one with at least eight clustered
     or contiguous households, where more than half of the population does not have a property title or regular
     access to at least two of the basic utilities (running water, metered electricity, and/or sewerage).
12   This includes low-income neighborhoods that are registered in RENABAP and are shantytowns or settlements
     created before 31 December 2016.
13   Individuals in the inactive population do not have a job and are not looking for one. They can be individuals
     engaged in domestic work, students who attend school exclusively, retirees, and pensioners. Also known as
     “inactivos marginales” [the marginal inactive population] or “desocupados desalentados” [the discouraged
     unemployed]. Optional link 20- [5].
                                                     -3-



1.4       With support from the Bank through CCLIP AR-X1004, the government has
          developed a successful model for a comprehensive, crosscutting intervention in
          the country that has helped Argentine cities improve VAAs and contain the growing
          gaps in access to a decent habitat and quality urban services. This intervention
          model has improved the quality of life of over 180,000 households in a sustainable
          manner and created capacity for habitat improvement in most of the country’s
          subnational governments. Previous operations under this program have proven
          effective by yielding results and impacts that have helped contain and reduce the
          qualitative housing deficit, which has improved with each stage of the operation.
1.5       The program has produced positive outcomes in terms of security of land tenure
          and access to basic services, especially for women. The percentage of households
          that reported having legal security of tenure has risen by 18%, and by 33% for
          households headed by women.14 With respect to basic services, there was a 27%
          increase in residential connections to water and sewerage utilities, and a 25%
          decrease in overflow of pit latrines and septic tanks. In terms of infrastructure and
          community facilities, household satisfaction improved with respect to plazas
          (53%), streets after rainfall (62%), public lighting (26%), and sports facilities (33%).
          The perception of women’s safety has also improved in plazas (increasing 35%),
          busy streets (22%), and less busy streets (43%).15 The two previous operations in
          particular led to positive outcomes in this area: (i) operation 2662/OC-AR
          formalized connections to water, sewerage, gas, and electricity for 81
          neighborhoods and 64,809 dwellings (117% of the final target). The provincial
          execution units and municipal execution units produced 256 final design
          documents for comprehensive projects, with detailed plans and technical
          specifications, to invite bids for comprehensive project works (222% of the final
          target). Field work teams carried out 2,600 workshops, training courses, etc.; and
          (ii) progress to date on operation 3458/OC-AR shows that it will be possible to
          regularize 33 neighborhoods and 17,000 lots, as well as develop 33 final designs
          for comprehensive projects.16
1.6       In addition, previous operations under the program led to positive impacts in terms
          of human development and reducing the qualitative housing deficit. The program
          was successful in decreasing school absences due to floods in neighborhoods
          (33%) and in increasing the participation of female heads of households in
          community activities (17%).17 Another impact was reducing the qualitative housing
          deficit by promoting investments in dwellings: (i) it increased the percentage of
          dwellings with more resistant materials by incorporating insulation and finishing
          elements (45%); (ii) it decreased the rate of overcrowding (16%) while increasing
          the percentage of households that have a bathroom inside the dwelling (8%); and
          (iii) it increased the percentage of households with hot water in the bathroom (9%),
          a figure that was twice as high for households headed by women (18%). In
          addition, resident satisfaction rose (65%), which is a comprehensive indicator of



14   This outcome is consistent with the literature, which indicates that programs to formalize housing tenure have
     greater effects for households that are led by women (optional link 20- [6]).
15   Universidad Torcuato Di Tella (2019). Evaluación del Programa de Mejoramiento de Barrios [Evaluation of the
     Barrio Improvement Program].
16   Latest progress monitoring report, first half of 2021.
17   Ibid.
                                                    -4-



          the positive impact of improving the quality of life and contributing to social and
          urban inclusion of these households.18
1.7       This fourth program under the CCLIP will be strategic in improving the intervention
          model, as the activities that will be carried out in 39 VAAs to benefit 50,000
          households will aim to make interventions more effective in areas related to climate
          resilience, gender and diversity, and building government capacity to prevent the
          creation of new VAAS. Within the aforementioned 39 VAAs, some have been
          previously targeted under the CCLIP and/or PROMEBA I, while others have not.
1.8       Problem. Social and urban inclusion of households in VAAs is limited by their
          restricted access to the amenities offered by the formal city. To address this
          problem, four main causes and crosscutting factors have been identified that
          contribute to vulnerability based on gender, diversity, and exposure to the effects
          of climate change.
1.9       Cause 1. Insecure land tenure. According to the last census, 14.4% of urban
          households in Argentina do not own the parcel of land on which they live and
          occupy the dwelling by way of a loan or for work. On average, 17% of the
          population lives in housing with irregular tenure, a situation that is more
          pronounced in VAAs, where over 50% of residents do not have a property title.19
          Insecure land tenure discourages households from making improvements to their
          homes,20 increases residents’ social insecurity,21 and makes it difficult to access
          credit.22
1.10      Cause 2. Substandard and inequitable access to urban services. In VAAs, only
          14.7%23 of dwellings are connected to the sewer system, and only 3.3% have a
          formal sewerage connection.24 In all, 1.7% of dwellings have access to natural
          gas,25 while only 30.8% have paved streets, and 51.8% are located near garbage
          dumps.26 Lastly, 64% of VAAs flood27 at least once a year, a rate that will increase
          due to the effects of climate change (optional link 8).28




18   Ibid.
19   In order for a neighborhood to be registered with RENABAP, at least 50% of households must have insecure
     land tenure. Disaggregated microdata are not available.
20   Secure land tenure not only increases the investments that residents make in their dwellings but also raises
     property values by 25% to 31%, in comparison with the control group (optional link 20- [7]).
21   Optional link 20- [8].
22   Optional link 20- [9].
23   Optional link 20- [10].
24   RENABAP.
25   RENABAP.
26   Optional link 20- [10].
27   Recurring floods limit human development. The impact evaluation of PROMEBA found that it had a significant
     effect in reducing the number of households where a member had to be absent from class due to floods.
28   Optional link 20- [11].
                                                   -5-



                             Table 1. Formal city versus shantytowns and settlements

                                                                                     Shantytowns and
                     Urban services and features                 Argentina
                                                                                       settlements
           Formal sewerage connection                               70%                    3.3%
           Natural gas connection                                  71.2%                    1.7%
           Urban solid waste collection                            93.9%                   68.9%
           Paved streets                                           79.4%                   30.8%
           Proximity to dumps                                      22.1%                   51.8%
           Source: IDB, based on data provided by the Department of Social and Urban Integration (SISU)
           (optional link 20- [10]).


1.11      In terms of social infrastructure, neighborhoods lack community amenities such as
          multipurpose rooms and sports facilities, which can be found in 50% of VAAs.29
          Only 12.24% of these neighborhoods have a plaza or park in the neighborhood,
          which hinders community-building and harmonious relations among neighbors.30
1.12      Given that most VAAs are not served by public transportation, the amount of time
          it takes to walk to a bus stop is longer than the average. For example, while the
          average distance in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area is 600 meters, it is
          700 meters or more in most neighborhoods in the sample.31 In addition, according
          to data from the single electronic ticket system (SUBE) for public transportation,
          users from neighborhoods that are far from the center of the metropolitan area
          have to make more transfers to reach their destination, which increases their travel
          times.32
1.13      Cause 3. Barriers to social and urban inclusion that limit social capital and
          development of communities and the local economy. These areas face a range of
          limitations in accessing social services: (i) low effective coverage of basic
          healthcare services (only 5.6% of VAAs have health centers,33 and only 30% of the
          population received at least one basic healthcare service in the past 12 months,
          compared with 73% in the rest of the country);34 (ii) low access to child
          development and early education services (80% of children from 0 to 4 do not
          attend childcare centers, versus 68% in the formal city);35 and (iii) low access to
          education services (only 3.5% of VAAs have a daycare center, 6.6% have a
          kindergarten, 5.8% have primary schools in the neighborhood, and 4% have
          secondary schools).36 They also experience development gaps: only 15.5% of
          young people from 18 to 24 in VAAs go on to higher education, compared with
          29.7% countrywide.37 Only 26% of male and female household heads in VAAs

29   Idem.
30   Diagnostic assessment of a total of 4,233 RENABAP neighborhoods.
31   Optional link 20- [12].
32   Optional link 20- [13].
33   RENABAP.
34   Estimates from studying the gender gap in low-income neighborhoods, applying the definition of low-income
     neighborhoods to ENES data (2015). Estimates are based on data from the Sumar [Rise Up] program for
     populations in the areas included in the representative project sample.
35
     Optional link 20- [14].
36   RENABAP.
37   The average dropout age is 15 (optional link 20- [14]).
                                                      -6-



          have finished secondary school, a figure that improves slightly for residents in
          low-income housing (38%), compared with 51% of residents in neighborhoods with
          a regular urban fabric and/or in private gated communities.38 Poor labor outcomes
          are also observed: 44.5% of the adult population in VAAs is economically inactive,
          39.4% are experiencing employment vulnerability, 22% have a job that does not
          offer retirement contributions, 9.4% are self-employed in precarious work, 8% are
          unemployed, and only 16.1% of adults have a registered job.39
1.14      Cause 4. Technical and administration limitations of local governments in territorial
          management. These limitations affect the ability to ensure a decent habitat for the
          population. Municipios are the level of government responsible for territorial
          regulation. However, their capacities are limited in terms of human, financial, and
          technological resources, which makes it difficult to implement housing policies for
          social and urban inclusion.40 Evaluations of PROMEBA point to difficulties in
          territorial planning, execution, supervision, administrative management of
          coordination, and cooperation between different levels of government.41 VAAs also
          pose significant challenges when it comes to timely and reliable information, 42
          which impacts the public policy cycle and hinders the development of accurate
          diagnostic assessments, thus limiting urban development planning. This is also felt
          in the lack of tools for project monitoring and evaluation.43
1.15      Factors of vulnerability related to gender. Gender gaps and the lack of access
          to a decent habitat are interconnected inequalities that limit the social and urban
          integration of women. The long distances that they must travel to locations offering
          care or services also restrict their empowerment and economic autonomy.44
          Women and girls living in VAAs experience a heavier burden of care.45 At the
          national level, women spend an average of 44.8 hours per week on unpaid work
          related to domestic activities, versus 23.8 hours for men.46 In all, 82.8% of children
          under 2 do not go to childcare centers, and the people who look after them are
          mainly women (61.5%).47 In Buenos Aires, 46.2% of households are headed by
          women.48 The poverty rate for female household heads is 68%, compared with
          60% for their male counterparts.49 In addition, over 50% of women-led households
          in VAAs are overcrowded, 10% of which are critically so. Only 12% of households



38   Optional link 20- [14].
39   Optional link 20- [5].
40   Optional link 20- [15].
41   IDB. Project completion report for operation 2662/OC-AR. PROMEBA III.
42   Optional link 20- [16].
43   Ibid.
44   The time that women spend on unpaid work is much greater than the time spent by men on the same activities.
     In Argentina, women spend an average of 15.2 hours on paid work and 42.4 hours on unpaid work per week,
     while men spend 33.2 hours and 17.3 hours, respectively (optional link 20- [17]).
45   “Care” is understood as activities for the material and immaterial continuation of life that maintain the social
     fabric. Generally relegated to the domestic space, these practices range from food preparation and cleaning
     tasks to physical and emotional support for individuals (optional link 20- [18]).
46   Optional link 20- [19].
47
     Optional link 20- [20].
48   Optional link 20- [21].
49   Optional link 20- [22].
                                                  -7-



          headed by women own the dwelling but not the land,50 and 80% receive income
          from up to two sliding-scale minimum living wages (SMVM). Lastly, gender-based
          violence is an issue that needs to be addressed. Calls to the 137 hotline increased
          34% in April 2020 with respect to the previous year51 (optional link 7).
1.16      Factors of vulnerability related to diversity. Population groups considered to be
          diverse, including persons with disabilities, migrants, and LGBTQ+ individuals, and
          who reside in VAAs, face greater barriers to social and urban integration. The
          percentage of the population with disabilities at the national level is 10.2%,
          compared with 21.3% in the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires and 35% in
          VAAs.52,53 In addition, 26.5% of households with persons with disabilities feel it is
          necessary to make adjustments to their homes due to disability.54 With respect to
          the LGBTQ+ population, of the 117 crimes against LGBTQ+ individuals that
          occurred in the country in 2019, 113 were against trans women. LGBTQ+
          individuals also face a 14% unemployment rate (versus 8.2% at the national
          level)55 (optional link 7).
1.17      Factors of vulnerability related to the effects of climate change. An estimated
          45% of VAAs are located in areas exposed to environmental risks and the effects
          of climate change. For example, nearly 50% of VAAs are located in areas subject
          to flood risk.56 They are also more exposed to storms and heat waves,57 which have
          increased considerably in Argentina, having doubled in the city of Buenos Aires
          between 1960 and 2010.58 The substandard materials used in the construction of
          dwellings and buildings make them more vulnerable to these types of events.
          Droughts and heat waves also have a greater impact on these neighborhoods. For
          instance, 483,000 households in Buenos Aires alone and nearly 100% of degraded
          areas in the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, Córdoba, and Santa Fe have been
          identified as being subject to drought risk. Lastly, since they are not included in
          urban planning, VAAs do not incorporate measures for adaptation to climate
          impacts but face significant environmental risks because they are located on
          cropland, which is more susceptible to soil erosion and contamination.




50   Optional link 20- [23].
51   Calls about domestic violence to the 137 hotline from January 2017 to January 2022.
52   Optional link 20- [24].
53   Optional link 20- [25].
54   Ibid.
55   Optional link 20- [26].
56   Aqueduct data.
57   Optional link 20- [27]. During the 1960-2010 period, an increase was observed in the average temperature
     throughout most of the country.
58   Third National Communication, 2015.
                                         -8-



                        Map 2. Households in VAAs exposed to drought




Source: IDB, based on RENABAP data.

                         Map 3. Households in VAAs exposed to floods




Source: IDB, based on RENABAP data.
                                             -9-



          Map 4. Households in VAAs located in suburban areas and classified by land use




 Source: Prepared by the authors based on RENABAP data.


1.18   Vertical logic. As part of the design to make progress toward achieving the
       general and specific objectives, the program’s vertical logic is presented below
       (Figure 1). It identifies the main problems and describes how this new operation
       will achieve the desired impacts through the expected outcomes and outputs.

                                       Figure 1. Vertical logic
                                                                 - 10 -




Note: To access all of the output and outcome indicators, see the online version of the Vertical logic.
                                                      - 11 -



1.19      According to the theory of change, the project will carry out comprehensive
          interventions that will increase the security of land tenure, access to basic services
          and a decent habitat, strengthening of community organizations, and the
          participation of households residing in VAAs.
1.20      The main features of the intervention model include: (i) multisector and interagency
          management coordinated at the subnational level, with field work teams and
          neighborhood management groups for intergovernmental coordination;
          (ii) participation of subnational governments in selecting the neighborhoods and
          designing, executing, and monitoring the investments; (iii) coordination with
          provincial and municipal service providers to ensure the proper functioning and
          maintenance of the public services delivered; (iv) development of community
          initiative projects59 to address critical issues and coordinate them with existing
          social programs to which populations in VAAs have limited access; and
          (v) promotion of gender equity and environmental sustainability.
1.21      In 2007, the Argentine government and the IDB signed a loan contract to develop
          a CCLIP (AR-X1004)60 to improve the quality of life and contribute to the urban and
          social inclusion of Argentine households in population groups residing in
          shantytowns and settlements.61 The CCLIP is expected to benefit 250,000
          households over a period of 25 years. To date, three loan operations
          (1842/OC-AR, 2662/OC-AR, and 3458/OC-AR) have been financed under this
          line, for a total amount of US$950 million, and have benefitted approximately
          165,000 households. Prior to the CCLIP, the Bank financed PROMEBA I
          (940/OC-AR) in the amount of US$102 million.

                              Table 2. Resources and beneficiaries of PROMEBA I and II
                                                                                      Amount in US$ millions
                        Loan number                     Households served
                                                                                        (external + local)
            PROMEBA I (940/OC-AR)                               57,194                         170
            PROMEBA II (AR-X0004)
            - CLP-1 (1842/OC-AR)                                71,888                            395
            - CLP-2 (2662/OC-AR)                                68,317                            445
            - CLP-3 (3458/OC-AR)                                24,533                            222


1.22      Sector experience. The Bank has extensive experience with interventions in
          VAAs. There has been a learning curve with these programs, which have gone
          from emphasizing basic infrastructure considerations toward supplementing these
          with actions focused on social considerations. Noteworthy programs include: in
          Argentina, the Urban Integration and Social and Educational Inclusion Program in
          the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (AR-O0005) and Energy Efficiency and
          Renewable Energy in Low-income Housing (GRT/FM-15083-AR); in Uruguay, the
          Program for the Integration of Irregular Settlements (CCLIP UR-X1009); in Brazil,
          the Nova Baixada Program (1037/OC-BR) and the Joinville Environmental

59   Community initiative projects are participatory activities that provide technical and social support to community
     organizations and groups, as defined by a diagnostic assessment of the specific needs of each neighborhood.
60   The CCLIP was approved in 2007 for a total amount of US$1.5 billion over a period of 25 years.
61   The CCLIP comprises the following components: (i) legalization of land tenure; (ii) provision of infrastructure,
     facilities, and environmental sanitation; (iii) increased social and human capital; and (iv) strengthening of
     institutions.
                                                      - 12 -



          Revitalization Program (1909/OC-BR); in Bolivia, the Neighborhood Improvement
          Multiphase Program (2082/BL-BO); in Paraguay, the Improvement of Housing and
          Habitat (3538/OC-PR) and the Housing and Rehabilitation Program for Bañado
          Sur in Asunción (Tacumbú Neighborhood) (4700/OC-PR); in Chile, the Program
          for the Urban Integration of Informal Settlements (5313/OC-CH); in Colombia, the
          Integrated Program of Urban Development for the Eastern Zone of Bogota
          (238/OC-CO, 344/SF-CO), the District of Barranquilla, Upgrading Informal
          Settlements Program (ATN/JC-11973-CO and ATN/JF-11972-CO), and the Socio-
          Urban Integration of Migrants in Colombian Cities Program (GRT/ER-17925-CO),
          among others; and in Ecuador, the Multiphase Program for Municipal
          Modernization and Comprehensive Neighborhood Upgrading in Quito, Phase I
          (1740/OC-EC). This operation also incorporates the lessons learned from previous
          PROMEBA operations.62
1.23      Lessons learned from the CCLIP. Evaluations of previous operations under the
          CCLIP show that: (i) interventions require a comprehensive approach;63
          (ii) community involvement in decisions helps strengthen local organization, as
          well as project ownership and sustainability over time; (iii) the work of
          multidisciplinary field work teams ensures that a comprehensive approach is taken
          on the ground and creates an environment for effective coordination and
          cooperation with communities and different levels of government when it comes to
          provision of services; (iv) it is critical that efforts are made to strengthen
          mechanisms for coordination between the different levels of government
          administration and within each level, with a view toward achieving complementarity
          with other public policies; (v) appropriate program design depends on an extensive
          information system based on rigorous data that allows for comprehensive analysis
          and implementation of monitoring and evaluation systems; (vi) the timing of land
          regularization programs requires intermediate documents64 that guarantee security
          of land tenure and leverage the impact of regularization at an early stage; (vii) a
          gender and diversity perspective, as well as considerations relating to
          environmental risk and the effects of climate change, should be mainstreamed into
          each project; and (viii) the three previous operations deviated by an average of
          32% from the programmed execution timelines. This operation will strengthen
          these aspects, with a focus on modernizing monitoring and planning mechanisms
          and adjusting the project cycle to ensure that proposed interventions that require
          financing are identified early on.




62   Optional link 20- [28]. The experience accumulated over the course of 25 years of support for barrio
     improvement programs, through PROMEBA or others such as the Rosario Habitat Program (1307/OC-AR),
     has been recognized in Bank publications and in external literature.
63   The impact evaluation of PROMEBA (CLP-3) concludes that comprehensive interventions affect the utility
     function of households in terms of housing welfare and satisfaction, integration into the city, and human
     development. The results show that improvements to neighborhood conditions, including sanitation
     infrastructure and public spaces, plazas, community amenities, public lighting, paving, and better accessibility,
     combined with activities for community participation at the core of the interventions, lead to higher levels of
     neighborhood satisfaction and citizen security and safety. In addition to land tenure security, these
     interventions help mobilize greater investment in housing, with clearly positive effects on the satisfaction and
     wellbeing of inhabitants in the neighborhoods where the program was implemented.
64   These are legal instruments that recognize legitimate ownership by household members but are not perfect
     title deeds like housing certificates, certificates of title, or other similar documents.
                                                    - 13 -



1.24      Challenges to efficiency. The project completion report (PCR) for CLP-3
          identified three implementation challenges:65 (i) delays in the bidding phase due to
          the involvement of different entities in the process and poor coordination; (ii) delays
          and cost overruns in the execution phase due to unrealistic estimates of the
          timeframes for project works, which lead to extensions and/or adjustments that
          affect payment amounts and dates; and (iii) a lack of responsiveness on the part
          of administrative management due to the limited effectiveness of monitoring tools.
          The PCR also noted that continued investment is needed in training and improving
          the performance of subexecution units, with a view to increasing the efficiency of
          project execution and ensuring project sustainability.66
1.25      Rationale. The fourth individual operation under the CCLIP (CLP-4) is justified by
          the positive results of PROMEBA in improving the habitability of dwellings in VAAs
          and by the growing challenges that the country is facing in terms of housing. The
          Argentine government’s decision to give this program priority is based on these
          results and impacts, which have helped reduce the qualitative housing deficit
          through comprehensive and crosscutting interventions in the country. The program
          complements other government efforts to provide housing and is considered an
          example of targeted public spending, as it operates in the country’s most
          disadvantaged urban areas, serving the most vulnerable population groups.
1.26      The executing agency has demonstrated its institutional capacity through the
          effective execution of CLP-1, CLP-2, and CLP-3. Since 2000, the executing
          agency has been the Ministry of Territorial Development and Habitat, which took
          over the implementation-related duties and technical teams of the Ministry of the
          Interior, Public Works, and Housing.
1.27      Consistency with Bank policies. CLP-3 has fulfilled the requirements67 for
          processing a new individual loan: (i) this individual loan operation is provided for in
          the sectors and components of the CCLIP; (ii) the operation is included in the
          country program; and (iii) the executing agency for the project is the same as in
          the previous project, and the level of performance that it maintains in terms of what
          the CCLIP finances has not deteriorated. With respect to the previous project:
          (i) execution performance has been satisfactory, and it is likely that the
          development objectives will be achieved; (ii) to date, 66.1% of the financing
          (US$132.2 million) has been disbursed, and all committed resources are in place
          to begin processing a new operation under the CCLIP; (iii) the borrower and the
          executing agency have complied with the contractual conditions of the loan
          contract and the applicable fiduciary policies of the Bank; and (iv) the audited
          financial statements have been updated and presented without qualification.
1.28      The program complies with the financial sustainability conditions and economic
          assessment of the Public Utilities Policy (document GN-2716-9) (optional link 6).
          The basic infrastructure works are socioeconomically viable. The investment costs
          are covered by State transfers that are transparently allocated and the purpose of
          which is to expand capacity in order to provide greater access. To expand public
          services to eligible neighborhoods, the provincial execution units and municipal

65   Barrio Improvement Program (PROMEBA III). Project completion report.
66   Vera, Felipe and Rodriguez, Sol (2021) in Acevedo, P. et al (Eds), Informando lo Informal. Estrategias para
     generar información en asentamientos precarios. IDB.
67   This operation has been prepared in accordance with the eligibility criteria set out in the Proposal for a New
     Lending Instrument. Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) (document GN-2246-1).
                                           - 14 -



       execution units obtain the necessary approvals and licenses of the service
       providers in each province and municipio. Once the works are completed, the
       subexecuting agencies sign work transfer agreements with the service providers.
       The agreements include the commitment to operate and maintain the investments
       in accordance with the regulatory framework in force in the respective province or
       municipio and in terms consistent with the Bank’s policies set out in the program
       Operating Regulations (optional link 11).
1.29   Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Second Update to the
       Institutional Strategy (document AB-3190-2) and with the IDB Group’s Corporate
       Results Framework 2020-2023 (document GN-2727-12), since it is aligned with
       the following development challenges: (i) social inclusion and equality, by helping
       to reduce poverty and promote equity while addressing gaps in basic infrastructure
       and access to social services for populations with unmet basic needs;
       (ii) productivity and innovation, through actions geared toward employment; and
       (iii) economic integration, through investments in road network improvements that
       enable better connectivity with the local area. It is also aligned with the following
       crosscutting themes: (i) gender equity and diversity, through: (a) property titling for
       women; (b) prioritizing the participation of women, persons with disabilities, and
       LGBTQ+ individuals in community initiative projects; (c) social and human capital
       strengthening projects and lines of action; and (d) the incorporation of urban
       design criteria that improves conditions for universal mobility and diverse
       populations; (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the
       following mitigation and adaptation measures: (a) titling settlements and land
       outside of areas with high climate vulnerability; (b) community amenities that
       comply with the green building criteria set out in the program Operating
       Regulations; (c) urban interventions in plazas, public spaces, and/or others that
       incorporate at least three comprehensive climate solutions (listed in the program
       Operating Regulations); and (d) LED public lighting and construction of bike lanes
       and pedestrian walkways; and (iii) institutional capacity and rule of law, including
       workshops, courses, and training in topics relating to the efficiency of project
       management and execution, and the development and use of digital technology
       tools and systems to optimize processes. In all, 56.66% of the operation’s
       resources are invested in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities for
       the activities indicated, in accordance with the joint methodology of the multilateral
       development banks (optional link 8).
1.30   The operation is consistent with the IDB Group’s Vision 2025 (document AB-3266)
       as its approach is aligned with working toward sustainable and inclusive economic
       growth through activities to: (i) promote social progress to improve access to and
       quality of public services, as well as coverage of basic needs, especially housing;
       (ii) strengthen good governance and institutions, by promoting efficient and effective
       public spending, public management, and digitalization of the government; and
       (iii) reinforce interventions that include gender equality, diversity, and climate change
       considerations. It is also consistent with the IDB Group Country Strategy with
       Argentina 2021-2023 (document GN-3051), which focuses on poverty reduction and
       social protection for the most vulnerable. In this regard, the Bank’s urban
       development efforts are noteworthy, as they focus on support for neighborhood
       improvement programs that benefit low-income groups living in VAAs.
1.31   This operation is included in the 2022 Operational Program Report (document
       GN-3087). It is also consistent with the following Sector Framework Documents:
                                                    - 15 -



          (i) Housing and Urban Development (document GN-2732-11), by identifying
          comprehensive urban interventions with citizen participation as one of the Bank’s
          operational lines of action; (ii) Climate Change (document GN-2835-8),68 by
          implementing specific mitigation and adaptation measures through planning and
          design; and (iii) Gender and Diversity (document GN-2800-8), by improving the
          quality of public services and expanding economic opportunities for women,
          persons with disabilities, and LGBTQ+ individuals. Additionally, the program is
          aligned with the Strategy of Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and
          Inclusive Growth. (document GN-2710-5), particularly the priority area of
          supporting the construction and maintenance of environmentally and socially
          sustainable infrastructure, thus enhancing quality of life.
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.32      The objective of this operation is to sustainably improve the habitability of dwellings
          located in the country’s shantytowns, settlements, and degraded areas through
          actions that contribute to more secure land tenure, the provision of basic
          infrastructure, and community development. This CLP-4 is part of CCLIP
          AR-X1004, which aims to improve the quality of life and contribute to the urban
          and social inclusion of Argentine households in the poorest segments of the
          population residing in shantytowns and informal settlements.
1.33      The program has four specific objectives: (i) to increase the security of land tenure
          for beneficiary households; (ii) to improve the quality of life of the inhabitants in each
          area targeted by the intervention and in the area of influence through different habitat
          improvement works; (iii) to strengthen grassroots community organizations and
          ensure the participation of neighborhood residents in all phases of the
          comprehensive project; and (iv) to enhance the performance of teams in the
          executing agency, the provincial execution units, and the municipal execution units.
1.34      Component I. Increased security of land tenure. (IDB: US$1.16 million. Local:
          US$0.12 million. Total: US$1.28 million). This component will finance technical
          assistance and other services aimed at achieving: (i) the physical regularization of
          the target area through legal studies and formalities, property surveys, and
          demarcation and cadastral registration of new lots; (ii) legal regularization of lots
          (allocation, sale, or registration) as needed to transfer property title to beneficiaries
          for lands targeted by the project; (iii) the purchase of lots for rehousing purposes
          that have or are able to have basic services, and are located in areas subject to
          low climate risk or to risks that can be mitigated as specified in the risk assessment
          that will be included in the neighborhood diagnostic assessments; and (iv) the
          delivery of legal instruments to inhabitants that ensure secure land tenure and
          location outside of areas with high climate vulnerability, through the adoption of
          different regularization strategies based on the specific features of each territory.
          Priority will be given to titling for diverse groups,69 or women for households headed
          by women, or shared titling for couples.
1.35      Component II. Comprehensive urban interventions, provision of urban
          infrastructure, environmental sanitation, and social facilities (IDB:
          US$126.73 million. Local: US$12.67 million. Total: US$139.4 million). This
          component will finance works, technical assistance, and other services that help

68   Promoting innovation for the implementation of climate actions in the area of housing and urban development.
69   Persons with disabilities and LGBTQ+ individuals.
                                                    - 16 -



          achieve: (i) the execution of basic urban infrastructure networks and connections
          for water, sewerage, storm drainage, sewage drains (or alternative solution), gas
          distribution, connectivity, and electrification, along with the respective residential
          connections;70 (ii) the execution of pedestrian area and infrastructure and facilities
          that promote public transportation and nonmotorized mobility, features that help
          reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and that are inclusive of persons with
          disabilities; (iii) environmental mitigation works; (iv) the construction of parks and
          the development of green spaces and recreational areas that incorporate
          considerations for gender and diversity71 and climate change mitigation and
          adaptation through the use of recyclable materials, LED lighting, native plants,
          absorbent surfaces, and nature-based or similar solutions; (v) the construction
          and/or improvement of urban and community facilities based on energy efficiency
          criteria designed in accordance with the bioclimatic conditions of each region and
          the incorporation of renewable energies; (vi) interventions that respond to, inter
          alia, climate, health, and social contingencies and/or emergencies, such as
          repairing and/or building housing, community facilities, and similar activities;
          (vii) works to improve rundown buildings; (viii) infrastructure works and
          interventions targeting the road and transportation network that improve
          connectivity with the city and encourage greater use of nonmotorized and mass
          public transport; (ix) the creation of lots with services that have guaranteed
          minimum infrastructure and an appropriate location in areas with low climate
          vulnerability that are suitable for rehousing programs; (x) studies that construct
          climate scenarios to analyze the viability of long-term land occupation and
          consolidation; and (xi) the formulation of final project designs to define the strategy
          and design for the comprehensive project interventions, including minimum climate
          change considerations. The eligibility criteria and execution mechanisms for
          expenditures will be described in the program Operating Regulations.
1.36      Component III. Strengthening of grassroots community organizations and
          community development (IDB: US$18.28 million. Local: US$1.83 million.
          Total: US$20.11 million). This component will finance: (i) the formulation and
          execution of community initiative projects, promoting those geared toward the
          employment of women, persons with disabilities, and LGBTQ+ individuals; (ii) the
          formulation and/or execution of social and human capital strengthening projects
          that address health, early education, addiction, and domestic violence through
          sport, recreational, and cultural activities for social inclusion, training to improve
          employability, and support for creating networks of organizations that contribute to
          local development and the environment, waste collection and treatment, upkeep
          of green spaces, nature-based solutions, among other similar solutions;
          (iii) actions for strengthening local economies; (iv) activities that respond to
          climate, health, and social contingencies and/or emergencies; (v) technical
          assistance to provide support to and strengthen community ties for families who
          have to be resettled; and (vi) the planning and execution of basic lines of action in
          areas such as health promotion and disease prevention, access to and
          development of information and communication technologies and similar issues.

70   Since 2013, elements to ensure energy efficiency in public lighting are being used in the execution of
     loan 2662/OC-AR, in a manner consistent with the National Program for Rational and Efficient Energy Use
     (PRONUREE) created by Decree 0140/2007.
71   Universal accessibility, lighting, lactation rooms, and recreational spaces that are inclusive of persons with
     disabilities.
                                          - 17 -



       For this component, various interdisciplinary field work teams will work on-site
       conducting participatory workshops and providing training in the communities, as
       well as facilitating coordination with government agencies, with a view to promoting
       access to social services. The eligibility criteria and execution mechanisms for
       expenditures will be described in the program Operating Regulations.
1.37   Component IV.        Strengthening       of    management           capacity      (IDB:
       US$1.78 million. Local: US$0.18 million. Total: US$1.96 million). This
       component will finance: (i) technical assistance to train and strengthen the units in
       the technical and fiduciary processes related to the programming and execution of
       the comprehensive projects; (ii) implementation of capacity-building workshops
       and/or trainings for social organizations and stakeholders involved in projects that
       address gender-based violence, sexual and functional diversity, climate action,
       and serving migrants, among other similar solutions; (iii) the hiring of skilled human
       resources and the procurement of equipment for the provincial execution units and
       municipal execution units; (iv) planning, actions, and strategies to minimize the
       creation of new settlements and expansion of current ones; (v) the procurement,
       development, improvement, installation, and operation of technological and/or
       computer tools and storage media; (vi) the development of systems for processing
       and managing climate information; and (vii) neighborhood diagnostic assessments
       of climate risk.
1.38   Administration, supervision, evaluation, and auditing (IDB: US$2.05 million.
       Local: US$0.20 million. Total: US$2.25 million). The program will finance the
       following, among others: (i) operating expenses, equipment, and management of
       the executing agency; (ii) consulting services provided by firms or individual
       consultants to carry out evaluations, audits, and program administration and
       supervision activities; and (iii) the strategic evaluation of the program.
C.     Key results indicators
1.39   This program will serve 50,000 households residing in 39 VAAs. The impact
       indicators for assessing improvement in the habitability of the VAAs will be: (i) the
       increase in the average value of property lots in the targeted neighborhoods;
       (ii) the decrease in the percentage of dwellings experiencing a qualitative deficit;
       (iii) satisfaction with neighborhood amenities; and (iv) the percentage of more
       vulnerable population groups that feel safe moving around the neighborhood. The
       expected outcomes are as follows: (i) increased security of land tenure for
       beneficiary households; (ii) improved quality of life of the inhabitants in each area
       targeted by the intervention and in the area of influence through different habitat
       improvement works; (iii) stronger grassroots community organizations and
       participation of neighborhood residents in all phases of the comprehensive project;
       (iv) enhanced performance of teams in the executing agency, provincial execution
       units, and municipal execution units. The indicators that measure the intervention’s
       results and targets are shown in the Results Matrix (Annex II).
1.40   Economic feasibility. For the program’s economic assessment (optional link 1),
       a cost-benefit analysis was conducted of a representative sample of the projects
       (paragraph 2.1). This evaluation is based on a comparison of incremental costs
       and benefits, at efficiency prices, in scenarios with and without the project. Benefits
       were estimated on the basis of the theory that an improvement of urban facility and
       infrastructure conditions in the neighborhoods will lead to an increase in the value
       of the dwellings, and that this improvement is a proxy for the benefits generated
                                                    - 18 -



          by the comprehensive investments in terms of better quality of life for households.
          The rise in the value of the dwellings as a result of program interventions was
          estimated on this basis.
1.41      The analysis performed on the sample, using a discount rate of 12% and an
          evaluation horizon of 20 years, yielded a positive net present value equivalent to
          US$21.5 million on an investment of US$45.6 million (US$33.7 million at efficiency
          prices) and an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 38.2%. In addition, the
          sensitivity analysis showed that faced with cost increases of up to 40% and
          reductions in the impact of dwelling appreciation of up to 30%, the EIRR for the
          sample remains equal to or higher than the discount rate of 12%, confirming that
          these results are robust vis-à-vis unfavorable scenarios.

                            II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       This fourth operation under CCLIP AR-X1004 will be structured as a multiple works
          program, since it will finance several physically similar but independent projects,
          applying the eligibility and prioritization criteria described in paragraphs 2.11 and
          2.12. The analyzed sample includes 13 projects that represent investments of
          US$49.78 million, or 30% of the financing (paragraph 2.10), confirming that the
          program properly reflects the demand for investments in the 39 areas that will be
          targeted by the intervention. Considering the time required for the property
          regularization processes and field work in the neighborhoods, as well as the time
          needed to prepare the final designs and bid processes, a period of four years is
          planned for the startup of works.
2.2       Cost and financing. This loan will be issued to the Argentine Republic from
          Ordinary Capital resources. This program is the fourth individual operation under the
          CCLIP, for a total of US$165 million, of which US$150 million will be financed by the
          Bank and US$15 million will be provided by the local counterpart (see Table 3).

                                     Table 3. Cost and financing (in US$ millions)

            Components                                                   Bank     Local    Total     %
            Component I. Increased security of land tenure                 1.16     0.12     1.28    0.78
            Component II. Comprehensive urban interventions,
            provision of urban infrastructure, environmental             126.73    12.67   139.40   84.48
            sanitation, and social facilities72
                Improvement of rundown buildings and activities
                                                                           6.57     0.65     7.23   5.2%
                to prevent the creation of new settlements
                Provision of community facilities and public
                                                                          40.45     4.04    44.48   31.9%
                space
                Construction and improvement of road and
                                                                          37.70     3.77    41.47   29.8%
                pedestrian networks
            Infrastructure works and provision of services
            (sewerage, sanitation, storm drainage, electricity,           42.05     4.20    46.20   33.1%
            and gas)
            Component III. Strengthening of grassroots
            community organizations and community                         18.28     1.83    20.11   12.19
            development



72   The costs indicated for each activity are estimates and may vary.
                                              - 19 -



       Components                                                   Bank           Local          Total       %
       Component IV. Strengthening of management
                                                                       1.78          0.18           1.96      1.19
       capacity
       Administration, supervision, evaluation, and auditing           2.05           0.20          2.25      1.36
       Total                                                         150.00          15.00        165.00    100.00
       Percentage                                                   90.91%         9.09%          100%


2.3   Limitations on disbursements. In accordance with Enhancing Macroeconomic
      Safeguards at the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2753-11,
      AB-2990), the disbursement of loan proceeds will be subject to the following
      maximum limits: (i) up to 15% during the first 12 months; (ii) up to 30% during the
      first 24 months; and (iii) up to 50% during the first 36 months, in all cases counting
      from the date on which the loan is approved by the Board of Executive Directors.
      These limits need not apply insofar as the Bank’s policy requirements have been
      met, provided that the borrower has been notified in writing. The disbursement
      period will be five years from the effective date of the loan contract (Table 4).

                              Table 4. Disbursement schedule (US$ millions)
               Source of
                                    1           2              3              4               5            TOTAL
            financing/Year
        IDB                       22.5         22.5        30.0            37.5              37.5          150.0
        %                          15           15             20             25             25             100


B.    Environmental and social risks
2.4   In accordance with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework
      (document GN-2965-23), and based on the environmental and social analysis of
      the projects in the sample, the program has been classified as a category “B”
      operation, since its expected negative impacts will be moderate, local, and limited
      primarily to the construction of works phase (dust, noise, soil contamination,
      erosion and sedimentation due to earthworks, temporary waterlogging, disruptions
      to vehicle and pedestrian traffic, and risk of accidents). None of the projects in the
      sample will have negative impacts on natural habitats or cultural sites, nor will they
      be carried out in indigenous communities.
2.5   Three projects in the sample entail the resettlement of a total of 27 families and
      include the respective resettlement plans, in line with the requirements of the
      Environmental and Social Policy Framework. Consultations have taken place with
      stakeholders for all of the projects in the sample. The disaster risk classification is
      “moderate,” due mainly to the risk of floods. The environmental and social analysis
      of the projects in the sample, the respective environmental and social management
      plans, and the program’s Environmental and Social Management Framework
      (ESMF) are available on the Bank’s website.
2.6   The executing agency’s environmental and social management system is being
      developed. Special contractual conditions precedent to the first
      disbursement of the financing: (i) the creation of the program
      implementation team, which will include, at a minimum, the technical officer
      and the environmental and social specialists for environmental and social
      management of the program.
                                                 - 20 -



2.7       Program works will be designed, built, operated, maintained, and monitored in
          accordance with the ESMS, ESMF, ESAP, and any other environmental, social, or
          occupational health and safety plan that is and/or should be prepared during
          execution.
C.        Fiduciary risks
2.8       During preparation of the program, two medium-high fiduciary risks were identified:
          (i) if the institutional capacity analysis identifies deficiencies in the subexecuting
          agencies, program planning could go off track. This risk will be mitigated by:
          (a) establishing a methodology, in the program Operating Regulations, for the
          institutional capacity analysis of the subexecuting agencies; and (b) preparing a
          capacity-building plan for the subexecuting agencies, as needed (training and
          hiring of human resources, among other activities); and (ii) if there are delays in
          expenditure accounting due to the highly decentralized execution arrangement,
          this could lead to delays in program execution. This risk will be mitigated by:
          (a) defining and formalizing activities, in the program Operating Regulations, for
          the executing agency to monitor the subexecuting agencies; and (b) carrying out
          activities to strengthen the subexecuting agencies’ capacities in using the
          executing units for external loans (UEPEX), as well as the procedures and required
          documentation for substantiating expenditures to the executing agency. The risk
          mitigation measures are based on the weaknesses and opportunities identified in
          previous operations under the CCLIP.
D.        Other key issues and risks
2.9       Program risks. Two risks have been identified in addition to the fiduciary risks
          (paragraph 2.7): (i) changes in authorities at the national, provincial, and municipal
          levels; and (ii) potential difficulties in coordination between different program
          stakeholders. Mitigation measures are planned for each of these risks.
2.10      Technical considerations. The representative sample of projects analyzed
          comprises 13 projects with complete technical designs in the amount of
          US$49.78 million, which is equivalent to 30% of the anticipated financing. Some of
          these projects provide continuity to comprehensive interventions carried out in
          previous operations under the CCLIP by moving forward on the remaining stages
          of infrastructure works, environmental sanitation, community facilities, and actions
          to regularize property. Other projects in the sample are beginning their
          interventions as part of this new operation. The average values of the interventions
          by lot73 and by region, set forth in Annex II to the program Operating Regulations,
          are aligned with the experience from previous phases, and the mechanisms for
          updating these values are suitable. In addition, all of the works in the sample
          comply with the eligibility criteria defined for the program.
2.11      Eligibility criteria. To be eligible, the projects carried out in VAAs should be viable
          in the following ways: (i) technically, in that they combine physical and social
          interventions in the territory; (ii) socioeconomically, in that at least 40% of the target




73   As of 2021, the average value by lot and by region is: (i) Buenos Aires/Centro-Cuyo/northeastern
     Argentina/northwestern Argentina: US$8,181.79; (ii) northern Patagonia: US$9,161.93; and (iii) southern
     Patagonia: US$10,702.87.
                                                    - 21 -



          population has unmet basic needs74 or poor sanitation conditions;75 (iii) financially,
          in that investment costs per lot do not exceed the threshold value equivalent to the
          average cost of public infrastructure per lot and per region; (iv) legally, in that
          legalization of land tenure is feasible;76 and (v) environmentally, in that projects are
          not located in areas with high climate vulnerability, and any resettlements affect a
          minimum of the residents in VAAs. Projects located in housing complexes with a
          qualitative deficit will be eligible, with a qualitative deficit defined as: (i) poor access
          or lack of access to basic services; and/or (ii) recoverable building quality (roofs
          and/or floors in poor condition, lack of weatherproofing of the building enclosure,77
          damage to elevators, or similar issues). Further details on the eligibility and viability
          criteria are provided in the program Operating Regulations. In addition, projects
          with an environmental and social rating of “A” will not be eligible.
2.12      Prioritization criteria. Priority will be given to projects that: (i) are carried out in
          areas with major infrastructure deficits; (ii) generate positive urban and social
          impacts from the intervention; and (iii) are located in areas with climate
          vulnerability.78 The Bank will verify compliance with the eligibility and prioritization
          criteria. The prioritization criteria are specified in the program Operating
          Regulations, with emphasis on urban complexity criteria and social and urban
          impact.
2.13      Financial and institutional feasibility. The analysis performed by the Bank’s
          fiduciary sector has concluded that the Office of Sector and Special Programs and
          Projects (DGPPSE) does not have significant institutional, technical, or financial
          weaknesses; its human resources are well qualified and have the experience
          necessary to manage the operation with the execution units. The analysis of
          current and projected financial resources shows that program execution and the
          counterpart contribution are feasible since the counterpart funds will be provided
          by the national government and by the participating provinces and municipios.
2.14      Institutional capacity. The institutional capacity of the executing agency was
          analyzed using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS), which found
          that it has sufficient institutional capacity to execute the program and achieve the
          objectives of CLP-4. However, the following actions for improvement were also
          identified in the ICAS: (i) incorporating, in the program Operating Regulations, an
          interagency diagram with a description of the interministerial coordination
          mechanism with other national agencies and subexecuting agencies, a description
          of the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder in terms of operational
          planning, execution by component, procurement processes, financial reporting,
          and monitoring and evaluation; (ii) designing and implementing a methodology for
          tracking and monitoring program performance, with a focus on the subexecuting
          agencies and the inclusion of an institutional capacity assessment at an early stage
74   Using the methodological definition from the National Statistics and Census Institute (INDEC).
75   Sanitation conditions: (i) dwellings without an indoor water connection to the public water mains; and
     (ii) dwellings with a lavatory that does not have a sewage disposal system with flush toilets connected to a
     septic tank and well, or to the sewage system. Source: indicator developed by the Ministry of Territorial
     Development and Habitat.
76   This means having legal possession of the lots where works will be executed and ensuring that there are no
     restrictions preventing the transfer of title to the target beneficiaries.
77   This information comes from a diagnostic assessment implemented by the provincial and/or municipal
     execution units.
78   Due to risk of floods and/or landslides.
                                         - 22 -



       so that action plans and training can be implemented to mitigate any deviations in
       execution; (iii) documenting the administrative procedures for managing projects
       with external financing; and (iv) strengthening the executing agency’s team in
       fiduciary matters to ensure correct execution of the program. The Bank will also
       provide support for training the teams in the executing agency and subexecuting
       agencies.
2.15   Sustainability of the interventions. The program supports the sustainability of
       the interventions by: (i) transferring methodology and creating capacities to
       implement interventions in VAAs, which the provinces and municipios then
       replicate with their own resources for other informal neighborhoods;
       (ii) strengthening community organizations in the neighborhoods, promoting their
       coordination with other organizations responsible for providing social services;
       (iii) signing agreements with the provincial and municipal authorities and the
       service providers to ensure the subsequent operation and maintenance of the
       works, through transfer of the works to the service providers, and the requirement
       to maintain and submit annual reports, among others; and (iv) citizen participation
       of neighbors in the process of defining the projects and executing the community
       initiative projects and social and human capital strengthening projects.

                    III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.     Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1    The borrower will be the Argentine Republic. The executing agency will be the
       Ministry of Territorial Development and Habitat through the Department of Habitat,
       which will be responsible primarily for the technical aspects of the operation, and
       through the Department of Coordination, which will be responsible for the
       administrative and fiduciary aspects. The executing agency will interface directly
       with the Bank for this operation.
3.2    The program will be executed in a decentralized manner through the provinces
       and municipios, as program subexecuting agencies. The provinces and municipios
       will propose projects for potential financing by the program in accordance with the
       criteria and conditions set out in the program Operating Regulations, which will
       incorporate lessons learned in the execution of loan 3458/OC-AR, the third
       individual operation under the CCLIP (AR-X1004).
3.3    As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the
       financing, the borrower will provide evidence of the entry into effect of the
       program Operating Regulations, in accordance with the terms agreed upon
       with the Bank. The program Operating Regulations define the responsibilities of
       the subexecuting agencies to be included in the framework participation
       agreement, through which the subexecuting agencies will accept the conditions of
       the program, including those set out in the contract that the borrower will sign with
       the Bank and in the program Operating Regulations.
3.4    In the subexecuting agencies, project management will be the responsibility of the
       provincial execution units as the management agencies of the provinces, or of the
       municipal execution units for municipal executing agencies, provided they have
       the institutional and technical capacity to do so, as assessed by the executing
       agency.
                                                    - 23 -



3.5       Special contractual condition of execution. A special contractual condition of
          execution precedent to the first transfer of proceeds to each subexecuting agency
          is the executing agency’s signature of the framework participation agreement or
          equivalent agreement with each subexecuting agency, under the terms previously
          agreed upon with the Bank. In accordance with the program Operating
          Regulations, the subexecuting agencies will sign, during the corresponding phase,
          a works execution agreement with the Department of Habitat, and a works transfer
          agreement with the service providers that will include a commitment to operate and
          maintain the investments in terms consistent with the Bank’s policies
          (paragraph 1.17).79 The executing agency will comply with the environmental and
          social legal requirements set out in Annex B to the environmental and social review
          summary. The provincial execution units and municipal execution units may be
          strengthened using program resources.
3.6       Financial management. The loan proceeds may be disbursed in the form of
          advances, reimbursements, and/or direct payments.80 In the case of advances,
          disbursements will be based on a financial plan81 to cover program needs for up to
          six months. The minimum percentage required for replenishment of advances will
          be 70%, since execution is decentralized and complex. The executing units for
          external loans (UEPEX) system will be used by the Accounting and Finance Office,
          which is part of the Department of Coordination, and by the subexecuting
          agencies, thereby improving the efficiency and effectiveness of financial
          management. The UEPEX system is already in operation.
3.7       Procurement. Items financed totally or partially with loan proceeds will be
          procured in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works
          Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-15) and
          the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the
          Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2350-15).
3.8       Audits. During execution, the executing agency will present audited financial
          statements for the program on an annual basis, pursuant to the requirements
          established by the Bank in its policies. The audited financial statements will be
          presented within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year. The program’s closing
          audit reports will be delivered within 120 days after the last disbursement. Audits
          for this program and previous programs under the CCLIP will be performed by an
          independent auditing firm pursuant to the terms of reference prepared by the Bank
          or by the Office of the Auditor General (AGN).
3.9       Retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively finance as a charge against
          the proceeds of the loan, up to US$22.5 million (15% of the proposed loan amount)
          in eligible expenditures incurred by the borrower prior to the approval date of the
          loan and related to program works (Component II) and contracting of technical
          support staff for the executing agency (Component IV and administration,
          supervision, evaluation, and auditing), provided that requirements substantially
          similar to those established in the loan contract have been met. Such expenditures


79   See program Operating Regulations, Annex IV.5.
80   IDB Disbursement Manual, March 2015. Annex III. Disbursement methods (pages 1 and 2).
81   For the Bank financing, all the estimated month-to-month costs/expenditures, by investment category, for the
     period covered by the disbursement request; for the local counterpart and other sources, the resources they
     will contribute to the project during that same period (by investment category).
                                                      - 24 -



          will have been incurred on or after 15 November 2021,82 but under no
          circumstances include expenditures more than 18 months prior to the date the loan
          was approved. The retroactive financing amount will be subject to the applicable
          disbursement limits. These expenditures may be financed as a charge against IDB
          funds or the local counterpart.
B.        Summary of arrangements for monitoring results83
3.10      The executing agency has instruments for tracking and monitoring execution that
          make it possible to determine the agreed-upon output and outcome indicators at
          the project level, as well as the associated targets for each period. The PROMEBA
          website provides access to the master project files for all projects.
3.11      The following instruments will be used to monitor the program: the multiyear
          execution plan, annual work plans, annual execution and planning reports, and
          on-site supervision plans. To monitor fiduciary matters, the executing agency will
          use the country systems implemented in previous stages, which were satisfactory
          to the Bank. All project transactions will be performed using the UEPEX system.
          The required financial reports are: (i) financial execution plan for the six months
          following the request for an advance; (ii) annual audited financial statements; and
          (iii) other reports that may be required by the Bank. Procurement will be managed
          and monitored through the Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA), which
          will be kept up to date.
3.12      The midterm and final evaluations are the key milestones of the monitoring
          process. These evaluations will include: (i) the financial execution results; (ii) the
          achievement of output and outcome targets; (iii) the degree of fulfillment of the
          environmental and operation and maintenance requirements for works; (iv) the
          degree of fulfillment of contractual commitments; (v) a summary of the findings of
          audits performed during execution; (vi) verification of compliance with the
          investment limits per lot; and (vii) a summary of lessons learned.
3.13      The final evaluation will include an ex post economic assessment using the same
          methodology as the ex ante assessment. The outcome indicators will be evaluated
          using the reflexive method. The basis for information will be the master project
          files, and the comprehensive evaluations of project two (EIP2), which are prepared
          for each neighborhood and monitor all interventions carried out during the program
          execution period through neighborhood surveys. Once accepted by the Bank,
          these reports will be made available to the public through the PROMEBA website.
3.14      To evaluate program results, the impact indicators will be measured using a
          before-and-after methodology (simple differences, pre and post). A specialized
          team will be hired to perform the midterm and final evaluations of the program. In
          terms of the strategic evaluation activities, the executing agency will be responsible
          for fiduciary execution, while the Department of Strategic Matters (SAE) will be
          responsible for technical and methodological execution. The arrangements and
          methodology for designing and carrying out the evaluations must have the Bank’s
          no objection.




82   The date the operation was registered in Convergence.
83   For further detail, see the monitoring and evaluation plan (required link 2).
                                                                                                                                                                                         Annex I - [AR-L1341; AR-X1004]
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 1




                                                                          Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                    Summary             AR-L1341
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Strategic Priorities and CRF Indicators

                                                                                                 -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                 -Productivity and Innovation
                                                                                                 -Economic Integration
  Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Issues                                                  -Gender Equality and Diversity
                                                                                                 -Climate Change
                                                                                                 -Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law



                                                                                                 -Beneficiaries of targeted anti-poverty programs (#)
                                                                                                 -Households with improved access to water and sanitation (#)
                                                                                                 -Households with improved access to energy services (#)
                                                                                                 -Beneficiaries of employment support initiatives (#)
                                                                                                 -Enterprises provided with technical assistance (#)
                                                                                                 -Roads built or upgraded (km)
                                                                                                 -Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)
  CRF Level 2 Indicators: IDB Group Contributions to Development Results
                                                                                                 -Countries with strengthened gender equality and diversity policy frameworks (#)
                                                                                                 -Targeted beneficiaries of public services that have been adapted for diverse groups
                                                                                                 (#)
                                                                                                 -Emissions avoided (annual tons CO2 equivalent)
                                                                                                 -Beneficiaries of enhanced disaster and climate change resilience (#)
                                                                                                 -Agencies with strengthened digital technology and managerial capacity (#)


2. Country Development Objectives

  Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                        GN-3051


                                                                                                                           The intervention is included in the 2022 Operational
  Country Program Results Matrix                                                                         GN-3087
                                                                                                                           Program.




   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)




II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                               Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                    10.0
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                 2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                               3.5
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                            4.0
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                               10.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                        1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                      3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                            2.5
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                              2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                   1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                               9.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                             4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                   5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                    Medium High
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                 B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                           Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and
                                                                                                                           Reporting.
                                                                  Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)             Yes
                                                                                                                           Procurement: Information System, National Public Bidding.



                                                                                Non-Fiduciary              Yes             Monitoring and Evaluation National System.


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:


Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                           Yes             AR-T1264
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




The objective of the program is to sustainably improve the habitat of households living in slums, settlements and degraded areas of the country through actions that contribute to
increase land tenure security, the provision of basic infrastructure and community development. The specific objectives are: (i) to increase the land tenure security of beneficiary
households; (ii) to increase the quality of life of the inhabitants of each intervened area and its zone of influence through different habitat improvement works; (iii) to strengthen
grassroots community organizations and guarantee the participation of neighborhood residents in all phases of the integral project; and (iv) to improve the performance of the EO
teams, the PIUs and the EMUs. The achievement of these objectives will contribute to the overall objective of sustainably improving the habitat of households living in slums,
irregular settlements and degraded areas of the country through actions that contribute to land tenure security, the provision of basic infrastructure and community development.

The project presents a complete diagnosis; with a precise description of the current situation of the gaps in access to adequate habitat and quality urban services in Argentina. All
specific objectives have outcome indicators and these indicators, included in the results matrix, are SMART. All indicators have means of verification.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through a cost-benefit analysis (CBA), in which the benefits are estimated based on the valuation of real estate in the
neighborhoods of a representative sample. The CBA has reasonable assumptions, uses a rigorous methodology (hedonic pricing) and has an adequate sensitivity analysis. The
analysis concludes that the project is economically viable, with an IRR of 38.2%, using a discount rate of 12% and an evaluation horizon of 20 years.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is in line with Bank standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured following an ex-post cost-
benefit analysis approach and a before-after comparison.
                                                                                                                                                                              Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 10


                                                                                RESULTS MATRIX

                            To sustainably improve the habitability of dwellings located in the country’s shantytowns, settlements, and degraded areas through actions that contribute
                            to more secure land tenure, the provision of basic infrastructure, and community development. The specific objectives are: (i) to increase the security of
                            land tenure for beneficiary households; (ii) to improve the quality of life of the inhabitants in each area targeted by the intervention and in the area of
                            influence through different habitat improvement works; (iii) to strengthen grassroots community organizations and ensure the participation of neighborhood
    Project objective:
                            residents in all phases of the comprehensive project; and (iv) to enhance the performance of teams in the executing agency, the provincial execution units,
                            and the municipal execution units. The achievement of these objectives will contribute to the general objective of sustainably improving the habitability of
                            dwellings located in the country’s shantytowns, informal settlements, and degraded areas through actions that contribute to the security of land tenure, the
                            provision of basic structures, and community development.


                                                                         GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

                                                                                                Expected year
                                           Unit of                                Baseline
            Indicators                                           Baseline                          of target           Target          Means of verification           Comments
                                         measurement                                year
                                                                                                 achievement
General development objective: To sustainably improve the habitability of dwellings located in the country’s shantytowns, informal settlements, and degraded areas
through actions that contribute to the security of land tenure, the provision of basic structures, and community development.
                                                                                                                                                                   (*) See required
Indicator 1. Increase in the average                                                                                                 Baseline form and
                                                                                                                                                                   link 2 for definitions
value of properties in the targeted             %                    0              2022              2027              20%          comprehensive evaluation
                                                                                                                                                                   and calculation
areas                                                                                                                                of project two (EIP2)
                                                                                                                                                                   formulas1
                                                                   To be
Indicator 2. Households with a                                 determined by
                                         % of households                            2022              2027              TBDB         Baseline form and EIP2                  (*)
qualitative housing deficit                                     the baseline
                                                                  (TBDB)2
Indicator 3. Households satisfied
                                         % of households           TBDB             2022              2027              TBDB         Baseline form and EIP2                  (*)
with neighborhood amenities
Indicator 4. Women and older
                                        % of women and
adults who feel safe moving around                                 TBDB             2022              2027              TBDB         Baseline form and EIP2                  (*)
                                          older adults
the neighborhood




1   (*) For the definitions and calculation formulas, see the monitoring and evaluation plan (required link 2).
2   (**) To be determined by the baseline (TBDB). The baseline will be determined at the beginning of the interventions in each shantytown, settlement, and degraded area (VAA).
Annex II
Page 2 of 10


                                                                        SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

Specific development objective 1:To increase the security of land tenure.


                                          Unit of                       Baseline                                                End of      Means of
            Indicators                                       Baseline              Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                    Comments
                                        measurement                       year                                                  project    verification
Indicator 1.1. Households located
in targeted neighborhoods that
are outside of areas with high                                                                                                            Baseline form -
                                       % of households         0%        2022       0%      10%      15%      40%      50%       50%                                  (*)
climate vulnerability that have                                                                                                               EIP2
increased security of land tenure
due to support from the program
Indicator 1.2. Households located
                                       % of households
in targeted neighborhoods that
                                      with female heads
are outside of areas with high
                                        of household,
climate vulnerability that have
                                           LGBTQ+              0%        2022      60%      60%      60%      60%      60%       60%           EIP2                   (*)
increased security of land tenure
                                      individuals, and/or
due to support from the program.
                                      couples, with more
taking into account a gender and
                                      secure land tenure
diversity perspective
                                                                                                                                                                        (*)
                                                                                                                                                                       (**)
Indicator 1.3. New lots that are                                                                                                                            • Contributes to CRF
                                      % of new lots that                                                                                                      level 2.
effectively allocated and located
                                       are effectively         0%        2022       0%       0%      25%      25%      25%      100%           EIP2         • 2.20. Beneficiaries of
outside of areas with high climate
                                          allocated                                                                                                           greater resilience to
vulnerability
                                                                                                                                                              disasters and the
                                                                                                                                                              effects of climate
                                                                                                                                                              change (#)
                                         % of women,
Indicator 1.4. New lots effectively        LGBTQ+
                                                             Baseline
allocated to diverse populations      individuals, and/or                2022      60%      60%      60%      60%      60%       60%           EIP2                   (*)
                                                              forms
and women                              couples with titles
                                             to lots
                                                                                                                                                                    Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3 of 10


Specific development objective 2: To improve the quality of life of the inhabitants in each area targeted by the intervention and in the area of influence through different
habitat improvement works.


                                   Unit of                      Baseline                                                 End of       Means of
         Indicators                                  Baseline              Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                       Comments
                                 measurement                      year                                                   project     verification
                                                                                                                                                                 (*)
                                                                                                                                                                (**)
                                                                                                                                                      • 2.4. Households with
Indicator 2.1. Households                                                                                                                               improved access to
                               % of households in
with effective access to basic                         0%        2022      10%      25%      45%      60%       75%       90%           EIP2            water and sanitation
                                targeted areas
services                                                                                                                                                (#)
                                                                                                                                                      • 2.5. Households with
                                                                                                                                                        improved access to
                                                                                                                                                        energy utilities (#)
Indicator 2.2. Community                                                                                                                 Final                  (*)
facilities built with                                                                                                               comprehensive              (**)
                                 % of community
mechanisms for water and                               0%        2022      25%      35%      50%      50%       50%       50%      project designs – • 2.19. Emissions
                                  facilities built
energy savings, with support                                                                                                          Provisional      avoided (annual tons
from the program                                                                                                                      acceptance       of CO2 equivalent)
Indicator 2.3. Targeted areas
that have the necessary                                                                                                            Agreements with
infrastructure to encourage                                                                                                         agencies, final
the use of public                 % of targeted                                                                                    comprehensive
                                                       0%        2022       0%       5%      10%      15%       30%       60%                                   (*)
transportation and                   areas                                                                                         project designs,
unmotorized transportation                                                                                                           maintenance
due to support from the                                                                                                                 reports
program
Indicator 2.4. Targeted areas
                                                                                                                                   Agreements with
that have the necessary
                                                                                                                                    agencies, final
infrastructure for access to a
                                  % of targeted                                                                                    comprehensive
system for trash collection,                           0%        2022       0%       5%      10%      15%       30%       60%                                   (*)
                                     areas                                                                                         project designs,
trash separation, or
                                                                                                                                     maintenance
recycling, due to support
                                                                                                                                        reports
from the program
Annex II
Page 4 of 10


                                  Unit of                    Baseline                                                End of      Means of
         Indicators                               Baseline              Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                     Comments
                                measurement                    year                                                  project    verification
                                                                                                                                                            (*)
                                                                                                                                                           (**).
Indicator 2.5. Targeted areas                                                                                                        Final      • 2.20. Beneficiaries of
whose main road networks                                                                                                       comprehensive      greater resilience to
are accessible and               % of targeted                                                                                 project designs,   disasters and the
                                                    0%        2022       0%       5%       10%      25%      30%      70%
connected to the mass               areas                                                                                            EIP2,        effects of climate
public transit system and to                                                                                                    maintenance       change (#)
unmotorized transportation                                                                                                          reports     • 2.19. Emissions
                                                                                                                                                  avoided (annual tons
                                                                                                                                                  of CO2 equivalent)
                                                                                                                                                            (*)
                                                                                                                                                           (**)
                                                                                                                                     Final
                                                                                                                               comprehensive • 2.18. Designated
Indicator 2.6. Targeted areas
whose main pedestrian                                                                                                                             beneficiaries of public
                                                                                                                               project designs,
networks are walkable and        % of targeted                                                                                                    services that have
                                                    0%        2022       0%       5%       10%      25%      30%      70%         provisional
designed to be universally          areas                                                                                                         been adapted to
                                                                                                                                 acceptance,
accessible for persons with                                                                                                                       diverse groups (#)
                                                                                                                                maintenance
disabilities                                                                                                                                    • 2.19. Emissions
                                                                                                                                    reports
                                                                                                                                                  avoided (annual tons
                                                                                                                                                  of CO2 equivalent)
                                                                                                                                                           (*)
                                                                                                                                                          (**)
Indicator 2.7. Households
with access to community                                                                                                                       • 2.20. Beneficiaries of
facilities and/or public                                                                                                                         greater resilience to
                                                                                                                               Final execution   disasters and the
spaces built by the operation   # of households      0        2022        0      5,000    10,000   20,000   35,000   35,000
                                                                                                                                   report        effects of climate
with criteria for adaptation
and mitigation to climate                                                                                                                        change (#)
change                                                                                                                                         • 2.19. Emissions
                                                                                                                                                 avoided (annual tons
                                                                                                                                                 of CO2 equivalent)
                                                                                                                                                           (*)
Indicator 2.8. Households
                                                                                                                                                          (**)
with access to community
facilities and/or public
                                                                                                                                    Final      • 2.18. Designated
                                # of households      0        2022        0      5,000    5,000    5,000    10,000   25,000    comprehensive     beneficiaries of public
spaces built by the operation
                                                                                                                               project designs   services that have
with a gender and/or
diversity focus                                                                                                                                  been adapted to
                                                                                                                                                 diverse groups (#)
                                                                                                                                                                         Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 10


Specific development objective 3: To strengthen grassroots community organizations and ensure the participation of neighborhood residents in all phases of the
comprehensive project.


                                          Unit of                         Baseline                                                End of       Means of
            Indicators                                         Baseline              Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                    Comments
                                        measurement                         year                                                  project     verification
Indicator 3.1. Basic lines of       % of community
                                                                                                                                               Monitoring
action, community initiative        initiative projects and
                                                                                                                                            reports (annual
projects, and social and human      social and human              0%        2022       0%      30%      45%      60%      60%      60%                                  (*)
                                                                                                                                            target form and
capital strengthening projects      capital strengthening
                                                                                                                                             annual report)
carried out satisfactorily          projects
                                                                                                                                                                          (*)
                                    % of community                                                                                                                       (**)
Indicator 3.2. Community
initiative projects and social and
                                    initiative projects and                                                                                                   • 2.7. Beneficiaries
                                    social and human                                                                                                            of employment
human capital strengthening                                                                                                                    Monitoring
                                    capital strengthening                                                                                                       support initiatives
projects carried out satisfactorily                                                                                                         reports (annual
                                    projects geared               0%        2022       0%      15%      30%      30%      30%      30%                          (#)
and geared toward the                                                                                                                       target form and
                                    toward the                                                                                                                • 2.16. Female
employment of LGBTQ+                                                                                                                         annual report)
                                    employment of                                                                                                               beneficiaries of
individuals, persons with
                                    women and diverse                                                                                                           economic
disabilities, and/or women
                                    groups                                                                                                                      empowerment
                                                                                                                                                                initiatives (#)


Specific development objective 4: To enhance the performance of teams in the executing agency, the provincial execution units, and the municipal execution units.


                                        Unit of                           Baseline                                                End of      Means of
           Indicators                                         Baseline               Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                   Comments
                                      measurement                           year                                                  project    verification
                                                                                                                                             Annual work
Indicator 4.1. Slippage between
                                                                                                                                             plan - annual
time scheduled and actual time              %                   30%        2022      30%      30%      27%      27%      25%       25%                                 (*)
                                                                                                                                               execution
required to execute the works
                                                                                                                                                 report
                                                                                                                                                                        (*)
Indicator 4.2. Execution units                                                                                                                                         (**)
                                                                                                                                                 Annual
and/or field work teams trained
                                                                                                                                               execution    • 2.17. Countries with
in issues related to gender                 %                   0%         2022       0%      25%      50%      75%      100%      100%                       strengthened gender
                                                                                                                                            report – annual
identity and gender-based                                                                                                                                     equality and diversity
                                                                                                                                              target forms
violence                                                                                                                                                      policy frameworks
                                                                                                                                                              (#)
Annex II
Page 6 of 10


                                       Unit of                      Baseline                                                     End of        Means of
          Indicators                                     Baseline              Year 1   Year 2    Year 3    Year 4    Year 5                                        Comments
                                     measurement                      year                                                       project      verification
                                                                                                                                                                          (*)
                                                                                                                                                                         (**)
Indicator 4.3. Execution units                                                                                                                    Annual
and/or field work teams trained                                                                                                                 execution    • 2.26. Institutions with
                                           %               0%        2022       0%      25%       50%       75%       100%       100%                          strengthened
in project management and                                                                                                                    report – annual
execution                                                                                                                                      target forms    management and
                                                                                                                                                               digital technology
                                                                                                                                                               capacities (#)

Indicator 4.4. Execution units
                                                                                                                                                  Annual
and/or field work teams trained
                                                                                                                                                execution
in projects geared toward                  %               0%        2022       0%       25%       50%      75%       100%       100%                                   (*)
                                                                                                                                             report – annual
mitigation of and adaptation to
                                                                                                                                               target forms
the effects of climate change



                                                                                  OUTPUTS

Component I: Increased security of land tenure.

                                       Unit of                      Baseline                                                       End of           Means of
           Indicators                                    Baseline              Year 1    Year 2    Year 3    Year 4     Year 5                                         Comments
                                     measurement                      year                                                         project         verification

Indicator 1.1. Shantytowns,     Shantytowns,
informal settlements, and       informal                                                                                                       Baseline form and
                                                             0        2022        0        5         5          5         10         25                                       (*)
degraded areas with regularized settlements, and                                                                                                     EIP2
urban fabric                    degraded areas

Indicator 1.2. Instruments that
contribute to increased security
                                   Instruments for the
of land tenure for lots that are                                                                                                               Annual report and
                                   regularization of         0        2022        0      1500      2.500      2.500     3.500      10.000                                     (*)
outside of areas that are more                                                                                                                 annual target form
                                   property
vulnerable to climate impacts,
delivered
                                                                                                                                                                 Annex II
                                                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 10



Component II. Comprehensive urban interventions, provision of infrastructure, environmental sanitation, and social facilities.

                                            Unit of            Baseline                                                End of
              Indicators                              Baseline            Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5             Means of verification        Comments
                                          measurement            year                                                  project
Indicator 2.1. Final comprehensive
projects designed by the provincial
execution units and municipal
execution units that incorporate
                                             Projects       0    2022       6        6        12       20       6        50      Annual execution report         (*)
considerations for climate change
mitigation and adaptation and are
developed with a gender and/or
diversity focus
Indicator 2.2. Final comprehensive
works projects executed that                                                                                                       Final comprehensive
incorporate considerations for                                                                                                   project designs – Works
                                             Projects       0    2022       0        3        7        10      19        39                                      (*)
climate change mitigation and                                                                                                    certificates – Provisional
adaptation and are developed with a                                                                                                      acceptance
gender and/or diversity focus
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
Indicator 2.3. Rundown buildings,                                                                                                project designs – Works
                                            Buildings       0    2022       0        1        0        1        1         3                                      (*)
improved                                                                                                                         certificates – Provisional
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
Indicator 2.4. Residential water                                                                                                 project designs – Works
                                               Lots         0    2022       0       700     1,600     700     1,600     4,600                                    (*)
connections                                                                                                                      certificates – Provisional
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
Indicator 2.5. Residential                                                                                                       project designs – Works
                                               Lots         0    2022       0      2,800    4,200    2,800    4,200    14,000                                    (*)
connections to adequate sewerage                                                                                                 certificates – Provisional
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
                                                                                                                                 project designs – Works
Indicator 2.6. Electric grids installed    Electric grid    0    2022       0        1        2        2        3         8                                      (*)
                                                                                                                                 certificates – Provisional
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
Indicator 2.7. LED public lighting in     Public lighting                                                                        project designs – Works
                                                            0    2022       0        5        7        5        7        24                                      (*)
main access roads installed                    grid                                                                              certificates – Provisional
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
Annex II
Page 8 of 10


                                            Unit of            Baseline                                                End of
               Indicators                             Baseline            Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5             Means of verification        Comments
                                          measurement            year                                                  project
                                                                                                                                                                  (*)
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive           (**)
Indicator 2.8. Road networks built or                                                                                            project designs – Works • 2.13. Roads
                                            Kilometers       0   2022       0       10       15       15       20        60
improved                                                                                                                         certificates – Provisional constructed or
                                                                                                                                         acceptance         improved
                                                                                                                                                            (kilometers)
Indicator 2.9. Pedestrian networks                                                                                                 Final comprehensive
built or improved with universal                                                                                                 project designs – Works
                                            Kilometers       0   2022       0       10       20       10       20        60                                      (*)
accessibility for persons with                                                                                                   certificates – Provisional
disabilities                                                                                                                             acceptance
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
Indicator 2.10. Plazas and parks built
                                           Plazas and                                                                            project designs – Works
with at least three integrated climate                       0   2022       0        5        7        5        8        25                                      (*)
                                              parks                                                                              certificates – Provisional
solutions
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
Indicator 2.11. Plazas and parks built
                                           Plazas and                                                                            project designs – Works
with at least three criteria for gender                      0   2022       0        5        7        5        8        25                                      (*)
                                              parks                                                                              certificates – Provisional
and diversity
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
Indicator 2.12. Urban facilities that                                                                                              Final comprehensive
help mitigate the effects of climate                                                                                             project designs – Works
                                          Urban facilities   0   2022       0        5        7        5        8        25                                      (*)
change, installed in the targeted                                                                                                certificates – Provisional
areas                                                                                                                                    acceptance
Indicator 2.13. Community facilities                                                                                               Final comprehensive
designed and built that meet criteria      Community                                                                             project designs – Works
                                                             0   2022       0        2        3        5        3        13                                      (*)
that contribute to mitigating the           facilities                                                                           certificates – Provisional
effects of climate change                                                                                                                acceptance
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
Indicator 2.14. Supplementary                                                                                                    project designs – Works
                                              Works          0   2022       0       10       15       10       15        50                                      (*)
works, finalized                                                                                                                 certificates – Provisional
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
Indicator 2.15. Residential gas                                                                                                  project designs – Works
                                               Lots          0   2022       0       200      200      300      300      1000                                     (*)
connections                                                                                                                      certificates – Provisional
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
Indicator 2.16. Storm drainage
                                                                                                                                   Final comprehensive
systems that contribute to
                                                                                                                                 project designs – Works
sustainable water management and             Projects        0   2022       0        2        3        3        5        13                                      (*)
                                                                                                                                 certificates – Provisional
provide a response to climate
                                                                                                                                         acceptance
change adaptation, finalized
                                                                                                                                                                                              Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 9 of 10


                                           Unit of            Baseline                                                                           End of
              Indicators                             Baseline                      Year 1       Year 2        Year 3       Year 4    Year 5                   Means of verification        Comments
                                         measurement            year                                                                             project
Indicator 2.17. Lots acquired or
generated by the program that have
basic services within a regular urban
                                               Lots              0       2022           0         25           50           75          100         250      Annual execution report          (*)
fabric and are located outside of
areas that are more vulnerable to
climate impacts


Component III: Strengthening of grassroots community organizations and community development.


                                          Unit of                    Baseline                                                                  End of
             Indicators                             Baseline                       Year 1       Year 2       Year 3    Year 4       Year 5                    Means of verification        Comments
                                        measurement                    year                                                                    project
Indicator 3.1. Community initiative
                                                                                                                                                              Monthly comprehensive
projects and social and human
                                           Projects          0           2022          10        20           20           20           20          90       monitoring form – annual          (*)
capital strengthening projects,
                                                                                                                                                            target form – annual report
executed

                                                                                                                                                              Monthly comprehensive
Indicator 3.2. Basic lines of action    Lines of action      0           2022          48        54           60           30           42       234         monitoring form – annual          (*)
                                                                                                                                                            target form – annual report



Component IV: Strengthening of management capacity.


                                                 Unit of            Baseline                                                                              End of         Means of
                Indicators                                 Baseline          Year 1                   Year 2        Year 3       Year 4       Year 5                                        Comments
                                               measurement            year                                                                                project       verification
Indicator 4.1. Workshops, courses, and/or
trainings in projects geared toward              Courses/                                                                                                           Photographic records
mitigating and adapting to the effects of       workshops/           0          2022        5            5             5            5           5           25       of trainings and/or        (*)
climate change, offered to the program’s         trainings                                                                                                             registration list
execution units and/or field work teams
Indicator 4.2. Workshops, courses, and/or
                                                 Courses/                                                                                                           Photographic records
trainings on gender-based violence and
                                                workshops/           0          2022        5            5             5            5           5           25       of trainings and/or        (*)
gender identity, offered to the execution
                                                 trainings                                                                                                             registration list
units and/or field work teams
Indicator 4.3. Workshops, courses, and/or
                                                 Courses/                                                                                                           Photographic records
trainings on efficient project management
                                                workshops/           0          2022        5            5             5            5           5           25       of trainings and/or        (*)
and execution, offered to execution units
                                                 trainings                                                                                                             registration list
and/or field work teams
Annex II
Page 10 of 10


                                              Unit of            Baseline                                              End of       Means of
                Indicators                              Baseline          Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                 Comments
                                            measurement            year                                                project     verification
Indicator 4.4. Information monitoring and
                                            Monitoring and                                                                       Annual execution
management systems that enable social,
                                            management       0     2022     0        1        1        1        0        3        report and final      (*)
physical, and financial monitoring of the
                                              systems                                                                            execution report
operation, developed
                                                                                                          Annex III
                                                                                                        Page: 1 of 6



                              FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Country: Argentina            Division: HUD           Operation number: AR-L1341; AR-X1004             Year: 2022

Executing agency: Ministry of Territorial Development and Habitat
Name: Barrio Improvement Program (AR-L1341) Fourth Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit
Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) Established by Agreement on 29 March 2007 (AR-X1004)

                                I. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1. Use of country systems in the operation (Any system or subsystem that is subsequently approved may
be applicable to the operation, in accordance with the terms of validation by the Bank.)

    Budget                 Reporting                 Information systems            National competitive bidding

    Treasury               Internal audit            Shopping                       Other
    Accounting             External control          Individual consultants         Other

2. Fiduciary execution mechanisms

     Coexecuting/       The provinces and municipios will be the subexecuting agencies for the program. In the
     subexecuting       subexecuting agencies, project management will be the responsibility of the provincial
     agencies           execution units as the management agencies of the provinces, or of the municipal execution
                        units for municipal executing agencies, provided they have the institutional and technical
                        capacity to do so, as assessed by the executing agency. The provincial execution units and
                        municipal execution units may be strengthened using program resources. A special
                        contractual condition of execution precedent to the first transfer of proceeds to each
                        subexecuting agency is the executing agency’s signature of the framework participation
                        agreement with each subexecuting agency, under the terms previously agreed upon with
                        the Bank.
     Specific           The borrower will be the Argentine Republic. The executing agency will be the Ministry of
     fiduciary          Territorial Development and Habitat through the Department of Habitat, which will be
     execution          responsible primarily for the technical aspects of the operation, and through the Department
     issues             of Coordination, which will be responsible for the administrative and fiduciary aspects. The
                        executing agency will interface directly with the Bank for this operation.

3. Fiduciary capacity

Executing agency’s The institutional capacity of the executing agency was analyzed using the Institutional
fiduciary capacity Capacity Assessment System (ICAS), which found that it has sufficient institutional capacity
                   to execute the program and achieve the objectives of CLP-4. However, the following actions
                   for improvement were also identified using ICAS: (i) incorporating, in the program Operating
                   Regulations, an institutional relationship diagram that includes the national agencies and
                   subexecuting agencies that will participate in the program, as well as a description of the
                   roles and responsibilities of each in terms of operational planning, execution by component,
                   procurement processes, financial reporting, and monitoring and evaluation; (ii) designing
                   and implementing a methodology for tracking and monitoring program performance, with a
                   focus on the subexecuting agencies and the inclusion of an institutional capacity
                   assessment at an early stage so that action plans and training can be implemented to
                   mitigate any deviations in execution; (iii) documenting the administrative procedures for
                   managing projects with external financing; and (iv) strengthening the executing agency’s
                   team in fiduciary matters to ensure correct execution of the program. The Bank will also
                   provide support for training the teams in the executing agency and subexecuting agencies.
Annex III
Page: 2 of 6


4. Fiduciary risks and risk response

  Risk taxonomy                    Risk                Risk level                  Risk response
Institutional         If there are difficulties in     Medium-      This risk will be mitigated by: (i) establishing
environment           assessing the institutional       high        a methodology, in the program Operating
Executing             capacity of the                               Regulations, for the institutional capacity
agencies: internal    subexecuting agencies, it                     analysis of the subexecuting agencies for
processes             will not be possible to                       the program, agreed upon with the Bank;
                      determine the capacity of                     and (ii) preparing a capacity-building plan
                      the provincial and municipal                  for the subexecuting agencies, as needed.
                      teams before delegating the
                      Bank’s fiduciary processes
                      (procurement and financial
                      management), which could
                      lead to deviations in
                      program planning.
Executing agency – If there are delays in              Medium-      This risk will be mitigated by: (a) defining
organizational     expenditure accounting due           high        and formalizing activities, in the program
structure          to the highly decentralized                      Operating Regulations, for the executing
                   execution arrangement, this                      agency to monitor the subexecuting
                   could lead to delays in                          agencies, using the modules and reports of
                   program execution                                the executing units for external loans
                                                                    (UEPEX) system and establishing
                                                                    submission deadlines, as well as defining
                                                                    measures to be taken in the event of delays;
                                                                    and (b) carrying out activities to strengthen
                                                                    the subexecuting agencies’ capacities in
                                                                    using UEPEX, as well as the procedures
                                                                    and required documentation for justifying
                                                                    expenditures to the executing agency.

5. Policies and guidelines applicable to the operation.
Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-12), Policies for the
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-
15), Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development
Bank (document GN-2350-15), and the Policy on recognition of expenditures, retroactive financing, and
advance procurement (document GN-2259-1; OP-507).

6. Exceptions to policies and guidelines. Not applicable.


                      II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS

Exchange rate: To render accounts for program resources, the parties agree that the applicable exchange rate
will be the rate indicated in Article 4.10(b)(i) of the General Conditions. To determine the equivalency of expenses
incurred in local currency and chargeable to the local contribution or the reimbursement of expenditures from the
loan, the agreed exchange rate will be the rate in effect on the first working day of the payment month in which
the borrower, the executing agency, or any other natural or legal person that has been delegated the authority
to make payments, effects the respective payments for contractors, suppliers, or beneficiaries.
                                                                                                           Annex III
                                                                                                         Page: 3 of 6



Annual audited financial reports: The executing agency will present annual audited financial reports on the
use of resources, in accordance with the terms of reference agreed with the Bank, within 120 days after the end
of the fiscal year. The project’s final financial reports will be delivered within 120 days after the date of the last
disbursement. External auditing for the program will be performed by an independent auditing firm eligible to
audit Bank-financed operations, and selected and contracted pursuant to the terms of reference and contract
model previously agreed upon with the Bank or the Office of the Auditor General (AGN).


                    III. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

     Bidding documents The procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services subject to international
                       competitive bidding under the Bank’s procurement policies (document GN-2349-15)
                       will be carried out using either the standard bidding documents issued by the Bank or
                       the bidding documents agreed between the executing agency and the Bank for a
                       particular procurement. Consulting services will be selected and contracted in
                       accordance with the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants
                       (document GN-2350-15) and will use either the Bank’s standard request for proposals
                       document or the request for proposals agreed between the executing agency and the
                       Bank for the selection in question. In the case of national competitive bidding and
                       shopping for goods and nonconsulting services, the Bank’s standard models for
                       Argentina will be used, together with the corresponding standard evaluation templates.
                       The review of technical specifications and terms of reference for contracts during
                       preparation of the selection processes is the responsibility of the Project Team Leader.
                       This technical review may be carried out ex ante and is independent of the method of
                       procurement review.
     Use of country        The information system will be used. The COMPR.AR system, which was approved
     systems               as an electronic system for processes under IDB policies, will be used for the
                           procurement of goods and nonconsulting services for amounts up to US$1.5 million.
     Recurrent             Recurrent expenditures required for implementing the project will be approved by the
     expenditures          Project Team Leader and will be made following the executing agency’s administrative
                           procedures, as described in the program Operating Regulations. These procedures
                           will be reviewed and accepted by the Bank, provided that they do not violate the
                           principles of economy, efficiency, and competitiveness (document GN-2331-5).
     Advance               The Bank may retroactively finance as a charge against the proceeds of the loan, up
     procurement/          to US$22.5 million (15% of the proposed loan amount) in eligible expenditures
     Retroactive           incurred by the borrower prior to the approval date of the loan and related to program
     financing             works (Component II) and contracting of technical support staff for the executing
                           agency (Component IV and administration, supervision, evaluation, and auditing),
                           provided that requirements substantially similar to those established in the loan
                           contract have been met. Such expenditures will have been incurred on or after
                           15 November 2021, but under no circumstances include expenditures incurred more
                           than 18 months prior to the date the loan was approved. The retroactive financing
                           amount will be subject to the applicable disbursement limits. In addition, the Bank will
                           examine the process used, which the executing agency carries out at its own risk.
                           These expenditures may be financed as a charge against IDB funds or the local
                           counterpart. (See documents GN-2349-15, GN-2350-15, and GN-2259-1).
Annex III
Page: 4 of 6



      Procurement with     For the execution of activities in comprehensive urban interventions under
      community            Component II, procedures for community participation in procurement may be used,
      participation        based on a basic survey of needs, followed by the selection of construction companies
                           or small-scale contractors at the neighborhood level and by geographic presence.
                           They will be responsible for the following activities, among others: providing estimates
                           and a detailed budget for interventions for each dwelling; supplying materials;
                           managing labor with community participation; certifying the functionality of the
                           infrastructure installed and built, with a view to promoting transfer of knowledge.
                           Selection of the construction companies and small-scale contractors will be based on
                           shopping for unit prices/rates (at least cost) and availability. The details pertaining to
                           execution will be described in the program Operating Regulations.
      Procurement          Except in cases where ex ante supervision is justified and the procurement plan so
      supervision          indicates, procurement will be subject to ex post supervision. Ex post reviews will be
                           conducted every year in accordance with the project supervision plan, subject to
                           changes over the course of execution. Ex post review reports will include at least one
                           physical inspection visit, selected from among the procurement processes subject to
                           ex post review. The ex post review thresholds are as follows:

                                  Executing agency            Works        Goods/services      Consulting services
                                Ministry of Territorial   US$5 million        US$5 million         US$200,000
                              Development and Habitat

      Records and files    The executing agency will be responsible for maintaining files and supporting
                           documentation for procurement, bidding, investments, and proof of payments made
                           with project resources. In addition to paper files, digital files will be maintained for the
                           same purposes and for Bank supervision, in accordance with the terms set out in the
                           program Operating Regulations.

Main procurement items

                                                                    New                                 Estimated
                                                 Selection                                                cost
               Item description                                  procedures/      Estimated date
                                                  method
                                                                    tools                                  US$
Goods
Purchase of technology and IT
                                                 Shopping                          October 2022            100,000
equipment

Works

Infrastructure works in the district of
                                                 National
Almirante Brown, locality of Rafael
                                                competitive                       November 2022          4,465,517
Calzada: B° 14 de noviembre and B°
                                                  bidding
San José
Infrastructure works in the district of
                                                 National
La Matanza, locality of Rafael Castillo: B°
                                                competitive                       November 2022          4,382,605
Latinoamérica, 24 de febrero, 17 de
                                                  bidding
octubre, El Vivero, and El Porvenir
Infrastructure works in the district             National
Avellaneda, locality of Villa Dominico:         competitive                       November 2022          1,901,832
Gran Corina                                       bidding
                                                                                                        Annex III
                                                                                                      Page: 5 of 6



                                                                  New                                Estimated
                                               Selection                                               cost
            Item description                                   procedures/      Estimated date
                                                method
                                                                  tools                                 US$
Infrastructure works in the district of         National
Presidente Perón, locality of Guernica:        competitive                      November 2022         2,421,456
Numancia                                         bidding
Nonconsulting services
Surveying and subdividing the targeted
                                                Shopping                        November 2022            57,567
neighborhoods (Buenos Aires)

Consulting services

Social capital strengthening projects and     Quality- and
community initiative projects (Buenos         cost-based                           July 2022          1,600,000
Aires)                                         selection
Individual consultants
Preparation of the final project design,
based on the needs of each                       3 CVs                           August 2022             12,500
neighborhood (Chaco)
Field work teams for the neighborhoods
                                                 3 CVs                           October 2022            91,714
in each jurisdiction (Buenos Aires)
For the procurement plan, see required link 4.


                       IV. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

     Programming         The executing agency is responsible for formulating and programming the annual
     and budget          budget, as well as all the procedures for consolidating the annual budget for approval.
                         As needs arise to increase or reallocate line items, the executing agency will request the
                         modifications and manage the approval process. Budget appropriations are executed
                         through quarterly and monthly accrued commitment installments, which are allocated by
                         the National Budget Office (Ministry of the Economy).
     Disbursements       Bank accounts. The executing agency will maintain a special account in dollars and an
     and cash flow       account in pesos at Banco de la Nación Argentina. For accounting and operational
                         purposes, these accounts will be separate and identified for the exclusive management
                         of program resources.
                         Financial plan. Disbursements will be made in accordance with a detailed financial plan
                         based on actual program liquidity needs.
                         Disbursement methods. The Bank will disburse resources under the advance of funds
                         modality or other modality established in document OP-273-12. Disbursements after the
                         first advance of funds may be processed once supporting documentation has been
                         submitted for 70% of the previous advance, since execution is decentralized and
                         complex.
                         The Online Disbursement electronic platform will be used to manage disbursements.
Annex III
Page: 6 of 6



      Accounting,        The executing agency will use the UEPEX system as the financial administration system.
      information        It will be used by the central execution unit and the subexecuting agencies. The UEPEX
      systems, and       system makes it possible to identify program funds and sources of financing. In
      reporting          accordance with the chart of accounts approved by the Bank, the UEPEX system
                         assigns the program investments by component from the cost table. Cash basis
                         accounting will be used, and the International Financial Reporting Standards will be
                         followed, where applicable, in accordance with national criteria.
      External control   External control is performed by the Office of the Auditor General (AGN). As the
      and financial      governing authority for external control, the AGN reports to and assists the National
      reports            Congress in the control of public sector accounts. Its creation and operation are
                         regulated by Title VII, Chapter I of Law 24,156 on Financial Administration and External
                         Control Systems.
                         In accordance with the terms of references previously agreed upon with the Bank, the
                         program’s annual financial statements will be audited by an independent auditor that is
                         acceptable to the Bank, which may be either the AGN or an independent auditing firm.
      Financial          The initial financial supervision plan will be based on assessments of the executing
      supervision of     agencies’ risks and fiduciary capacity, through on-site supervision visits and desk
      the operation      reviews, as well as analysis and monitoring of the results and recommendations of the
                         audits of the program’s annual financial reports.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/22



 Argentina. Loan ____/OC-AR to the Argentine Republic. Barrio Improvement Program. Fourth
    Individual Operation Under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP)
                  Established by Agreement on 29 March 2007 (AR-X1004)



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as
may be necessary with the Argentine Republic, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a
financing to cooperate in the execution of the Barrio Improvement Program, which constitutes
the fourth individual operation under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment
Projects (CCLIP), established by Agreement on 29 March 2007 (AR-X1004), approved by
Resolution DE-5/07 on 31 January 2007. Such financing will be in the amount of up to
US$150,000,000, from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the
Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary
of the Loan Proposal.



                                 (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2022)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1044359933-19671
AR-L1341
