                                            REQUEST FOR BIDS (RFB)
                                                  (WORKS)

        DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF TOURIST PARK AND INDEPENDENCE PARK IN
                           ORANGE WALK TOWN, BELIZE

Institution:            Ministry of Finance
Country:                Belize
Project:                Sustainable and Inclusive Urban Development Program
Process ID:             BL-L1046 – P00004
Duration:               Ten (10) Months
Site Location:          Orange Walk Town, Belize
Deadline:               November 4th, 2025; 10:00 a.m. (Local Belize Time)

   1.   This RFB follows the General Procurement Notice for this Project, which was published on the websites of the Inter-
        American Development Bank and the Ministry of Finance.

   2.   The Government of Belize has received a loan from the Inter-American Development Bank to finance the Sustainable
        and Inclusive Urban Development Program, of which a key component of the Program focuses on constructing
        multifunctional public spaces that include parks, boardwalk infrastructure, shoreline protection, and ecological
        restoration elements to support community use and environmental stability.

   3.   The Ministry of Finance, through its Central Executing Unit intends to allocate a portion of the Program’s proceeds
        to procure the services from a qualified Company to undertake the Contract for the “Design and Construction of
        Tourist Park and Independence Park in Orange Walk Town.

   4.   The objective is to design and construct upgrades for the Tourist Park (approximately 0.25 acres of space) and
        Independence Park (approximately 0.4 acres of space) in Orange Walk Town, Orange Walk District, hereafter
        referred to as the Project. The Project aims to transform both parks into vibrant recreational hubs, providing safe,
        accessible, and aesthetically pleasing spaces for pedestrians, families, and community activities. The design-build
        approach requires fully functional park facilities, including structural, landscaping, electrical, and accessibility
        features, compliant with all specified codes and standards.

   5.   Qualification requirements include, among others: (a) total monetary value of construction works performed over
        a period of five (5) years, (b) experience as a prime contractor in design of works and in the construction of at least
        two (2) works of a similar nature and complexity equivalent to the construction works over a period of ten (10)
        years, (c) essential key technical personnel and equipment for the design and construction phase as indicated in the
        bidding document, (d) Financial Statements of 2020 to 2024, (e) liquid assets and/or credit facilities net of other
        contractual commitments of the successful Bidder of a minimum of BZD $250,000.00 (f) other requirement
        provided in the respective Bid Document.

   6.   The Ministry of Finance now invites sealed bids from eligible and qualified bidders for the Design and Construction
        of these works. The design/construction period is ten (10) months. Interested eligible bidders may obtain further
        information from the Central Executing Unit, Ministry of Finance via email: procurement@ceu.mof.gov.bz.

   7.   The RFB will be conducted through the National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procedures specified in the Inter-
        American Development Bank’s Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American
        Development Bank GN-2349-15 as well as the procurement policies and best practices of the Government of Belize.
        The selection process is open to all eligible bidders as defined by the referenced policies.

   8.   The Government of Belize reserves the right to cancel this invitation, in whole or in part, without assigning any
        reason. It is under no obligation to shortlist any bidder and will not be liable for any costs incurred by bidders in
        the preparation and submission of their Bids.

   9.   A complete set of the bidding document in English may be obtained by interested bidders via online at
        https://procurement.gov.bz/opportunities/ or by scanning the QR Code below.

   10. Bids must be delivered to the address below at or before November 4th, 2025, at 10:00 a.m. Electronic shall not be
       permitted. Late bids will not be accepted and will be returned unopened to the Bidder. Bids will be opened
       November 4th, 2025 at 10:45 a.m. in the presence of the bidders’ representatives who choose to attend in person or
       on-line at the address below.

   11. The address referred to above is:

ATTN: Ruby Pascascio
Senior Procurement Specialist
Central Executing Unit
Ministry of Finance
2nd Floor, Sir Edney Cain Building
Belmopan, Belize
Email: procurement@ceu.mof.gov.bz

Ref: Design and Construction of Tourist Park and Independence Park in Orange Walk Town, Belize (BL-L1046) - Your
name
