                                                                                                     PUBLIC
                                                                                   SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                        DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                                     BRAZIL




        STATE HOUSING PROGRAM – STATE OF PARANÁ – VIDA NOVA PROJECT

                                                   (BR-L1588)



         SECOND INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT
                   LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)
                                “PROMORAR”

                                                  (BR-O0014)



                                                LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Jorge Silva Herreros, Project Team Leader;
Dalve Soria and Diego Arcia (CSD/HUD), Alternate Project Team Leaders; Verónica Adler,
Sofía del Castillo, Gabriel Torres, Dianela Ávila, and Silvia Pérez (CSD/HUD); Bruno Camarano
(CSC/CBR); Lidia Rebouças, Álvaro Fresno, Adriana Zambrano, and Luciana Vanzan (VPS/ESG);
Guillermo Eschoyez and Carolina Verissimo da Silva (LEG/SGO); Ana Azevedo, Ángela Radis,
Juan Carlos Lazo, Fabia de Assis, and David Salazar (VPC/FMP); Jorge Franco (SPD/SDV); Laisa Rachter
(SCL/GDI); Alexandra Alvear (INE/INE); and Katia Queiroz and Ana Champloni (CSD/CCS).

In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and distributed to
the Bank's Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should
the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus
superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                      CONTENTS



PROGRAM SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ............................................................... 1

       A.     Background, problem to be addressed, and rationale .................................. 1
       B.     Objectives, components, and cost................................................................ 9
       C.     Key results indicators ................................................................................. 12

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS .............................................................. 13

       A.     Financing instrument .................................................................................. 13
       B.     Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 14
       C.     Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 15
       D.     Other key issues and risks ......................................................................... 15

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN............................................................ 16

       A.     Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 16
       B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 18

IV.    ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ............................................................................................ 19
                                                       - ii -



                                                     ANNEXES
 Annex I         Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix

 Annex II        Results Matrix

 Annex III       Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                      LINKS
REQUIRED:
  1     Multiyear execution plan / Annual work plan

  2     Monitoring and evaluation plan

  3     Environmental and social review Summary

  4     Procurement plan

 OPTIONAL:
  1     Program economic analysis

  2     Analysis of the State of Paraná’s financial, fiscal, and debt situation

  3     Vertical logic

  4     Gender and diversity

  5     Climate change and sustainability

  6     Program Operating Regulations

  7     Bibliographic references

  8     Casa Fácil Paraná Program

  9     Environmental and social safeguards filter
                                            - iii -




                                        ABBREVIATIONS
BIM        Building information modeling
CCLIP      Conditional credit line for investment projects
COHAPAR    Companhia de Habitação do Paraná (Paraná Housing Company)
DALY       Disability adjusted life years
EDGE       Excellence in design for greater efficiencies
           Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Brazilian Institute of Geography and
IBGE
           Statistics)
ICAP       Institutional capacity assessment platform
ICB        International competitive bidding
IRR        Internal rate of return
LOA        Annual Budget Law
MtCO2e     Megatons of carbon dioxide equivalent
NCB        National competitive bidding
NDC        Nationally determined contribution
NPV        Net present value
PCR        Program completion report
PEH        Programa Estadual de Habitação (State Housing Program)
           Plano Estadual de Habitação de Interesse Social do Paraná (Paraná State Plan for
PEHIS
           Low-income Housing)
PMU        Program management unit
           Sistema Integrado de Administração Financeira [Integrated financial management
SIAFI
           system]
           Sistema de Gerenciamento, Monitoramento e Acompanhamento de Programas e
SIGMA-PP
           Projetos (Program and project management, monitoring, and support system)
           Sistema de Informações Sobre Necessidades Habitacionais do Paraná (Paraná
SISPEHIS
           Housing Needs Information System)
                                                             PROGRAM SUMMARY
                                                 BRAZIL
             STATE HOUSING PROGRAM – STATE OF PARANÁ – VIDA NOVA PROJECT (BR-L1588)
                                      SECOND INDIVIDUAL OPERATION
       UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) “PROMORAR” (BR-O0014)
                                                       Financial Terms and Conditions
 Borrower:                                                                                   Flexible Financing Facility(a)
 State of Paraná                                                            Amortization period:                       24.5 years
 Guarantor:                                                                 Disbursement period:                       5 years
 Federative Republic of Brazil                                              Grace period:                              6 years(b)
 Executing agency:                                                          Interest rate:                             SOFR-based
 Paraná Housing Company (COHAPAR)                                           Credit fee:                                (c)

           Source              Amount (US$)                     %           Inspection and supervision fee:            (c)

 IDB (Ordinary Capital):          150,000,000                        80     Weighted average life:                     15.25 years
 Local:                            37,500,000                        20
                                                                            Approval currency:                                 United States dollar
 Total:                           187,500,000                       100
                                                              Program at a Glance
 Program objective/description: The program’s general objective is to enhance the quality of life of the socially vulnerable
 population living in shantytowns, informal favela-like settlements, or unhealthy housing in the State of Paraná, by improving access
 to decent housing, basic infrastructure conditions, and socioenvironmental actions. Its specific objectives are to: (i) increase access
 to equitable and sustainable housing and habitat solutions for the socially vulnerable population; and (ii) improve the assistance
 provided by COHAPAR, through innovative and smart public management. This will be the second individual operation under the
 ProMorar CCLIP (operation BR-O0014), approved by Resolution DE-57/23, for a total of US$600 million. The program will
 contribute to the CCLIP’s objective of promoting new housing and habitat improvement strategies in Brazil, by supporting a
 subnational government entity, i.e. the State of Paraná, in the preparation and implementation of low-income housing programs
 (paragraph 1.28).

 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the financing: The borrower, through the executing
 agency, will submit evidence to the Bank of the following: (i) the signing and entry into effect of an agreement between the borrower
 and the executing agency for the transfer of resources and the execution of program activities; (ii) the approval and entry into effect
 of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (iii) the creation of the program
 management unit and appointment of that unit’s staff indicated in paragraph 3.2. Other special contractual conditions may be
 consulted in the environmental and social action plan and in Annex B of the environmental and social review summary
 (paragraph 3.5).

 Special contractual conditions for execution: (i) Before activities are undertaken in a program beneficiary município, the
 executing agency will provide evidence that an agreement has been signed with that municipal government, specifying the
 responsibilities of both parties in the execution of the project in question, including works maintenance obligations; (ii) before the
 first service order for program works is issued, the borrower will submit evidence to the Bank that a firm has been contracted to
 support program management; (iii) prior to the execution of each of the program’s works begins, the executing agency will submit
 evidence that a firm has been hired for the respective technical and socioenvironmental supervision; and (iv) the deadline for the
 start of program works will be three years from the effective date of the loan contract. Other special contractual conditions may be
 consulted in the environmental and social action plan and in Annex B of the environmental and social review summary
 (paragraph 3.6).
 Exceptions to Bank policies: None.
                                                               Strategic Alignment
 Objectives:(d)                                       O1 ☒                                        O2 ☒                                 O3 ☐
                                                        OF2-G ☒
 Operational focus areas:(e)             OF1 ☒                            OF3 ☒           OF4 ☐            OF5 ☐           OF6 ☒            OF7 ☐
                                                        OF2-D ☒
(a)
    Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization
    schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe protection conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management
    considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)
    Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail
    any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)
    The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the
    Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the applicable policies.
(d)
    O1 (Reduce poverty and inequality); O2 (Address climate change); and O3 (Bolster sustainable regional growth).
(e)
    OF1 (Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action); OF2-G (Gender equality); OF2-D (Inclusion of diverse population groups); OF3 (Institutional
    capacity, rule of law, and citizen security); OF4 (Social protection and human capital development); OF5 (Productive development and innovation
    through the private sector); OF6 (Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure); and OF7 (Regional integration).
                              I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem to be addressed, and rationale
1.1       Background and general rationale. The State of Paraná, which occupies an area
          of 199,298 square kilometers [1] 1 in southern Brazil, has an estimated population of
          11,443,208 (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), 2022). Paraná
          has the fifth largest state GDP [2], the sixth largest per capita GDP [3], and the fifth
          highest Human Development Index (0.792 in 2017) of the 26 Brazilian states [4]. It
          has a payment capacity of “B,” and a sound fiscal situation with low debt indicators
          and high current savings and liquidity. 2 Despite its strong position in the national
          context, Paraná still has persistent pockets of poverty and vulnerability. More than
          40% of households are poor in 36 of the state’s 399 municípios (IBGE, 2010), which
          is much higher than the state average (18.4%). In Paraná, 33% of the population
          lives in municípios with a Human Development Index below the Brazilian municipal
          average, compared to 10% in the other states of the South Region [5].
1.2       The economic crisis that had afflicted the country since 2014 caused a significant
          increase in poverty, following a period of sustained poverty reduction. Between 2014
          and 2021, the poverty rate in Brazil increased by 5 percentage points, from 10.7%
          to 15.7% [6]. In Paraná, a study by the Getulio Vargas Social Foundation estimates
          that between 2019 and 2021 alone, poverty increased by 2.51 percentage points
          [7, 8]. One of the factors contributing to this increase 3 has been the deterioration in
          access to decent housing for the most vulnerable population. Data from the Paraná
          State Low-income Housing Plan (PEHIS) show that the housing deficit in Paraná
          increased from 485,255 dwellings in 2015 to 511,746 in 2020. Of this number,
          322,533 represent a quantitative deficit. 4 This deficit has grown unevenly and has
          had a greater impact on the most disadvantaged groups (paragraphs 1.15 and 1.16).
          Comparing the deficit data with the income of Paraná families who registered with
          the online applicant register to access a home of their own through the Paraná
          Housing Company (COHAPAR), shows that 87% of them have incomes of up to
          three times the minimum wage. A 2022 World Bank report [9] that assessed different
          affordability measures found that acquiring a home is “far beyond the reach” of this
          population group in Brazil. This means that most of the families that comprise the
          deficit are not able to acquire a home 5 on their own or obtain financing through the
          banking system, and therefore depend directly on the public sector to exercise their
          constitutional right to housing.

1    A complete bibliography can be found at optional link 7 with references identified by the number in square
     brackets [#].
2    For an analysis of the financial, fiscal, and debt situation of the State of Paraná, see optional link 2.
3    Although the methodology used to measure poverty in Brazil only takes income poverty into account, other
     methodologies that measure multidimensional poverty consider access to adequate housing as one of the basic
     structural needs of society.
4    The quantitative deficit is the need for housing production. It comprises: (i) the applicant register maintained by
     COHAPAR and a number of municipal governments, from which 30% is subtracted to avoid double counting
     (because there is no unified applicant register); (ii) informal settlements located in preservation and at-risk areas
     that require total or partial resettlement; and (iii) precarious collective housing for rent (tenement buildings or
     cortiços).
5    The estimated cost of a standard COHAPAR housing unit is currently R$137,106 (US$27,548). This amount
     does not take into account typology variations (persons with disabilities, and large or blended families), or
     discounts potentially obtained in the bidding process.
                                                        -2-



1.3      Given the shortage of subsidized housing and the scarcity of land that is suitable in
         terms of location and services to build housing units, many families have decided to
         occupy urban areas illegally. In many cases, these areas have not been developed
         owing to their exposure to natural disaster hazards, such as floods and landslides,
         as well as to the impacts of climate change, including heatwaves and flooding [10]. 6
         The result has been an increase in the number of dwellings in informal settlements
         that are located in at-risk areas. In PEHIS 2015, 31,889 households were recorded
         as requiring resettlement because they were located in at-risk or protection areas.
         By 2020, this figure had increased significantly (24.5%) for a total of 41,711.
1.4      The deterioration in access to housing units for the vulnerable population is
         attributable to two main reasons: (i) insufficient production of qualified housing 7 for
         this specific population group; and (ii) the deterioration of housing conditions in
         informal settlements owing to the effects of climate change.
1.5      Insufficient production of qualified housing units for the vulnerable
         population. Between 2008 and 2014, Brazil experienced a major real estate boom,
         at a time when the federal government also made substantial investments in the
         housing area, generating large-scale production of low-income housing projects
         targeted to the lower-income population, with several lines of financing subsidized
         through the Minha Casa, Minha Vida program. During this period, the states and
         municípios collaborated as supporting entities in a management model centralized
         in the Ministry of Cities and the federal savings bank, Caixa Econômica Federal.
         Since 2015, however, as a result of the aforementioned crisis, federal resources for
         low-income housing have been cut back; and since 2018 funding has only been
         allocated to projects under construction. 8 This has resulted in a scarcity of housing
         units available for people with a monthly income of up to three times the minimum
         wage [11]. In the last five years, the number of housing units built by COHAPAR to
         serve this population segment averaged 376 per year, which is insufficient to meet
         the demand in the state. Yet there is practically no private supply in the real estate
         market, given the financing constraints of these families. This situation is aggravated
         in municípios with smaller populations located far from large urban centers, where
         virtually all housing supply for this group is heavily subsidized.
1.6      Deterioration of dwellings located in informal settlements owing to the effects
         of climate change. According to a recent study conducted by the National
         Confederation of Municipal Governments [12], the number of homes that are either
         damaged or destroyed has been rising in Brazil in recent years. Between 2013 and
         2022, more than two million housing units were damaged across the country as a
         result of extreme weather events, and over 107,000 were effectively destroyed,
         which meant a loss of more than R$26 billion (US$5.3 billion). The South Region has
         been hit hardest by this phenomenon, with about 46.79% of its housing units
         damaged or destroyed over the last 10 years. In Paraná, this phenomenon affected
         146,616 homes. Most of them are located in informal, undeveloped, and illegal

6   Paraná state already acknowledges the effects of climate change and is developing the Paranaense Climate
    Change Program (2020) to address this challenge.
7   Qualified housing are housing units that not only meet minimum inhabitability and safety standards, but also
    respond to the specific social and environmental needs of the families living in them.
8   Following the delivery of 11,609 federally financed housing units in 2014, the number peaked at 12,455 in 2015.
    Since then, the number of homes delivered has dropped sharply, reaching a minimum in 2019 when just
    275 homes were delivered statewide, i.e. a 98% reduction in just five years. In 2022, only 520 federally financed
    housing units were delivered.
                                                        -3-



          settlements, which are in many cases unfit to live in, owing to deficiencies in the
          provision of basic utilities (or total lack thereof) or because they are located in
          disaster-prone areas. Although federal housing policies prioritize assistance for
          families living in at-risk areas, in practice the reduction in funding for low-income
          housing has made this impossible. Between 2015 and 2019 9 the number of
          households living in precarious settlements in the state grew by roughly 32% [13],
          with significant negative impacts on the quality of life of the most socially vulnerable
          population. These include a major proliferation of serious diseases, 10 reduced life
          expectancy among the people living in such settlements, a context of violence in the
          surrounding environment; and the lack of a network of quality public schools, access
          to public transportation and jobs, among other impacts.
1.7       To make up for the lack of federal resources, in 2019 the Paraná state government
          developed a new housing policy, the Casa Fácil State Housing program (PEH), which
          is being implemented by COHAPAR. One of the missions of this program is to serve
          families enduring conditions of high social vulnerability, living in favela-type precarious
          settlements that are susceptible to flooding and/or environmental hazards.
1.8       COHAPAR is a mixed economy enterprise managed indirectly by the State of
          Paraná, attached to its Ministry of Cities. It was created in 1965 with the aim of
          formulating, coordinating, and implementing the state’s housing policy, and planning
          and executing projects and programs. In its 58 years of operation, COHAPAR has
          experience with more than 300,000 housing units distributed throughout the state. It
          has a decentralized structure distributed across 12 regional offices that enable it to
          supervise and manage projects throughout the state. 11 COHAPAR currently
          executes a variety of programs to assist vulnerable populations of different types,
          including financing for families with borrowing capacity, programs targeted to older
          adults, property titling programs, land regularization, and attention to communities
          living in precarious settlements in at-risk areas. 12 Its funding comes from: (i) the state
          treasury, specifically the State Fund to Combat Poverty (FECOP); (ii) the General
          Budget of the Union; (iii) the Length of Service Guarantee Fund (FGTS); and
          (iv) private funding and international loans. COHAPAR has an annual budget of
          approximately US$51 million [14].
1.9       Although COHAPAR has a robust and well-prepared structure, there is a need to
          modernize its management and provide continuous training for its teams, in order to
          expand its potential to provide assistance and expedite the provision of solutions in
          a socially equitable and environmentally sustainable manner. Currently, the time

9    Data on the impact of COVID19 are not yet available. The SISPEHIS database will only be updated with these
     data in 2023.
10   A study conducted between September 2020 and February 2021 in 16 Rio de Janeiro favelas found that their
     inhabitants have a much higher COVID-19 prevalence rate than previously documented for the state and
     município of Rio de Janeiro. “Prevalence and Predictors of Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Serology in a Highly Vulnerable
     Population of Rio de Janeiro: A Population-based Serosurvey.” The Lancet Regional Health - Americas, 15,
     100338.
11   The regional offices are responsible for coordinating with the municipal governments and the various local
     agencies, such as water and energy companies, in addition to maintaining direct contact with the population
     served by COPAHAR projects. The technical teams carry out field work and monitoring of projects and works,
     hold meetings, and conduct socioenvironmental monitoring, while also providing all assistance needed to make
     COHAPAR's programs effective. Its organizational structure includes professionals in the administrative,
     financial, real estate, social, and engineering areas, as well as a coordination team that manages projects and
     liaises with headquarters in all areas, and reports directly to COHAPAR’s president.
12   For more detailed information on the programs implemented by COHAPAR, see optional link 8.
                                                         -4-



          COHAPAR spends preparing basic projects averages 9.14 months, 13 despite the fact
          that available technologies could shorten this time considerably. Also, the increase
          in housing demand, together with society’s new demands for gender equity and
          diversity actions (paragraphs 1.15 and 1.16), and an increase in problems
          associated with climate change (paragraph 1.17) require an institutional framework
          with the capacity to meet these challenges.
1.10      Vida Nova Program. This program was created in 2019 14 and forms part of the PEH.
          It targets small and medium-sized municípios that have limited access to credit
          operations and need support in managing housing projects, 15 through the
          construction of housing complexes with units that are fully subsidized (grant). The
          Vida Nova Program is structured in two lines of action: (i) closed demand, i.e.
          complete resettlement of groups of families living in informal and precarious
          settlements (favelas) that are prone to flooding, landslides, and/or other
          environmental hazards, resettling them in housing projects with adequate
          infrastructure; and (ii) open demand, i.e. individual housing assistance provided to
          families in a situation of high social vulnerability dispersed throughout the state,
          through the construction of comprehensive housing projects.
1.11      COHAPAR issues a call for proposals open to all of the state’s municípios. Those
          interested must present the land areas on which the housing complexes are to be
          built, and indicate the type of demand that the project will address (closed or open).
          COHAPAR evaluates the feasibility of the land in question, or the conditions needed
          to acquire them, as the case may be, from the technical, environmental, legal, and
          urban integration perspectives (need for urban infrastructure such as sanitation,
          paving, and electricity supply). Once the land is approved, COHAPAR prepares the
          technical projects for urbanization and construction, and then tenders the
          corresponding works.
1.12      COHAPAR has established the following criteria for prioritizing projects: (i) projects
          that serve families in situations of risk, emergency, and/or public calamity; (ii) projects
          that involve involuntary resettlement of families; (iii) projects in municípios with fewer
          than 50,000 inhabitants; (iv) the Human Development Index of the município in
          question; and (v) the order in which the municípios submit complete documentation of
          the land to be used in the program.
1.13      In cases of closed demand, the entire community living in a precarious settlement and
          in conditions of social vulnerability is selected. Alongside execution of the housing
          complex, social work is undertaken with the previously identified families, which
          involves socioenvironmental support, help in the transition to the new housing, and
          multisectoral activities for their inclusion in state public policies. Upon completion of
          the works, the families are resettled in the new complex (destination area) and receive
          assistance according to their degree of vulnerability. This may involve inclusion in

13   The average time is measured from the issuance of the service order for preparation of the basic project though
     to its final approval by COHAPAR.
14   The Bank will be providing technical and financial support for the Vida Nova Program, which is already under
     way.
15   The Cities Statute requires municípios with more than 20,000 inhabitants to have master plans, which implies
     the creation of municipal low-income housing plans and the formation of institutional structures such as
     municipal housing councils and housing secretariats. However, smaller and medium-sized municípios face
     challenges such as a lack of trained staff and limited budgets to implement housing policies. They also mostly
     lack the administrative and financial capacity to raise the funds needed to assist a project's target population.
                                              -5-



       public policies on health, education, security, the environment, income generation, job
       offers, and technical training. The old settlement (area of origin) is fenced off and its
       buildings demolished to prevent it from being repopulated. The land is subject to
       environmental recovery; and, if possible, it is converted into a useful public space (e.g.,
       park, plaza, or community facilities).
1.14   In the case of open demand, at the end of the construction process, beneficiary
       families are selected from COHAPAR’s applicant register, prioritizing: (i) families
       residing in at-risk or unhealthy areas, or who have become homeless; (ii) families with
       a female head of household; (iii) families that include at least one person with a
       disability; (iv) families benefiting from the Bolsa Família program (PBF) or the
       Continuous Cash Benefit (BPC) of the Social Assistance Policy; (v) families with
       dependents under 18 years of age; and (vi) families with an excessive rent burden. In
       both types of assistance, the entire process is supported by the socioenvironmental
       team of COHAPAR and the beneficiary municipal government.
1.15   Gender considerations. Gender gaps in Paraná’s housing deficit, as in the country
       at large, are significant. According to data of the João Pinheiro Foundation (2019)
       there is a quantitative deficit of 60% in female-headed households, compared to one
       of 40% in households headed by men. This disparity is reflected in the three
       components of the deficit: 54.6% of female-headed households were living in
       precarious housing, compared to 45.4% of households headed by men; 62.7% of
       female-headed households were subject to overcrowding, compared to 37.3% of
       male-headed households; and 61% of female heads of family faced problems of
       excessive rent, compared to 39% of their male counterparts. In addition, women also
       have a lower perception of safety in their homes, neighborhoods, and cities. Data for
       2021 from the sense of safety supplement of the household survey reveal that
       women feel less safe than men, both in their homes and neighborhoods, and
       especially in their cities. In the South Region of Brazil, the perception of safety gap
       is 4.3% in neighborhoods (19% in the case of women versus 14.7% for men) and
       6% in cities (31.2% versus 25%).
1.16   Diversity considerations. Data from the 2019 Health Survey for Paraná show that
       only 62% of persons with disabilities had simultaneous access to the three basic
       sanitation services [15], compared to 73% among persons without disabilities. The
       figure is even lower for the visually impaired (57%) and among those with physical
       impairment of the upper limbs (60%). Brazilian law requires at least 5% of housing
       to be destined for persons with disabilities, without specifying construction standards
       that are adapted to their needs. The regulations of the Vida Nova Program already
       require architectural standards to include housing adapted to the disabilities of its
       inhabitants, in compliance with the 5% minimum legal requirement.
1.17   Climate change mitigation and adaptation considerations. The precarious
       settlements that will benefit from the program are not only located mostly in disaster
       risk areas, but are also more exposed to the impacts of climate change. Paraná has
       experienced severe and extreme weather events in terms of rainfall, air humidity,
       wind, and temperature, associated with changing weather patterns (paragraph 1.6).
       These are of concern to various sectors of society in terms of susceptibility to
       damage and the resilience of infrastructure systems [16]. According to climate
       projections available for the state, spanning 2041-2070, the northeastern part of the
       state could experience an increase of up to 5.6ºC in temperature and
       an 18% reduction in rainfall volume, while the southeastern part could be the most
       affected in terms of the number of consecutive days without precipitation (dry days)
                                                       -6-



          in the year. 16 In terms of greenhouse gas emissions, Paraná ranks 12th among
          Brazilian states, with total emissions of roughly 76 metric tons of CO2e (as of 2020),
          of which 4.9% of energy sector emissions can be attributed to residential energy
          consumption [17]. Green and resilient low-income housing provides an opportunity
          to address these climate challenges and join efforts towards the objectives of the
          Paris Agreement, while providing social, economic, and environmental benefits to
          residents.
1.18      Brazil has made a commitment to combat climate change, with its Nationally
          Determined Contribution (NDC, 2022) stating that it will reduce greenhouse gas
          emissions by 37% by 2025 relative to the 2005 baseline and by 50% no later than
          2030, and that it will achieve carbon neutrality by 2050. The NDC also acknowledges
          the need to improve development indices in the areas of housing and social inclusion,
          while contributing to global efforts to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. The state is
          developing the Paraná State Climate Change Program (ParanáClima, 2020), guided
          by the Paraná State Climate Change Policy, established in Law 17,133/2012. This
          operation contributes to the climate commitments of both Brazil and the state, since
          the application of environmental sustainability criteria in the development of low-
          income housing highlights their importance, by promoting the efficient and rational use
          of natural resources. It also improves habitability conditions, reduces family expenses
          on basic utilities; and, among other collateral benefits, it contributes to reducing local
          pollution. In addition, quality housing solutions located in non-hazard-prone areas can
          reduce the population’s vulnerability to the effects of climate change by implementing
          resilient design strategies, and by incorporating adaptive measures that mitigate risks
          and improve the safety and general well-being of both individuals and communities.
1.19      Rationale. Through the National Housing Department (SNH), the Brazilian
          government requested the Bank’s support to develop new models of housing and
          habitat provision, and to formulate policy strategies for the sector, especially for the
          most vulnerable groups. In response, the Bank created the ProMorar Conditional
          Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) (operation BR-O0014), with a 10-year
          utilization period and an individual operation capacity of up to US$600 million. This
          project is the second operation under the CCLIP. It aligns with the CCLIP objectives
          by supporting a subnational agency, in this case COHAPAR, to implement new
          housing and habitat improvement strategies by adopting several innovations in
          programs for the socially vulnerable population in Paraná. The operation will draw
          on the Bank’s experience in the country and sector by proposing the following
          value-added elements: (i) mainstreaming of gender and diversity in its solutions, by
          building housing complexes tailored to the specific needs of each family;
          (ii) incorporation of environmental sustainability and energy and water efficiency
          criteria in all program housing; (iii) prioritization of nature-based solutions for the
          recovery of environmentally degraded areas that are subject to high climate risk,
          including measures to discourage their reoccupation; (iv) incorporation of building
          information modeling (BIM) technology in the review and approval of projects within
          COHAPAR; (v) training for COHAPAR staff in the issues mentioned above
          (i.e., gender and diversity, green housing and infrastructure, and technology
          systems) to update and improve its capacity to provide assistance; and

16   These data are from an unpublished study that evaluated the climate change vulnerability of 399 Paraná
     municípios. The research, coordinated by the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), forms part of the Climate
     Change Vulnerability Project, undertaken in partnership with the Ministry of the Environment. The study uses
     climate projections for the future scenario (2041-2070) compared to the present (1960-1990).
                                            -7-



       (vi) implementation of a high-standard environmental and social management
       system.
1.20   The Bank’s experience in the country. The program builds on the capacities
       developed in previous Bank-financed housing and urban development programs in
       Brazil. Examples include the “Habitar Brasil” Low-income Neighborhood
       Improvement Program (loan 1126/OC-BR), which sought to address the housing
       shortage in precarious urban settlements through integrated urbanization projects.
       This program is also aligned with other operations focused on improving urban and
       social conditions for vulnerable communities, including the Rio de Janeiro Urban
       Upgrading Program (Favela Bairro I), loan 898/OC-BR, 1995-2001; Favela Bairro II,
       loan 1241/OC-BR, 2000-2006; Favela Bairro III, loan 2482/OC-BR, 2010-2019); the
       Integrated Sustainable Urban Development Program for the Municipality of João
       Pessoa (loan 4444/OC-BR), the Urban Upgrade Program in the Western Area of
       Aracaju – Building for the Future (loan 4736/OC-BR), the PROCIDADES programs
       (loans BR-L1043; 1960/OC-BR; 1961/OC-BR; 1986/OC-BR; 1990/OC-BR;
       2054/OC-BR; 2121/OC-BR; 2246/OC-BR; 2320/OC-BR; 2752/OC-BR; 2751/OC-
       BR; and 2999/OC-BR); and in Paraná the “Família Paranaense” Integrated Social
       Inclusion and Urban Requalification Program (loan 3129/OC-BR). The objective of
       the first individual operation under the CCLIP (BR-L1596) is for the federal
       government to provide public, private, and civil society stakeholders with new tools
       to facilitate and diversify access to low-income housing solutions with a view to
       enhancing access to decent housing. While the focus of the first operation was on
       providing tools to access low-income housing solutions, connecting supply with
       demand, and promoting microfinance programs as a means for improving housing,
       the second operation underscores the need to directly improve access to decent
       housing, and improve basic infrastructure and socioenvironmental conditions. By
       addressing different dimensions of the housing problem—from facilitating and
       providing financing for buying and improving housing to direct intervention in
       precarious settlements—both operations work in a comprehensive way to strengthen
       housing and habitat policy in Brazil, ensuring a sustained impact on reducing the
       qualitative and quantitative housing deficit, and on promoting more inclusive and
       sustainable urban development.
1.21   The Bank’s experience in the region. The Bank’s housing programs promote
       actions targeting the social and urban inclusion of housing with the rest of the city,
       working at the scale of the dwellings and that of its surroundings. Regional examples
       include the following: in Chile, the Program for the Integration of Vulnerable
       Neighborhoods (loan 5313/OC-CH); in Argentina, the CCLIP for the Barrio
       Improvement Program (PROMEBA II) (AR-X1004), the Urban Integration and Social
       and Educational Inclusion Program in the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (loan
       4303/OC-AR), the CCLIP for the Social and Urban Integration Program in Greater
       Buenos Aires (loan 4823/OC-AR), and the Social and Urban Integration Program
       (loan 4804/OC-AR); in Uruguay, the Neighborhood Improvement Program, Phases I,
       II, and III (loan UR-X1003); and in Paraguay, the Improvement of Housing and
       Habitat Program (loan 3538/OC-PR) and the Housing and Rehabilitation Program
       for Bañado Sur in Asunción (Tacumbú Neighborhood) (loan 4700/OC-PR).
1.22   The program design is supported by national and international impact evaluation
       studies of similar housing and neighborhood improvement projects. These include:
       (i) research conducted on projects that provide low-income populations with housing
                                                         -8-



          solutions in certain Mexican cities [18], through a hedonic housing price model, 17 with
          a difference-in-differences evaluation approach; and (ii) projects that promote
          integrated neighborhood or urban environment improvement actions [19]. In Brazil,
          the program design is supported by impact studies such as the Rio de Janeiro
          Low-Income Neighborhood Urban Development Program – PROAP III (loan
          2482/OC-BR) which demonstrates that housing improvement and urban
          redevelopment actions in low-income settlements increase property values in the
          targeted areas and their surroundings, measured through the difference-in-
          differences methodology. In addition, a World Bank study in Mexico showed that
          dwellings with cement floors reduce the prevalence of diarrheal disease in children
          by 49% and cases of childhood anemia by 81%, compared to dwellings with dirt
          floors; and enhance cognitive development by up to 96%. Similarly, the Habitat para
          a Humanidade–Brasil study (2021) identifies a reduction in the prevalence of
          diarrhea among residents who have been resettled in new low-income housing.
1.23      Lessons learned. Based on previous Bank experiences with similar operations,
          both in Brazil and elsewhere in the region, this operation draws on the following
          lessons learned: (i) the need to address the challenges in a comprehensive manner,
          incorporating not only housing construction, but also the expansion of urban
          infrastructure, the rehabilitation of affected ecosystems, and the implementation of
          projects to address climate change (paragraph 1.13); (ii) coordination with all
          stakeholders is essential for maximizing the impact of the interventions and
          optimizing the use of available resources (paragraphs 1.13 and 2.5); (iii) the need for
          balancing infrastructure works with access to social services, especially when
          working with highly vulnerable groups (paragraphs 1.13 and 1.14); (iv) the relevance
          of strengthening the institutional capacities of government teams to ensure the
          sustainability of the actions undertaken (paragraph 1.9); (v) the need for verifying
          beforehand the technical and legal feasibility of the land on which the housing
          projects will be located before including them in the program (paragraph 1.11);
          (vi) since the works are widely dispersed across the state, it is advisable for the
          program management unit (PMU) to receive technical support throughout the
          program in the form of consulting services specializing in program management and
          supervision (paragraph 2.12); and (vii) the importance of developing a stakeholder
          engagement plan and communication that informs the affected communities in a
          timely manner about the housing projects, resettlement alternatives, and available
          compensation measures, in a timely manner (paragraphs 2.9 and 2.10).
1.24      Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the IDB Group Institutional
          Strategy: Transforming for Scale and Impact (document CA-631) 18 and is in
          alignment with the objectives of: (i) reducing poverty and inequality, by helping to
          improve living conditions for families in situations of informality and extreme social
          and environmental vulnerability; and (ii) addressing climate change, by recovering
          degraded areas exposed to climate change risk, and by supporting housing
          developments and housing solutions that incorporate resilience criteria and efficient
          use of resources in housing units that achieve a level of savings equivalent to

17   The price of land per square meter increased by R$75.5 in real terms in the control group, compared
     to R$27.7 in the treatment group, i.e. by 3.7 times the real increase in the control group. In cost-benefit terms,
     the results show that, for each real invested in services, infrastructure, and equipment, R$2.8 were gained
     through the increase in the value per square meter of land with housing.
18   This program was designed when the second update to the Institutional Strategy (document AB-3190-2) was
     in effect.
                                             -9-



       “excellence in design for greater efficiencies” (EDGE) certification. The program is
       also aligned with the following operational focus areas: (i) biodiversity, natural
       capital, and climate action; (ii) gender equality and the inclusion of diverse population
       groups; (iii) institutional capacity, rule of law, and citizen security; and
       (iv) sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure. The program is also consistent
       with the IDB Group Country Strategy with Brazil (documents GN-2973 and
       GN-2973-2), since it contributes to expanding opportunities and reducing social
       inequalities, by implementing efficient public policies to increase access to housing,
       and by making government more effective by strengthening COHAPAR’s capacities.
       It also relates to the previously mentioned crosscutting themes of gender, diversity,
       and climate change, as well as innovation and digital transformation, by
       implementing BIM technology in COHAPAR’s work.
1.25   The program is also aligned in Category 2 with the Employment Action Framework
       with a Gender Perspective (documents GN-3057 and OP-2289-1) as it envisages
       analysis, actions, and indicators related to the talent pillar from the standpoint of
       institutional strengthening and social inclusion. It is also consistent with the
       cornerstones of strengthening gender equality, diversity, and climate change.
       Furthermore, the program is consistent with the following sector frameworks:
       Housing and Urban Development Sector Framework Document (document
       GN-2732-11), in the dimension of success of promoting access to housing for more
       vulnerable populations; and Gender and Diversity Framework Document (document
       GN-2800-13), in the dimension of success of promoting interventions to increase
       gender equality and social inclusion.
1.26   An estimated 94.23% of the operation’s resources are allocated to climate change
       mitigation and adaptation activities, according to the multilateral development banks’
       joint methodology for tracking climate finance, given the program’s contributions in
       terms of energy and water efficiency in housing, staff training in environmental
       certifications and green housing, and nature-based solutions for vacant land
       reclamation (optional link 5).
1.27   This operation has been analyzed using the IDB Group’s Joint MDB Assessment
       Framework for Paris Alignment and the IDB Group Paris Alignment Implementation
       Approach: Principles, Methodology, and Technical Guidance (document
       GN-3142-1); and it is deemed to be aligned with the mitigation and adaptation
       objectives of the Paris Agreement, based on a specific analysis. Alignment was
       verified on the basis of the following: consistency with climate change adaptation
       priorities in the production of low-income housing and urban development reflected
       in Brazil’s NDC; the analysis performed of alternatives for the cooking technologies
       to be financed. The latter confirms that liquefied petroleum gas (in cylinders) is the
       cleanest viable technology in the given context, as it involves a low risk of
       technological dependency and a positive transition to more efficient cooking methods
       for vulnerable populations benefiting from this operation.
B.     Objectives, components, and cost
1.28   Objectives. The program’s general objective is to enhance the quality of life of the
       socially vulnerable population living in shantytowns, informal favela-like settlements,
       or unhealthy housing in the State of Paraná, by improving access to decent housing,
                                                         - 10 -



          basic infrastructure conditions, and socioenvironmental actions. 19 The specific
          objectives are to: (i) increase access to equitable and sustainable housing and
          habitat solutions for the socially vulnerable population; and (ii) improve the
          assistance provided by COHAPAR, through innovative and smart public
          management. This will be the second individual operation under the ProMorar CCLIP
          (operation BR-O0014), approved by Resolution DE-57/23, for a total of
          US$600 million. The program will contribute to the CCLIP’s objective of promoting
          new housing and habitat improvement strategies in Brazil, by supporting a
          subnational government entity, i.e. the State of Paraná, in the preparation and
          implementation of low-income housing programs.
1.29      Component 1. Housing assistance to families in situations of
          socioenvironmental vulnerability (IDB: US$134 million, Local counterpart:
          US$36.5 million). This component will undertake activities to achieve the program’s
          first specific development objective. To that end, it will finance: (i) the construction of
          low-income housing complexes with access to basic utilities (e.g., sanitation, paved
          streets, electricity, and drinking water), habitat improvements, community
          equipment, 20 and land purchases, as necessary; 21 (ii) the recovery of vacated areas22
          subject to high climate risk, prioritizing nature-based solutions: temporary isolation
          of areas, plan development, implementation of restoration and environmental
          protection, and construction of public utility infrastructure; and (iii) works technical
          and socioenvironmental supervision: technical and laboratory tests, works
          monitoring and supervision, social and environmental monitoring, and multisector
          activities.
1.30      Representative sample. To evaluate and dimension the program, a representative
          sample was prepared equivalent to 26% 23 of the total investments. The sample
          included the different types of assistance (open and closed demand), territorial
          dispersion, município size, and number of housing units per project, to ensure that
          the sample was as representative as possible. This made it possible to establish the

19   This objective will be measured using an indicator that determines the average per-square-meter increase in
     property values in the program’s areas of intervention. This indicator reflects improvements in the quality of
     life, inasmuch as property value appraisals are based on a set of factors that account for and impact people’s
     quality of life. Initially, property values are determined by infrastructure conditions in the region, such as
     access to drinking water, basic sanitation, reliable electric power supply, streets that are paved and
     illuminated, and security. Property value is also determined by the improvements made to the conditions of
     the property itself and its documentation, i.e., the registration and title of the property. The conditions of a
     property are correlated, among other factors, with the standards of its finishings, the existence of any
     bathrooms, flooring, plaster/drywall, windows, and doors. Moreover, the property title, in addition to being a
     security factor for the beneficiaries, provides them with an increase in per capita income and, consequently,
     an improvement in the quality of life of the beneficiary population. Accordingly, factors attributable to
     increasing the value of real estate are also directly related to the population’s quality of life.
20   The housing units and other buildings (such as leisure facilities) to be built will achieve efficiency levels that
     produce savings—relative to conventional construction—of at least 20% in energy consumption, 20% in water
     consumption, and 20% in energy embodied in materials, according to sustainable building certification
     standards such as EDGE or similar.
21   The loan proceeds may be used to buy land, subject to compliance with the requirements of the Bank's policies,
     including the expenditure eligibility policy (document GN-2331-5), and subject to the Bank's prior written no
     objection.
22   Vacated areas (áreas desocupadas) is the name given to land on which the informal favela-type settlements
     are located (area of origin), which will be resettled once the families that were living there have vacated them
     and moved into the new housing complex.
23   Forty projects were analyzed in 39 municípios, corresponding to a total of 1,652 housing units and representing
     an investment of approximately US$50 million.
                                                          - 11 -



          basic costs of the projects and to develop the corresponding socioenvironmental
          evaluations and the economic analysis. The sample projects satisfy the program’s
          technical, economic, and environmental eligibility requirements. All of the program’s
          category “A” projects were included in this sample.
1.31      Eligibility criteria. In addition to the projects of the representative sample, the works
          financed under the program will meet specific criteria. Accordingly, these works
          must: (a) be related to the construction of housing complexes for (i) families who
          reside in shantytowns, informal favela-type settlements, or unhealthy housing on
          public land exposed to environmental, geological, or health risks, 24 requiring
          complete resettlement; or (ii) families living in extreme conditions of social
          vulnerability, according to the parameters established by COHAPAR; and (b) be built
          on land that meets the criteria of the viability analysis conducted by COHAPAR from
          the technical, environmental, legal, and urban integration perspectives. The specific
          details of the eligibility criteria will be spelled out in the program Operating
          Regulations. The program will not finance any Category “A” projects outside of the
          representative sample, in accordance with the IDB’s Environmental and Social Policy
          Framework.
1.32      All works executed under the program will observe the criteria for reducing carbon
          emissions and be climate-change resilient, in addition to having a gender perspective
          (prioritization of property titles issued to women heads of household 25 and
          architectural standards that are gender sensitive), 26 and recognizing the needs of
          persons with disabilities (houses adapted to their type of disability).
1.33      Component 2. Institutional strengthening (IDB: US$2.5 million, Local
          counterpart: US$500,000). This component will undertake activities aimed at
          achieving the program’s second specific development objective. To that end, it will
          finance the following for COHAPAR: (i) procurement of information technology
          equipment (hardware and software); (ii) studies for the implementation of green
          infrastructure, urban resilience, energy efficiency, and bioclimatic construction of
          low-income housing developments; (iii) implementation of BIM technology; 27
          (iv) updating and modernization of housing registration systems; (v) training for
          personnel in: (a) techniques and system updating; (b) environmental and green
          housing certifications; and (c) design of projects and initiatives with a gender


24   These include areas susceptible to erosion, subsidence, rock fall and rolling boulders, and flooding; as well
     as hillsides, ravines, rugged terrain, slopes prone to landslides; locations under high-voltage transmission
     lines, safety areas in ports, airports, highways, railroads, and landfills, contaminated or polluted areas, and
     other hazard areas as defined by Civil Defense.
25   The prioritization criteria applicable at levels above the legal thresholds will be defined in the program Operating
     Regulations.
26   Gender considerations could include: a well-planned and sufficient lighting design for outdoor and common
     areas can help increase the perception of safety, by making spaces more visible and deterring criminal activity;
     an urban design that provides more welcoming and walkable spaces, among other elements of the housing
     environment.
27   BIM technology is used at all stages of projects: in planning, a conceptual model is created; in design, elements
     are detailed and analysis is performed; in construction, activities are planned and quality is controlled; in
     operation, the model is used for continuous management and maintenance; in future renovations, the model is
     updated to evaluate changes. In all of these stages, collaboration between teams is essential, and the use of
     BIM optimizes efficiency and accuracy by minimizing errors and delays in the construction process. Successful
     implementation of BIM requires an ongoing commitment to staff training, process standardization, and
     investment in appropriate technology to maximize its benefits.
                                                          - 12 -



          approach; (vi) an institutional communications plan; and (vii) studies to improve the
          financial efficiency of COHAPAR housing programs.
1.34      Program administration and socioenvironmental compensation (IDB:
          US$13.5 million, Local counterpart: US$500,000). This item will finance actions to
          support the program’s technical, social, and environmental management:
          (i) technical and socioenvironmental consulting services, which will be organized by
          implementing a technical and socioenvironmental management system for the
          program in COHAPAR headquarters and its 12 decentralized units throughout the
          state; (ii) monitoring and evaluation actions; and (iii) socioenvironmental
          compensation actions.
C.        Key results indicators
1.35      Expected outcomes. The expected outcomes will be measured through the
          following indicators: (i) increase in the number of families in vulnerable situations
          who are provided with qualified housing solutions; (ii) percentage increase in the
          number of families, whose members include persons with disabilities, provided with
          adapted housing; (iii) increase in the percentage of property titles issued to women
          heads of household assisted by the program; (iv) the reduction in greenhouse gas
          emissions; (v) areas recovered with nature-based and resilient solutions; and
          (vi) reduction in the time taken to prepare basic projects 28 at COHAPAR.
1.36      Beneficiaries. The program will benefit approximately 5,600 families that: (i) live in
          precarious settlements requiring resettlement actions, implementation of
          infrastructure, and/or urban improvement and land regularization, registered in the
          Paraná Housing Needs Information System (SISPEHIS); and (ii) are socially
          vulnerable, with gross family income not to exceed three times the minimum wage
          and that are included in COHAPAR’s Unified Applicant Register. 29 In terms of the
          distribution between the different assistance typologies, an estimated 70% of the
          housing units will respond to closed demand and the remaining 30% to open
          demand.
1.37      Economic viability. The program’s economic viability was analyzed (optional link 1)
          using a cost-benefit analysis of the representative project sample. Incremental
          benefits and costs were estimated at efficiency prices over a 20-year period,
          discounted at a rate of 12% per year. Program returns were assessed on the basis
          of indicators such as the internal rate of return (IRR), cost-benefit ratio, and net
          present value. The results of the study indicate a net present value of US$225.10,
          an IRR of approximately 21.5%, and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.3, which make it
          economically viable. In addition, sensitivity tests were conducted that assumed
          higher costs and reduced benefits. The results showed that the program withstands
          cost increases of up to 34.7% and benefit reductions of up to 25.8%. In addition, two
          other sensitivity tests were performed: one considering the maximum reduction in
          the number of housing units built, while maintaining the viability of the program with
          the current costs; and the other applying a 20% reduction to the disability adjusted

28   Article 6(IX) of the Tendering Act (Law 8,666/93) defines a basic project as “the set of elements that are
     necessary and sufficient, with an adequate level of precision, to characterize the object of the tender; it must be
     prepared on the basis of preliminary technical studies, in order to guarantee its technical viability and appropriate
     treatment of the environmental impact, and make it possible to evaluate the cost and define the methods and
     terms of execution”.
29   In both groups, the representation of female heads of household and persons with disabilities is above the state
     average. These groups will receive special attention during the development of the operation.
                                                  - 13 -



      life years (DALYs) value. The results obtained were 3,744 housing units for the first
      sensitivity test, and an IRR of 16% per year for a 20% reduction in the DALY value.

                        II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.    Financing instrument
2.1   The program is designed as an investment loan under the global multiple-works
      modality, which is justified by the nature of the projects. As they are all
      comprehensive projects that include the construction of low-income housing
      complexes, community facilities, and the recovery of degraded areas, their
      definitions, designs, and implementation will have similar characteristics, although
      the projects themselves will be mutually independent. The total program cost will be
      US$187.5 million, of which US$150 million will be financed from the proceeds of a
      loan from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital and US$37.5 million from local counterpart
      resources (Table 1). For the correct evaluation and dimensioning of the program, a
      representative sample was prepared, encompassing each of the different project
      typologies (paragraph 1.30).
                                  Table 1. Estimated program costs (US$)*

       Component                                             IDB         Local         Total         %
       Component 1. Housing assistance to
       families in situations of                       134,000,000 36,500,000 170,500,000           90.93
       socioenvironmental vulnerability

        a. Actions in the pre-works phase                   2,200,000   2,050,000     4,250,000      2.27

        b. Works                                       123,800,000 34,450,000 158,250,000           84.40

        c. Works supervision                                8,000,000            0    8,000,000      4.27

       Component 2. Institutional strengthening             2,500,000    500,000      3,000,000       1.6

       Program administration and
                                                           13,500,000    500,000     14,000,000      7.47
       socioenvironmental compensation

        a. Implementation of technical and
                                                            3,900,000    500,000      4,400,000      2.35
           environmental support system

        b. Evaluation reports                                400,000             0      400,000      0.21

        c. Socioenvironmental assistance                    9,200,000            0    9,200,000      4.91

       Total                                           150,000,000 37,500,000 187,500,000 100.00

       * Note: The distribution of funding within the program components and administration is indicative.


2.2   The disbursement period will be five years, as shown in Table 2.
                                              - 14 -



                            Table 2. Tentative disbursement schedule (US$)

           Source        Year 1          Year 2         Year 3         Year 4         Year 5
       IDB              16,271,681      41,172,147     50,721,933     34,080,574       7,753,665

       Local             4,788,095       9,801,840     12,484,416      8,985,173       1,440,476

       TOTAL            21,059,776      50,973,987     63,206,349     43,065,747       9,194,141

       %                     11             27              34             23              5


B.    Environmental and social risks
2.3   In terms of environmental and social impact, this program is classified as a
      category “A” operation, because it is expected to generate significant direct impacts,
      involving the physical and economic displacement of some 5,600 families living in
      situations of extreme social vulnerability, and/or located in disaster risk areas and
      unregulated settlements.
2.4   Either directly or through COHAPAR, the borrower must have legal possession of the
      land areas on which the housing developments are to be built. Approximately
      130 municipal governments will participate in the program. The program actions will
      generate adverse impacts stemming from infrastructure demolition in favelas located
      in risk areas; and impacts associated with the construction of new housing units—
      predominantly single-story homes—located in existing urbanized neighborhoods. The
      projects will not be undertaken in indigenous or Quilombola territories. However, they
      do have impacts, recognized by local law, on families of traditional origin.
2.5   The operation’s environmental and social risk is rated high, owing to the potential
      loss of livelihoods of a group of traditional fisherfolk (eight families identified thus far);
      the context of socioenvironmental vulnerability; and the need to strengthen
      COPAHAR’s institutional capacity and interaction with the respective municipal
      governments, to perform the socioenvironmental monitoring of multiple projects
      located throughout the state of Paraná.
2.6   The program’s disaster and climate change risk is rated moderate since, although
      the threat of flooding is high-to-moderate, the criticality and vulnerability of the
      program is moderate. This risk will be managed through specific climate change
      adaptation and mitigation efforts and integrated disaster risk management actions.
2.7   In accordance with the environmental and social policy framework (ESPF),
      COHAPAR has developed an environmental and social management system that
      contains eligibility criteria for excluding category “A” projects that were not previously
      analyzed as part of the sample during the preparation phase. For all of the works
      included in the sample, an environmental and social impact assessment was carried
      out, along with the preparation of an environmental and social management plan
      (ESMP) and an involuntary resettlement plan. These tools will be used to collectively
      assist families in situations of disaster-risk and/or social vulnerability (closed
      demand), and a housing assistance plan will serve vulnerable families located
      throughout the state on an individual basis (open demand), which reflect the
      program’s representative sample projects—a total of 40 spread across
      39 municípios (see Annex C of the environmental and social review summary
      (required link 3): Location of the municípios in which the sample projects will be
      executed).
                                              - 15 -



2.8    The guidelines underpinning the socioenvironmental viability of projects that were
       not included in the sample and for managing the entire program will be set out in an
       environmental and social management framework. This includes a resettlement
       framework with compensation and livelihood restoration measures that will form part
       of the environmental and social management system.
2.9    A stakeholder engagement plan has been prepared for the entire program and for
       the sample projects. The plan takes account of the degree of vulnerability and the
       presence of culturally differentiated families of traditional origin (traditional fisherfolk)
       among the families to be benefited. The aforementioned documents were made
       available in suitable versions prior to the analysis mission.
2.10   All consultations took place between 3 and 15 August 2023. In all, 43 consultations
       were organized in munícipios of the representative sample. Of these,
       19 consultations focused exclusively on involuntary resettlement (closed demand);
       23 on housing assistance projects (open demand); and one was held at COHAPAR
       headquarters for different stakeholders. The results indicate that the consultations
       were broad in scope (with a total of 2,652 stakeholders who physically attended and
       another 1,023 who participated remotely), with an average of 65% of women and
       35% of men participating. There were a significant number of expressions of interest,
       as well as questions that were directly answered, demonstrating that the program
       was well accepted by the population. The main topics covered concerned the supply
       of public health, education, and social assistance services and facilities, as well as
       the program’s eligibility criteria, compensation matrix, and scope. For groups of
       traditional origin, a specific and culturally appropriate event was held on
       3 August 2023, as a result of a consultation process held in accordance with the
       requirements of free, prior, and informed consent (FPIC). The environmental and
       social management framework also includes stakeholder engagement guidelines for
       projects that were not included in the sample; and a complaints and grievance
       mechanism has been developed for the entire program, including specific
       resettlement guidelines. The consultation report and the final version of the
       socioenvironmental documents have been posted on the Bank’s website.
C.     Fiduciary risks
2.11   Three medium-low fiduciary risks have been identified, which will be monitored
       throughout the program. The greatest risk concerns the contracting of a financial
       management system which, should it not occur, could delay the first disbursement.
       The procurement plan will provide for this system to be contracted as soon as the
       program contract is signed, so that it does not impact execution. The other risks can
       be consulted in Annex III.
2.12   Institutional capacity analysis. The Bank evaluated the executing agency using
       the institutional capacity assessment platform (ICAP), which found that it has
       institutional capacities classified as strengths in most of the modules analyzed.
       However, support needs were identified for improvement in all modules.
D.     Other key issues and risks
2.13   In view of COHAPAR’s experience, no technical risks were detected, although a
       number of execution risks were observed. These include the possibility that no
       construction companies will be available during the contracting of works, owing to
       the volume of the works and level of demand; and the possibility that COHAPAR
       may have difficulties in fulfilling the Bank’s socioenvironmental requirements, thereby
                                             - 16 -



       impacting the program’s execution deadlines. These risks were classified as
       medium-high. The former will be mitigated by carefully preparing the terms of
       reference for works bidding, and maintaining communication with potential bidders.
       The second risk will be avoided by providing staff training and by hiring firms to
       provide management support and socioenvironmental supervision. Low and
       medium-low risks were also identified, related to the population’s resistance to
       resettlement, changes in mayors during program implementation, and problems with
       land availability. These risks will be monitored throughout program execution to
       ensure that they do not materialize.
2.14   Sustainability. The program will ensure the sustainability of its actions by:
       (i) incorporating low-carbon and resilient design criteria and the use of green
       infrastructure in housing and other projects; (ii) developing good practice guidelines
       for implementing resilient and low-carbon urban and housing projects;
       (iii) environmentally remediating land in climate risk areas that is vacated through the
       operation, and creating public spaces and enclosures to promote urban resilience
       and prevent reoccupation; and (iv) raising awareness among program beneficiaries
       of the need to foster good practices in terms of reducing water and energy
       consumption and improving waste management.

                      III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.     Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1    Execution mechanism. The State of Paraná will be the borrower and the Federative
       Republic of Brazil will be the guarantor of the borrower’s financial obligations under
       the loan. The State of Paraná will execute the program through the Paraná Housing
       Company (COHAPAR), acting as program executing agency, which will create a
       program management unit (PMU) for that purpose.
3.2    The PMU will be structured with the following coordination units at minimum:
       (i) general coordination will be headed by a general coordinator and supported by a
       deputy coordinator, both of whom will work exclusively for the program and will be
       responsible for supervising the various thematic coordination units within the PMU;
       (ii) the technical coordination unit, which will handle matters related to projects,
       works, and institutional strengthening; (iii) the administrative coordination unit will be
       responsible for financial, legal, and contracting matters, including the special bidding
       committee; and (iv) the socioenvironmental coordination unit will focus on
       environmental and social management, resettlement, and all related safeguards.
3.3    In addition, COHAPAR’s 12 regional offices will form part of the PMU’s
       organizational structure, serving as the main provider of information on the status of
       program actions. The communication department will be in direct contact with
       general program coordinator and will be responsible for the complaints and
       grievance mechanism.
3.4    The PMU will be responsible for coordinating and executing the different actions and
       interventions, and it will promote communication and integration among the entities
       involved in the program, serving as COHAPAR’s main interlocutor with the Bank. It will
       also be responsible for the operation’s financial and accounting management. The
       PMU’s main functions include: (i) planning the investments; (ii) evaluating the final
       designs of the projects’ works; (iii) preparing and supporting bidding processes for the
       procurement of works, goods, and services; (iv) controlling and supporting works
                                           - 17 -



      supervision and oversight; (v) coordinating and supervising environmental issues;
      (vi) controlling accounting and files, and submitting disbursement and accountability
      requests; (vii) performing physical and financial control, and preparing physical and
      financial progress reports; (viii) attending to and coordinating compliance with the
      clauses of the loan contract; (ix) monitoring and evaluating the intermediate results,
      targets, and indicators of the results matrix; (x) developing the managerial and
      accounting systems required for physical and financial monitoring; (xi) preparing the
      operational plans and documents, including the annual work plans; (xii) preparing
      terms of reference for hiring consulting firms; (xiii) preparing all technical and
      administrative documentation relevant to the bidding and contracting processes; and
      (xiv) producing other reports as required by the Bank. Other program functions and
      issues, such as financial management rules, eligibility criteria, procurement policies,
      socioenvironmental safeguard policies, the program supervision system, and issuance
      of no-objection notices, will be specified in the program Operating Regulations.
3.5   Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the
      financing: The borrower, through the executing agency, will submit evidence
      to the Bank of the following: (i) the signing and entry into effect of an
      agreement between the borrower and the executing agency for the transfer of
      resources and the execution of program activities; (ii) the approval and entry
      into effect of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms previously
      agreed upon with the Bank; and (iii) the creation of the program management
      unit and appointment of that unit’s staff indicated in paragraph 3.2. Other
      special contractual conditions may be consulted in the environmental and
      social action plan and in Annex B of the environmental and social review
      summary.
3.6   Special contractual conditions for execution: (i) Before activities are undertaken
      in a program beneficiary município, the executing agency will provide evidence that
      an agreement has been signed with that municipal government, specifying the
      responsibilities of both parties in the execution of the project in question, including
      works maintenance obligations; (ii) before the first service order for program works
      is issued, the borrower will submit evidence to the Bank that a firm has been
      contracted to support program management; (iii) prior to the execution of each of the
      program’s works begins, the executing agency will submit evidence that a firm has
      been hired for the respective technical and socioenvironmental supervision; and
      (iv) the deadline for the start of program works will be three years from the effective
      date of the loan contract. Other special contractual conditions may be consulted in
      the environmental and social action plan and in Annex B of the environmental and
      social environmental and social review summary.
3.7   The deadline for the physical start of the works was established through the planning
      of project execution, and the way in which the bidding schedule has been structured
      to enable the last group of works to start on time (required link 1).
3.8   Financial management and auditing. The program’s financial management will be
      conducted in accordance with the Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-
      financed Projects (document OP-273-12), which establishes the disbursement
      modalities and external audits of the program’s financial statements to be agreed
      upon with the Bank, among other issues. The program’s financial statements will be
      audited annually by the Audit Office of the State of Paraná, or by a Bank-eligible
      independent external audit firm, to be contracted by the executing agency. The
      audited financial statements of the program will be submitted to the Bank annually,
                                           - 18 -



       no later than 120 days after the closing of each fiscal year of the executing agency,
       in accordance with the procedures and terms of reference previously agreed on with
       the Bank.
3.9    Disbursements. The loan proceeds will be disbursed in United States dollars as
       advances of funds, and will be deposited into a special bank account, opened in the
       name of the program, for the exclusive use of the loan proceeds. Requests for
       advances of funds will meet the program’s liquidity needs for a period of up to six
       months, as documented in the financial plan. For each advance (except for the first),
       at least 80% of the funds advanced and not yet justified must be accounted for.
3.10   Procurement of works, goods, and services. Procurement will be conducted in
       accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by
       the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-15) and the Policies for
       the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American
       Development Bank (document GN-2350-15). Procurement operations for works,
       goods, and services are defined in the procurement plan (required link 4) and will
       carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Fiduciary Agreements and
       Requirements (Annex III).
3.11   Retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively finance, chargeable against the
       loan proceeds, up to US$15 million (10% of the proposed loan amount) in eligible
       expenditures incurred by the borrower and/or executing agency prior to the loan
       approval date, to make payments for program studies, projects, and works, provided
       that requirements substantially similar to those established in the loan contract have
       been met. Such expenditures must have been incurred on or after the project profile
       approval date (27 February 2023), but will not, under any circumstances, include
       expenditures incurred more than 18 months before the loan approval date.
B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.12   Monitoring and tracking system. The executing agency will monitor and control all
       project management processes, including: (i) semiannual monitoring reports
       specifying: the achievement of output and outcome indicator targets as described in
       the results matrix; the physical and financial progress of outputs; progress of the
       annual work plan; the status of procurement and contracting processes in
       accordance with the procurement plan (required link 4); compliance with
       environmental and social safeguards; risk assessment; and updating of planning and
       monitoring tools; (ii) delivery of the program’s financial statements; and
       (iii) preparation of the project completion report (PCR) as detailed in the monitoring
       and evaluation plan (required link 2).
3.13   Program evaluation. The program provides for a midterm evaluation, covering
       technical, administrative, and financial aspects, to be performed once 50% of the
       loan proceeds have been disbursed or when three years have elapsed since the loan
       contract took effect (whichever occurs first); and a final evaluation, which will be
       delivered to the Bank within 90 days of the end date of the disbursement period or
       any extensions thereof. This will also include an ex post economic evaluation and a
       qualitative assessment (required link 2). In addition, a PCR to be submitted under
       the Bank’s responsibility will be based on the semiannual execution reports, the
       results matrix, the progress monitoring report and audited financial statements, and
       the midterm and final evaluation reports, together with a qualitative assessment that
       includes the systemization of good practices and the main lessons learned. This will
       contribute to improving the Bank’s value added in future urban interventions
                                          - 19 -



      (required link 2). The PCR will be processed under the applicable rules and
      procedures.

                               IV. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

4.1   Eligibility of the second individual operation under the CCLIP. This second
      operation fulfills the requirements contained in the policy applicable to the CCLIP
      instrument (document GN-2246-13), since: (i) the ICAP was used to perform a
      comprehensive analysis of the institutional capacity of the executing agency,
      COHAPAR, which was found to have execution capacity as well as areas for
      improvement and potential risks (paragraph 2.12); (ii) the operation’s objective
      contributes to the achievement of the CCLIP’s multisector objectives, by promoting
      new strategies to address the housing deficit for low-income families through support
      for a subnational government entity, i.e., the State of Paraná, in developing and
      implementing low-income housing programs (paragraph 1.28); (iii) the operation
      addresses three sectors of the CCLIP (provision of housing solutions, habitat
      improvement, and sector strengthening); and (iv) the program includes actions in the
      areas for improvement identified in the capacity assessment.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Annex I -BR-L1588
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 1




                                                                               Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                         Summary             BR-L1588
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Institutional Strategy Alignment


                                                                                                      -Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action
                                                                                                      -Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups
  Operational Focus Areas                                                                             -Institutional capacity, rule of law, citizen security
                                                                                                      -Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure




  [Space-Holder: Impact framework indicators]

2. Country Development Objectives

                                                                                                                                 Priority area: (iv) Reduce social inequality and inequality of
                                                                                                                                 opportunity by improving the efficiency of public policies.
   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                            GN-2973
                                                                                                                                 Strategic objective of: (v) Implement efficient policies to
                                                                                                                                 increase access to housing.



                                                                                                                                 The intervention is not included in the 2024 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix
                                                                                                                                 Program.


 Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
 strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                                     Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                            8.1
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                         2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                                       1.6
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                                    4.0
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                                       7.5
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                                1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                              3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                                    0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                                      2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                           1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                       8.4
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                                     4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                           4.4
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                           Medium Low
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                        A
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                                 Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting, External
                                                                                                                                 Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                      Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)               Yes
                                                                                                                                 Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison,
                                                                                                                                 Contracting Individual Consultant, National Public Bidding.


                                                                                                                                 Monitoring and Evaluation National System, Environmental
                                                                                      Non-Fiduciary              Yes
                                                                                                                                 Assessment National System.

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project



Evaluability Assessment Note:
The operation´s general objective is to improve the life quality of socially vulnerable population that lives in irregular or precarious settlements, or unhealthy dwellings in the State of Paraná,
promoting access to decent housing, basic infraestructure and socio-environmental actions. The specific objectives are: (i) increasing access to equitable and sustainable housing solutions
for socially vulnerable populations; and (ii) improving COHAPAR´s service through innovative and smart management.

The operation will benefit 5,600 families approximately that (i) live in precarious settlements that require infrastructure implementation and/or urban improvement, resettlement actions, and
land regularization (closed demand); and (ii) socially vulnerable families whose gross family income does not exceed three minimum wages and who are registered in COHAPAR´s unique
cadastre (open demand). It is estimated that around 70% of the units produced by the program will be delivered to the beneficiaries of the closed demand and remaining 30% will go to
beneficiaries of the open demand.

Overall, the diagnosis is adequate and has a well-identified problem and clear determinants. The results matrix exhibits a clear vertical logic with specific objectives and SMART indicators
that would allow the monitoring and evaluating the objectives.

The economic analysis of the program is based in a Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) for a period of 20 years, and the project’s Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is 21.5% for the baseline scenario.
The sensitivity analysis shows that the operation could bear cost increases up to a maximum of 34.7% or decline in the estimated benefits up to a maximum of 25.8% and still remain cost-
effective in both cases. The Cost-Benefit Analysis includes the monetization of some benefits that go beyond the target beneficiaries of the operation.

The program has a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan that specifies: (i) the minimum monitoring activities; (ii) the evaluation questions; (iii) the methodologies for measuring the indicators; and
(iv) the data sources and verification protocols, as well as the M&E budget. The Evaluation Plan proposes an evaluation with attribution using the Difference-In-Differences method to
measure the causal effect of the operation on the achievement of the operation's objectives. The Evaluation Plan also proposes a Before and After approach to measure the theoretical
contribution of the operation to the result indicators.
                                                                                                                                                                    Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 6



                                                                             RESULTS MATRIX

                           The program’s general objective is to enhance the quality of life of the socially vulnerable population living in shantytowns, informal favela-like
                           settlements, or unhealthy housing in the State of Paraná, by improving access to decent housing, basic infrastructure conditions, and
   PROGRAM OBJECTIVE:
                           socioenvironmental actions. Its specific objectives are to: (i) increase access to equitable and sustainable housing and habitat solutions for the
                           socially vulnerable population; and (ii) improve the assistance provided by COHAPAR, through innovative and smart public management.

                                                                    GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

                      Unit of   Baseline      Baseline          Target         Expected year
    Indicator                                                                                       Means of verification                          Comments
                     measure     value          year                             achieved
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE: Enhance the quality of life of the socially vulnerable population living in shantytowns, informal favela-like settlements, or unhealthy
housing in the State of Paraná, by improving access to decent housing, basic infrastructure conditions, and socioenvironmental actions
Average property      R$/m2      897.73         2024           1,077.27             2028         Report on the program’s        The unit benefit measured by the increase in
value per square                                                                                 ex ante and ex post            property values (R$/m²), was calculated using the
meter in the areas                                                                               economic analysis              COHAPAR database, which contains registered
targeted by the                                                                                                                 housing units in which residents pay rent for use
program                                                                                                                         of the property. The average property value was
                                                                                                                                estimated at R$83,744.34. Data obtained from
                                                                                                                                the sample survey conducted in the project areas
                                                                                                                                identified an average property area of 90m²,
                                                                                                                                resulting in a unit value of R$897.73/m².
                                                                                                                                Target: The expected appreciation is 20% of the
                                                                                                                                value per square meter.
                                                                                                                                Exchange rate: US$1 = R$5.50.
    Annex II
    Page 2 of 6


                                                                            SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                                                             Baseline    End of program        Means of
             Indicator              Unit of measure                                                                                               Comments
                                                            value (2024)     (2029)           verification
    SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 1: Increase access to equitable and sustainable housing and habitat solutions for the socially vulnerable population
    Indicator 1. Average        Number of families             376            670         COHAPAR reports     In the last five years, an average of 376 families per year have been provided
    annual number of families                                                                                 with housing. Implementation of the program is expected to raise this
    in vulnerable situations1                                                                                 number to an average of 1,120 housing units per year.
    receiving qualified housing                                                                               Taking account of exchange rate risks and the risks inherent to the
    solutions                                                                                                 construction of housing units in Brazil, a minimization coefficient of 0.6 was
                                                                                                              foreseen for the target, resulting in 670 houses/year (an increase of 178%).
    Indicator 2. Percentage        Percentage                   5%           7.5%         COHAPAR reports     Baseline: COHAPAR currently fulfills the requirement stated in Federal
    of families that include                                                                                  Law 13,146/2015, i.e., that 5% of the housing units be reserved for families
    persons with disabilities                                                                                 whose members include persons with disabilities.
    receiving adapted houses                                                                                  Target: Based on the percentage of families that include persons with
                                                                                                              disabilities in a representative sample. The closed demand comprises
                                                                                                              713 families, of which 75 include a person with a disability (10%).
                                                                                                              Accordingly, the target will be 7.5%.
                                                                                                              Housing will be adapted according to the needs of each person with a
                                                                                                              disability identified in the register: e.g., width of doors, fixtures, height of sinks
                                                                                                              and taps, etc.
    Indicator 3. Percentage        Number of women-            54%           60%          COHAPAR             Baseline: Although Article 1 of State Law 15,301/2006 stipulates that 20% of
    of property titles issued to   headed households                                      semiannual report   the units in low-income housing developments and low-income housing
    women heads of                 benefited, relative to                                                     programs must be assigned to “women heads of household,” in the last three
    household served by the        the total number of                                                        years COHAPAR assisted 17,000 families in this group (54% of the total).
    program                        households served                                                          Target: The program seeks to allocate 60% of all housing units to female-
                                   by the program                                                             headed households with a property title or joint title in their names.
    Indicator 4. Greenhouse            Percentage               0%           20%          COHAPAR             The new housing units will generate less greenhouse gas emissions than
    gas emissions reduced or                                                              semiannual report   the standard projects COHAPAR had been building prior to this operation.
    avoided                                                                                                   Target: According to excellence in design for greater efficiencies (EDGE)
                                                                                                              simulations shared with the team, the new designs will result in annual
                                                                                                              greenhouse gas reductions of between 0.1 and 0.2 tCO2e per dwelling,
                                                                                                              relative to the baseline, i.e., savings of 20-25%.
                                                                                                              Source: COHAPAR semiannual report demonstrating that the housing units
                                                                                                              achieve the level of greenhouse gas emission savings using EDGE or a
                                                                                                              similar tool.




1    Families who live in shantytowns, informal favela-type settlements, or unhealthy housing in a situation of hypo-sufficiency.
                                                                                                                                                                        Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 3 of 6


                                                Baseline    End of program        Means of
        Indicator            Unit of measure                                                                                          Comments
                                               value (2024)     (2029)           verification
Indicator 5. Areas              Hectares           0             15.6        COHAPAR                COHAPAR’s definition of the degree of implementation of nature-based
recovered with resilient                                                     semiannual report      solutions in the total number of hectares recovered.
nature-based solutions                                                                              Considering the calculation specified in Output indicator 1.2 - Milestone 3,
                                                                                                    78 hectares of areas of origin are planned for treatment. Therefore,
                                                                                                    15.6 hectares (20%) of the areas of origin are expected to be recovered with
                                                                                                    resilient and nature-based solutions.
                                                                                                    Resilient nature-based solutions can be those that promote ecological
                                                                                                    restoration and long-term sustainability, such as: protection and restoration
                                                                                                    of plant cover, planting of native species, creation of ecological corridors, use
                                                                                                    of natural engineering techniques (e.g., natural structures to stabilize soil,
                                                                                                    control erosion, and create habitats), water conservation, community
                                                                                                    education and participation, among other items.
SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 2: Improve the assistance provided by COHAPAR, through innovative and smart public management
Indicator 6. Time taken to       Months           9.14           7.31        COHAPAR reports,       Estimated reduction in time it takes COHAPAR to prepare all projects using
prepare basic projects at                                                    backed by              the building information modeling (BIM) methodology, not just the projects of
COHAPAR                                                                      documentation          the program.
                                                                             recorded in            From 2018 to 2023, the average time it took COHAPAR to prepare basic
                                                                             COHAPAR’s              projects was 9.14 months. Following implementation of the BIM
                                                                             electronic processes   methodology, COHAPAR expects project preparation to take an average of
                                                                             and audited by the     7.31 months, i.e., 20% less time.
                                                                             Audit Office of the    Importantly, this average time refers to the period running from issuance of
                                                                             State of Paraná        the work order for preparation of the basic project through to its final approval
                                                                                                    by COHAPAR.
                                                                                                    The training envisaged in the program will also contribute to reducing the
                                                                                                    time taken to prepare basic projects.
                                                                                                    In addition to the time reduction, projects will be more technically and
                                                                                                    socioenvironmentally qualified.
                                                                                                    The data source and means of verification will be supported by
                                                                                                    documentation recorded in COHAPAR’s electronic processes and audited
                                                                                                    by the State Audit Office.
Annex II
Page 4 of 6


                                                                               OUTPUTS
                                        Baseline
                              Unit of     value                                                   End of      Means of
         Indicator                                 Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                                    Comments
                             measure                                                             program     verification
                                         (2024)
 COMPONENT 1. Housing assistance to families in situations of socioenvironmental vulnerability
 1.1. Engineering studies    Studies       0         1        2        0        0        0          3      Project           Engineering studies and designs approved by
      and designs                                                                                          management        COHAPAR and the respective municipal
      approved                                                                                             unit (PMU)        governments for execution of the program works
                                                                                                           semiannual
                                                                                                           progress report
 1.2. Construction of        Housing       0         _       500     1,900    2,000    1,200      5,600    PMU semi-
      housing units           units                                                                        annual progress
                                                                                                           report
 Milestone 1: Housing        Housing       0         -       500     1,900    2,000    1,200      5,600    PMU semi-         Housing units built in areas not subject to high
 units built in areas         units                                                                        annual progress   climate risk, with drinking water supply, sewerage,
 outside high-climate-risk                                                                                 report            and EDGE level 1 certification or similar.
 areas compatible with                                                                                                       Works execution takes approximately 18 months,
 EDGE level 1 or similar                                                                                                     so the first group, comprising the housing unit
                                                                                                                             projects of the representative sample, could begin
                                                                                                                             in year 1 and finish in year 2.
 Milestone 2. Low-income     Hectares      0         -        2        9        9        6         26      PMU semi-         Low-income housing complexes with access to
 housing complexes with                                                                                    annual progress   basic services are defined as the area within the
 access to basic services                                                                                  report            project perimeter that will be provided with
                                                                                                                             drinking water supply, sewerage connection or
                                                                                                                             individual solution, paving, public lighting,
                                                                                                                             signage, roads, and landscaping.
                                                                                                                             Calculation: According to COHAPAR, 43% of the
                                                                                                                             projects in the representative sample will have
                                                                                                                             paving services. COHAPAR estimated that each
                                                                                                                             housing complex will have an average of 3,713 m²
                                                                                                                             of pavement and 895 m² of sidewalks (external
                                                                                                                             public areas). These values, added together and
                                                                                                                             multiplied by 43%, result in an urbanized area of
                                                                                                                             1,981.44 m² per housing complex.
                                                                                                                             Considering the ratio of the total number of
                                                                                                                             housing units (5,600) to the historical average of
                                                                                                                             42 units per housing complex, the program will
                                                                                                                             have an estimated 133 housing complexes.
                                                                                                                             Accordingly, it is possible to calculate that the total
                                                                                                                             urbanized area of the housing complexes will be
                                                                                                                             263,531.52 m² or 26.35 hectares.
                                                                                                                                                                    Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 6


                                       Baseline
                            Unit of      value                                                  End of      Means of
        Indicator                                 Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                                   Comments
                           measure                                                             program     verification
                                        (2024)
Milestone 3. Areas of      Hectares                 -        -        7       26       45        78      PMU semi-         The indicator refers to the total number of
origin receiving urban                                                                                   annual progress   degraded areas that will be treated, prioritizing the
infrastructure works                                                                                     report            program’s urban resilience elements with a
                                                                                                                           variety of solutions, including: implementation of
                                                                                                                           urban infrastructure, public facilities, parks, or
                                                                                                                           reforestation.
                                                                                                                           According to program data, a total of
                                                                                                                           5,600 housing units will be built, of which 70% will
                                                                                                                           be used to satisfy closed demand, i.e.,
                                                                                                                           3,920 families living in unregulated settlements
                                                                                                                           will move into qualified housing units.
                                                                                                                           The      representative        sample       includes
                                                                                                                           895 dwellings in the areas of origin with closed
                                                                                                                           demand. A surface area of 200 m² per dwelling
                                                                                                                           was considered.
                                                                                                                           The total number of housing units with closed
                                                                                                                           demand, 3,920, yields a total value of 78 hectares
                                                                                                                           in areas of origin that will receive environmental
                                                                                                                           treatment.
Milestone 4. Housing       Number of      0         -       10       20       30       20        80      PMU semi-         Projects that incorporate designs in the housing
complexes that integrate    housing                                                                      annual progress   complexes to enhance the perception of security,
gender and inclusion       complexes                                                                     report            from the interior of the dwelling to the exterior, in
perspectives                                                                                                               common areas, and vice versa.
                                                                                                                           Actions will be confined to the housing complex
                                                                                                                           polygon and accessibility features inside each lot.
                                                                                                                           The number of urban developments was
                                                                                                                           estimated in the description of milestone 2, with a
                                                                                                                           minimization coefficient of 0.6, resulting in a total
                                                                                                                           of 80 housing complexes.
1.3. Technical, social,     Reports       0         0        2        2        2        2         8      PMU semi-         Supervision firms will be hired to produce
     and environmental     approved                                                                      annual progress   semiannual reports, in accordance with the
     supervision                                                                                         report            program’s contractual clause on that point,
                                                                                                                           excluding year 1, when no completed
                                                                                                                           construction is expected. but only project
                                                                                                                           development.
                                                                                                                           Every six months, the PMU will condense the
                                                                                                                           outputs into a single semiannual report.
Annex II
Page 6 of 6


                                        Baseline
                             Unit of      value                                                  End of      Means of
         Indicator                                 Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                                  Comments
                            measure                                                             program     verification
                                         (2024)
 COMPONENT 2. Institutional strengthening
 2.1. Procurement and         BIM           0        -       14        -        -        -        14      PMU semi-         Procurement and installation of packages with
      installation of BIM   packages                                                                      annual progress   14 new high-efficiency computers and installation
      packages with                                                                                       report            of BIM methodology software. Five additional BIM
      information                                                                                                           licenses will be added to COHAPAR’s existing
      technology                                                                                                            computers, and the respective user training will be
      hardware and                                                                                                          provided, including modules for applying BIM to
      software                                                                                                              climate change issues.
 2.2. COHAPAR staff         Number of       0       15       20       400      20        0        455     PMU semi-         Staff training in: systems techniques and
      trained               employees                                                                     annual progress   updating; environmental and green housing
                                                                                                          report            certifications; design of projects and initiatives
                                                                                                                            with a gender and diversity perspective
                                                                                                                            (Afro-descendants      and     the   LGBTQIA+
                                                                                                                            population).
 2.3. Paraná Housing          Final         0        -        -        -        1        -         1      PMU semi-         Updating of the Paraná State Low-income
      Needs Information      report                                                                       annual progress   Housing Plan (PEHIS) every four years. To make
      System (SISPEHIS)     approved                                                                      report            the plan viable in 2027, seminars will be held,
      updated                                                                                                               along with training events in the municípios, field
                                                                                                                            activities coordinated by COHAPAR and
                                                                                                                            executed locally by Paraná’s municipal
                                                                                                                            governments.
                                                                                                        Annex III
                                                                                                      Page 1 of 5



         Country: Brazil             Division: HUD               Operation: BR-L1588              Year: 2024

                               FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS
Executing agency: Paraná Housing Company (COHAPAR)
Operation name: State Housing Program – State of Paraná – Vida Nova Project

                        I.      FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1. Use of country systems in the operation1

             Budget               Reporting                Information system            National competitive
                                                                                         bidding
             Treasury             Internal audit           Shopping                      Other
             Accounting           External control         Individual consultants

2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

      Specific features       The State of Paraná will be the borrower and COHAPAR will serve as
      of fiduciary            executing agency, with responsibility for the program’s technical,
      execution               administrative, financial, and procurement management.

3. Fiduciary capacity

Fiduciary capacity of         The fiduciary capacity assessment of the executing agency concluded
the executing agency          that COHAPAR has satisfactory institutional capacity to implement
                              program. The operation’s fiduciary agreements and requirements take
                              account of the institution’s track record in executing subcomponent 2.1 of
                              loan 3129/OC-BR. The program will have Operating Regulations that
                              address the risk mitigation measures, needs, and specifics of this
                              program.

4. Fiduciary risks and risk response

    Risk taxonomy                     Risk                 Risk level               Risk response

Human resources              If the executing agency Medium-Low           Financial       and    procurement
                             does         not      have                   management risks will be
                             professional staff with                      mitigated       by:   (i) continuous
                             experience in using the                      strengthening of the executing
                             Bank’s fiduciary policies,                   agency         through      training,
                             program startup could be                     assistance, and supervision by
                             delayed, which would                         the Bank’s fiduciary team;
                             result in higher costs and                   (ii) creation of a special bidding
                             a     longer      program                    committee for the program; and
                             implementation time.                         (iii) inclusion of the detailed

1   Any system or subsystem that is subsequently approved may be applicable to the operation, in accordance with
    the terms of the Bank’s validation.
Annex III
Page 2 of 5



      Risk taxonomy                Risk              Risk level             Risk response

                                                                   financial requirements in the
                                                                   program Operating Regulations.
   Systems                 If    the       program’s Medium-Low     Develop      or     contract     a
                           financial management                     technological      solution     to
                           system is not contracted                 manage        the       program’s
                           by the start of execution,               accounting in United States
                           the    submission        of              dollars and generate the
                           financial     information                financial reports required by the
                           could     be     delayed,                Bank.
                           thereby compromising
                           or                delaying
                           disbursement requests.

  5. Policies and guidelines applicable to the operation: Document OP-273-12 (or its current
     version) will apply for financial management; and policies GN-2349-15 and GN-2350-15 will
     apply for procurement under the program.
  6. Exceptions to policies and/or guidelines: Not applicable.

              II.   CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

  Special conditions precedent to the first disbursement: The borrower, through the executing
  agency, will submit evidence to the Bank of the following: (i) the signing and entry into effect of
  an agreement between the borrower and the executing agency for the transfer of resources and
  the execution of program activities; (ii) the approval and entry into effect of the program
  Operating Regulations, under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (iii) the
  creation of the program management unit and appointment of that unit’s staff indicated in
  paragraph 3.2. of the proposal document. Other special contractual conditions may be consulted
  in the environmental and social action plan and in Annex B of the environmental and social
  review summary.
  Exchange rate: Pursuant to the terms of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties
  agree that the applicable exchange rate will be the one stipulated in Article 4.10(b)(i). For the
  purpose of determining the equivalency of expenditures incurred in local currency chargeable
  against the local contribution, or the reimbursement of expenditures chargeable against the loan
  proceeds, the exchange rate will be the one prevailing on the date on which the borrower,
  executing agency, or any other person or legal entity to which the authority to incur expenditures
  is delegated effectively makes the respective payments to the contractor, vendor, or beneficiary.
  Type of audit: Audited financial statements will be submitted annually during program
  execution, no later than 120 days after each fiscal year end. The program’s external audit will be
  performed by the State of Paraná Audit Office or by a Bank-eligible external audit firm. The
  program’s final audited financial statements will be submitted no later than 120 days following
  the last disbursement date or any extensions thereof.
                                                                                            Annex III
                                                                                          Page 3 of 5


             III.   AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

    Bidding          Works, goods, and nonconsulting services procured under the Bank’s
    documents        procurement policies (document GN-2349-15) and requiring international
                     competitive bidding will use the Bank’s standard bidding documents or those
                     agreed upon between the executing agency and the Bank for the specific
                     procurement operation. Consulting services will be selected and contracted in
                     accordance with the consultant selection policies (document GN-2350-15)
                     using the standard request for proposals issued by the Bank or a request for
                     proposals agreed upon between the executing agency and the Bank for the
                     specific selection.
    Advance          The Bank may retroactively finance from the loan proceeds up to
    procurement      US$15 million (10% of the proposed loan amount) in eligible expenditures
    and              incurred by the borrower prior to the loan approval date for program studies,
    retroactive      projects, and works, provided that requirements substantially similar to those
    financing        established in the loan contract have been met. Such expenditures will have
                     been incurred on or after the project profile approval date (27 February 2023),
                     but will not, under any circumstances, include expenditures incurred more than
                     18 months before the loan approval date.
    Procurement The supervision method will be ex post, except where ex ante supervision is
    Supervision justified. For procurement operations executed using the country system,
                supervision will also be conducted using the country supervision system. Use
                of the (i) ex ante, (ii) ex post, or (iii) country system supervision method will be
                determined for each selection process. Ex post reviews will be conducted
                according to the program supervision plan, which may be altered during
                execution. The thresholds for ex-post review are as follows:
                                                                                     Consulting
                         Executing agency          Works        Goods/services
                                                                                      services

                            COHAPAR             US$10 million     US$5 million      US$1 million


Main procurement items

                                                                                 Estimated amount
  Description of procurement                Selection method    Estimated date
                                                                                       (US$)
Goods
Information technology hardware Shopping                        Jan-2025                   600,000
and building information modeling
(BIM) equipment
Works
Group 1 - Lots 1, 2, 3                National competitive      Jan-2024                12,555,000
                                      bidding (NCB)
Group 1 - Lots 4, 5, 6                NCB                       Feb-2024                12,555,000
Group 1 - Lots 7, 8, 9                NCB                       Mar-2024                12,555,000
Annex III
Page 4 of 5



                                                                                     Estimated amount
     Description of procurement           Selection method        Estimated date
                                                                                           (US$)
  Group 1 - Lots 10, 11, 12            NCB                        Apr-2024                   12,555,000
  Group 2 - 12 Lots                    International competitive Sep-2024                    59,420,000
                                       bidding (ICB)
  Group 3 - 12 Lots                    ICB                        Jan-2026                   48,610,000
  Nonconsulting services
  Works technical and                  Quality- and cost-based Feb-2024                        2,000,000
  socioenvironmental supervision -     selection (QCBS)
  First regional
  Works technical and                  QCBS                       Feb-2024                     2,000,000
  socioenvironmental supervision -
  Second regional
  Works technical and                  QCBS                       Feb-2024                     2,000,000
  socioenvironmental supervision -
  Third regional
  Works technical and                  QCBS                       Feb-2024                     2,000,000
  socioenvironmental supervision -
  Fourth regional
  Implementation of the technical      QCBS                       Feb-2024                     4,400,000
  and environmental support
  system

   Link to procurement plan.

                IV.     AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

         Programming     Acting through the program management unit (PMU), COHAPAR is
         and budget      responsible for coordinating the entire planning process for the execution of
                         activities contained in the multiyear execution plan and in the annual work
                         plan. Paraná state agencies use planning instruments such as the multiyear
                         plan, the targets and priorities of the Budget Guidelines Law, and the actions
                         of the Annual Budget Law (LOA). The budget allocated to program activities
                         is included in the LOA. The PMU team will ensure that the program’s
                         budgetary resources, both Bank and local contribution, are duly budgeted and
                         secured for annual execution in accordance with the program’s operational
                         programming and financial plan.
         Treasury and    Disbursements and cash flow. Disbursements will be made in United States
         disbursement    dollars, in the form of advances of funds or any other modality established in
         management      the Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-Financed Projects (document
                         OP-273-12). Funds will be advanced on the basis of a financial plan generated
                         for a period of up to 180 days. With the exception of the first advance of funds,
                         subsequent advances may be processed once 80% of the total cumulative
                                                                                          Annex III
                                                                                        Page 5 of 5


                 balance of advances has been justified. The Online Disbursement Platform
                 will be used to manage disbursements with the Bank.
                 The Bank’s resources will be administered through a dedicated bank account
                 that will make it possible to identify the loan proceeds and bank reconciliations
                 of these funds.
                 To account for the loan proceeds and local contribution resources, the
                 executing agency will use: (i) the exchange rate in effect when the funds
                 advanced in the currency of the operation are converted to local currency, in
                 the case of IDB resources; and (ii) the exchange rate in effect on the payment
                 date, in the case of reimbursement of expenditures and the recognition of
                 expenses charged against the local contribution. Expenditures deemed
                 ineligible by the Bank will be reimbursed from local contribution resources or
                 from other funds, at the borrower’s discretion and with the Bank’s approval,
                 depending on the nature of the ineligibility.
Accounting,      State of Paraná public agencies are required to work with the integrated
information      financial management system (SIAFI) and the program and project
systems, and     management, monitoring, and support system (SIGMA-PP), and to meet
reporting        public sector accounting standards. SIAFI affords the Finance Department a
                 crosscutting view of financial resources and enables efficient management of
                 all of the state’s financial resources, in national currency. However, the system
                 does not automatically make it possible to manage the operation in other
                 currencies or issue reports according to the Bank’s requirements.
                 SIGMA-PP is linked to SIAFI and integrates budgetary, accounting, and cash
                 management activities. It was developed to support program planning, record
                 results and targets, monitor and evaluate program performance, and issue
                 follow-up, and physical and financial monitoring reports in foreign currencies.
                 Accordingly, within six months from the signing of the loan contract,
                 COHAPAR will confirm that SIGMA-PP has been implemented, which will
                 automatically make it possible to issue financial reports according to the
                 Bank’s requirements.
                 To supplement the policies and guidelines applicable to the operation, the
                 program Operating Regulations will be used with workflows and internal
                 controls as documented.
External         The program’s external audit may be performed by the State of Paraná Audit
control and      Office, or by an independent external audit firm that is eligible to audit
financial        Bank-financed operations, under terms of reference previously agreed upon
reports          between the executing agency and the Bank. These may be amended during
                 the lifetime of the project, depending on the results of the Bank’s supervision.
                 Audited financial statements will be delivered no later than 120 days after each
                 fiscal year end; and the final audited statements will be submitted no later than
                 120 days following the date of the last actual disbursement.
Financial        The financial supervision plan will be based on the risk and fiduciary capacity
supervision of   assessments made of COHAPAR. It will provide for onsite supervision visits
the operation    and desk monitoring, supported by analysis and monitoring of the results of
                 the audits of the program’s annual financial statements and accompanying
                 recommendations.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/24



 Brazil. Loan ____/OC-CH to the State of Paraná. State Housing Program – State of Paraná –
     Vida Nova Project. Second Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit Line for
                     Investment Projects (CCLIP) ProMorar (BR-O0014)



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary
with the State of Paraná, as borrower, and with the Federative Republic of Brazil, as guarantor, for
the purpose of granting the former a financing to cooperate in the execution of the State Housing
Program – State of Paraná – Vida Nova Project, which constitutes the second individual operation
under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) ProMorar (BR-O0014), approved
by Resolution DE-57/23, on 28 June 2023. Such financing will be for an amount of up to
US$150.000.000 from the Ordinary Capital resources of the Bank, and will be subject to the
Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of
the Loan Proposal.



                                (Adopted on ___ __________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZIDB0000366-620307903-44125
BR-L1588
