                                         Safeguard Policy Filter Report

Operation Information

Operation
BR-L1497 Vitória Urban Development and Citizen Security Program (Phase One of the Sustainable
             Vitória Action Plan)
Environmental and Social Impact Category           High Risk Rating
B
Country                                            Executing Agency
BRAZIL                                             BR-PMVITORIA - Prefeitura Municipal de
                                                   Vitoria)
Organizational Unit                                IDB Sector/Subsector
Env, Rural Dev & Disaster Risk                     URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING
Team Leader                                        ESG Primary Team Member
 MICHAEL G. DONOVAN                                 LIDIA MARCELINO REBOUCAS
Type of Operation                                  Original IDB Amount       % Disbursed
Loan Operation                                     $100,000,000              0.000 %
Assessment Date                                    Author
9 May 2018                                         LIDIAMA ESG Primary Team Member
Operation Cycle Stage                              Completion Date
ERM (Estimated)                                    17 Jan 2018
QRR (Estimated)                                    23 May 2018
Board Approval (Estimated)
Safeguard Performance Rating


Rationale




Potential Safeguard Policy Items

[No potential issues identified]



Safeguard Policy Items Identified
B.1 Bank Policies (Access to Information Policy±OP-102)




Safeguard Policy Filter Report                                                                  1
                                               Safeguard Policy Filter Report

The Bank will make the relevant project documents available to the public.


B.1 Bank Policies (Disaster Risk Management Policy±OP-704)
The operation is in a geographical area exposed to natural hazards (Type 1 Disaster Risk Scenario). Climate
change may increase the frequency and/or intensity of some hazards.

B.1 Bank Policies (Disaster Risk Management Policy±OP-704)
The sector of the operation is vulnerable to natural hazards. Climate change may increase the frequency
and/or intensity of some hazards.

B.1 Bank Policies (Disaster Risk Management Policy±OP-704)
The operation includes activities related to climate change adaptation, but these are not the primary
objective of the operation.

B.1 Bank Policies (Gender Equality Policy±OP-761)
The operation will offer opportunities to promote gender equality or women's empowerment.


B.2 Country Laws and Regulations
The operation is expected to be in compliance with laws and regulations of the country regarding specific
women's rights, the environment, gender and indigenous peoples (including national obligations established
under ratified multilateral environmental agreements).

B.3 Screening and Classification
The operation (including associated facilities) is screened and classified according to its potential
environmental impacts.

B.4 Other Risk Factors
There are associated facilities (see policy definition) related to the operation.


B.4 Other Risk Factors
The operation includes activities to close current ³adaptation deficits´or to increase the ability of society and
ecological systems to adapt to a changing climate.

B.5 Environmental Assessment Requirements
An environmental assessment is required.


B.6 Consultations
Consultations with affected parties will be performed equitably and inclusively with the views of all
stakeholders taken into account, including in particular: (a) equal participation by women and men, (b) socio-
culturally appropriate participation of indigenous peoples and (c) mechanisms for equitable participation by
vulnerable groups.

B.7 Supervision and Compliance
The Bank is expected to monitor the executing agency/borrower's compliance with all safeguard
requirements stipulated in the loan agreement and project operating or credit regulations.




Safeguard Policy Filter Report                                                                                       2
                                               Safeguard Policy Filter Report

B.9 Natural Habitats and Cultural Sites
The operation will result in the degradation or conversion of Natural Habitat or Critical Natural Habitat in the
project area of influence.

B.10. Hazardous Materials
The operation has the potential to impact the environment and occupational health and safety due to the
production, procurement, use, and/or disposal of hazardous material, including organic and inorganic toxic
substances, pesticides and persistent organic pollutants (POPs).

B.11. Pollution Prevention and Abatement
The operation has the potential to pollute the environment (e.g. air, soil, water, greenhouse gases).


B.17. Procurement
Suitable safeguard provisions for the procurement of goods and services in Bank financed operations may
be incorporated into project-specific loan agreements, operating regulations and bidding documents, as
appropriate, to ensure environmentally responsible procurement.



Recommended Actions
Operation has triggered 1 or more Policy Directives; please refer to appropriate Directive(s).
Complete Project Classification Tool. Submit Safeguard Policy Filter Report, PP (or equivalent)
and Safeguard Screening Form to ESR. The project triggered the Disaster Risk Management
policy (OP-704) and this should be reflected in the Project Environmental and Social Strategy. A
Disaster Risk Assessment (DRA) may be required (see Directive A-2 of the DRM Policy OP-704).
Next, please complete a Disaster Risk Classification along with Impact Classification. Also: if the
project needs to be modified to increase resilience to climate change, consider the (i) possibility of
classification as adaptation project and (ii) additional financing options. Please consult with
INE/CCS adaptation group for guidance. The project triggered the Other Risks policy (B.04):
climate risk.
   ‡ Please include sections on how climate risk will be dealt with in the ESS as well as client
        documents (EIA, EA, etc);
   ‡ Recommend addressing risks from gradual changes in climate for the project in cost/benefit
        and credit risk analyses as well as TORs for engineering studies.

Additional Comments
[No additional comments]




Safeguard Policy Filter Report                                                                                     3
                                 Safeguard Policy Filter Report




Safeguard Policy Filter Report                                    4
