                                                                                        PUBLIC
                                                                      SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                 DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                          PARAGUAY




HOUSING AND REHABILITATION PROGRAM FOR BAÑADO SUR IN ASUNCIÓN
                   (TACUMBÚ NEIGHBORHOOD)



                                           (PR-L1152)




                                        LOAN PROPOSAL




 This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Roberto Camblor
 (CSD/HUD), Project Team Leader; Gloria Visconti (CSD/CCS), Alternate Project Team
 Leader; Verónica Adler (CSD/HUD); Milagros Aimé (VPS/ESG); María Elena Castro
 (VPS/ESG); Sandra López Tovar (CSD/CCS); Viviana Maya (LEG/SGO); Alonso Chaverri-
 Suárez (LEG/SGO); José Manjarres (INE/WSA); Ruth Aquino (CSC/CPR); Beatriz
 González (CSD/HUD), Paloma Acevedo (SPD/SDV); Jorge Luis González (VPC/FMP);
 Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); and Catarina Mastellaro (CSD/HUD).




 This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank's Board of Executive
 Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board
 approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus
 superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                    CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY


I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 8
       C.    Key impact and results indicators ............................................................... 10

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11

       A.    Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11
       B.    Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 12
       C.    Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 14
       D.    Other project risks ...................................................................................... 14

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 15

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 15
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 16
                                                   - ii -



                                                ANNEXES
Annex I        Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM)
Annex II       Results Matrix
Annex III      Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                  LINKS
REQUIRED
1.   Multiyear execution plan and annual work plan
2.   Monitoring and evaluation plan
3.   Environmental and social management report (ESMR)
4.   Procurement plan
OPTIONAL
1.  Economic analysis
2.  Involuntary resettlement plan
3.  Draft Operating Regulations
4.  Analysis of compliance with the Bank’s Public Utilities Policy
5.  Disaster risks and climate-change adaptation in the communities and infrastructure of riverside
    Asunción
6. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF)
7. Risk management in the urban context - the case of Asunción 2018
8. Social investment in housing. Informative leaflet No. 20
9. Diagnostic assessment of the housing sector in Paraguay
10. Map 1 of the Tacumbú neighborhood
11. ASUviva initiative
12. Tacumbú neighborhood strategy
13. Bibliography
                                 - iii -



                           ABBREVIATIONS


ANDE    National Electricity Administration
APUF    Asociación de Barrios Unidos por la Franja [Association of
        Neighborhoods United for the Riverfront]
BOD5    5-day biochemical oxygen demand
DIPE    Office of Strategic Projects
ESSAP   Empresa de Servicios Sanitarios del Paraguay, S.A. [Sanitation
        Services Company]
LIBOR   London interbank offered rate
masl    meters above sea level
MCA     Municipality of the City of Asunción
MUVH    Ministry of Urban Planning, Housing, and Habitat
MOPC    Ministry of Public Works and Communications
PCU     Program coordination unit
PDFC    Riverfront development program
PDUA    Urban and environmental development plan of the municipality of
        Asunción
SIAF    Sistema Integrado de Administración Financiera [Integrated Financial
        Management System]
WAL     Weighted average life
                                             PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                 PARAGUAY
                      HOUSING AND REHABILITATION PROGRAM FOR BAÑADO SUR IN ASUNCIÓN
                                         (TACUMBÚ NEIGHBORHOOD)
                                                (PR-L1152)
                                               Financial Terms and Conditions
                                                                                    Flexible Financing Facility(a)
Borrower: Republic of Paraguay                                        Amortization period:         23.5 years
                                                                      Disbursement period:         6 years
Executing agency: The borrower, acting through the Ministry of        Grace period:                6.6 years(b)
Public Works and Communications (MOPC)
                                                                      Interest rate:                 LIBOR-based
         Source              Amount (US$)              %
                                                                                                     (c)
                                                                      Credit fee:
IDB (Ordinary Capital):            100,000,000              100       Inspection and                 (c)
                                                                      supervision fee:
                                                                      Original WAL:                 15.25 years(d)
Total:                             100,000,000              100                                      U.S. dollars from the
                                                                      Approval currency:
                                                                                                     Ordinary Capital
                                                        Project at a Glance
Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to improve the quality of life of the riverside population
of the southern area of the city of Asunción (Bañado Sur) through: (i) the construction of quality urban infrastructure and
affordable housing for the relocation of the Tacumbú neighborhood in line with sustainable urban planning standards; (ii) the
environmental recovery of lagoons, streams, and wetlands and the protection of natural buffer zones; and (iii) the creation of
conditions of economic and institutional sustainability and the improvement of the families’ adaptive capacities.
Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: The borrower will provide evidence to the
Bank’s satisfaction of the following: (i) approval of the program Operating Regulations by the competent authority of the
executing agency, under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including, among other documents, the program’s
environmental and social documents; (ii) approval by the Municipality of the City of Asunción (MCA) of the master urban plan,
including, among other items, the program area, under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; (iii) assignment of the
program to the Office of Strategic Projects (DIPE) at the Ministry of Public Works and Communications (MOPC) through a
ministerial resolution; (iv) creation of the program execution unit and commencement of the process of appointing the members
thereof, in accordance with the profiles agreed upon with the Bank; and (v) entry into force of a coordination and partnership
agreement or agreements for program execution and the subsequent maintenance of the works, between the MCA and the
institution or institutions responsible for the works associated with construction of the housing, based on the master urban plan,
and in the case of the MCA, for the subsequent maintenance and transfer of the program works, residential utilities, and the
mechanisms for legalizing land ownership (paragraph 3.5). See other special contractual conditions precedent to the first
disbursement in Annex B to the environmental and social management report.
Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to the call for the first tender for Component 1 works, evidence will be
presented of the entry into force of partnership agreements between the executing agency and ANDE and ESSAP for the
delivery of services under the terms set forth in the master urban plan, and the Ministry of Urban Planning, Housing, and
Habitat (MUVH) under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.6). Furthermore, the borrower will fulfill the
special contractual conditions of execution set forth in Annex B to the environmental and social management report.
Exceptions to Bank policies: None
                                                        Strategic Alignment
Challenges:(e)                                     SI                         PI                           EI

Crosscutting themes:(f)                           GD                          CC                           IC
        Project Summary                                                                                                   Page 2 of 2


(a)
      Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes in the
      amortization schedule as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management
      considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)
      Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that
      they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan
      contract.
(c)
      The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its
      review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies.
(d)
      The original weighted average life may be shorter depending on the signature date of the loan contract.
(e)
      SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).).
(f)
      GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of
      Law).
                           I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Asunción’s informal human settlements. The city of Asunción has the most
          important and populated urban agglomeration in Paraguay. The Asunción
          metropolitan area has a total of 2.7 million inhabitants (40% of Paraguay’s total
          population),1 of whom approximately 422,000 (optional link 13) [1]2 are living in
          poverty. Because of its geographical location on the bank of the Paraguay River,
          the city is increasingly exposed to the effects of climate change. The amount of
          rainfall has increased, with serious consequences for the city and its inhabitants. A
          diagnostic assessment of the metropolitan area shows that Asunción’s high level of
          vulnerability is multicausal but mainly results from the following factors: (i) poorly
          controlled urban sprawl, with informal housing going up on riverbeds, riverbanks,
          wetlands, and flood zones; (ii) inadequate water, storm drainage, and sanitation
          infrastructure; and (iii) the expansion of impervious cover [2].
1.2       Most of the informal human settlements in the Asunción metropolitan area are
          located in the so-called Bañado Norte and Bañado Sur3 areas of the city that lie
          adjacent to the river. These settlements are the country’s largest and most
          complex in terms of urban, social, and environmental aspects. According to the
          most recent census (2012), around 80,000 of Asunción’s 515,587 residents live in
          the riverside Bañados zones. These communities are highly vulnerable, living in
          situations like the one described above, with the aggravating factor that because
          they are built on flood-prone land, the impacts of climate change are far worse in
          terms of affected population and material losses. The most recent floods in
          January 2018, caused by the rising Paraguay River, affected around 23,000
          people living in the Bañados zones.4 These figures are worsening annually, every
          time the Paraguay River floods.
1.3       The Bañado Sur has an area of 1,000 hectares with a total of 7,300 families and
          42,000 inhabitants divided between three neighborhoods: (i) San Cayetano;
          (ii) Tacumbú; and (iii) Santa Ana. Most of the homes were gradually self-built by
          their owners at altitudes below 62 masl (meters above sea level). As the number of
          families has grown and they have settled in low areas through landfilling, the
          impact of the floods has worsened [3]. The number of dwellings in Bañado Sur has
          grown at an average rate of 10% per year, while the population has grown at an
          average annual rate of 15%. All told, 26% of the population has been living in the
          same zone for 25 to 34 years, and 24% has lived there for 15 to 24 years. The
          oldest, with 65 years or more, make up 1% of the resident population [4].


1    According to data from the 2012 census, Paraguay has a population of 6.7 million inhabitants and
     1.4 million households. Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses.
2    Optional link 13 contains the bibliographic references identified by the number in brackets [#].
3    The “bañados” are the areas surrounding the city that lie adjacent to the Paraguay River. As a rule, they
     flood periodically and are home to the poorest sectors of society, forming a true “poverty belt.”
4    The Paraguay River has an altitude of 51 masl, while the Yrupé lagoon is at 62 masl. The informal
     settlements, streets, and houses are currently also at this level. The Paraguay River floods cyclically,
     and accordingly, in the Bañado Sur there is a local “culture of floods and the flooded.” Every flood
     washes away homes, facilities, streets, power lines, and water and drainage systems, and causes the
     loss of jobs, worksites, and sources of production.
                                                    -2-




1.4       Most of the families have built their homes without having regularized their
          properties, since all land below the altitude of 62 masl is considered flood-prone
          and therefore not fit for occupancy. Consequently, the inhabitants are considered
          to be illegally occupying the properties on which their homes are built, which are
          actually owned by the municipality or come under the jurisdiction of the national
          Navy.5 In general, the areas around the lagoon have access to basic water and
          electricity services, albeit through informal connections.6 There are no records of
          use or activation/connection with the responsible authorities—the National
          Electricity Administration (ANDE) and the Sanitation Services Company (ESSAP).
1.5       In addition to the foregoing, the lack of a sewage system for sanitation and the
          inadequate disposal of waste and excreta7 further lower the families’ quality of life.
          This situation is compounded by: (i) the lack of waste collection and disposal;
          (ii) the conditions of the sewage and storm drainage systems of Asunción’s high
          area (above the altitude of 64 masl); and (iii) the lack of quality public spaces8 and
          of recreational and social facilities.
1.6       Tacumbú. Tacumbú is one of the neighborhoods located in Asunción’s Bañado
          Sur, on the bank of the Paraguay River, with a surface area of 60 hectares. It is a
          fragile zone exposed to the flooding of the Paraguay River, in which the homes
          have been built on land filled by the residents themselves. The neighborhood has
          grown rapidly. Today, it has 2,517 dwellings (2017 census) and some 10,000
          inhabitants, all residing below 64 masl.
1.7       According to the census data on utilities, most residents (91%) state that they have
          electricity, but studies show that up to 60% of their connections could be illegal. 9
          For sanitation, 73% use cesspits or septic tanks that are in no way guaranteed to
          be well-built or to not pollute the aquifers,10 while 13% empty waste directly into a
          water source (stream, lagoon, or river). In all, 91% of the population has piped
          water services. For solid waste, most burn their trash, and only 21% use a
          municipal garbage collection service. Among registered households, 81% have
          mobile telephone services [5].
1.8       The majority of this population migrated from rural areas in the country’s interior in
          search of better job opportunities and a better quality of life. However, gaps in their
          education and training mean that their sources of employment are limited or that
          they can only access informal jobs.11 While 92.7% of residents indicated that they

5    The areas where the program will be executed are all municipal properties.
6    In this zone 80% of connections are informal, Aspectos Sociodemográficos del Bañado Tacumbú,
     Consultora Global, 2017.
7    All told, 100% of the population lacks access to the sewerage network and only 21% has trash collection
     services, which pass down the neighborhood’s main street. Bañado Sur census, 2017.
8    In Bañado Sur, the amount of public space in square meters is below the World Health Organization’s
     recommendations of 15 m2 of green spaces per inhabitant as optimal and 10 m 2 per inhabitant at a
     minimum.
9    Aspectos Sociodemográficos del Bañado Tacumbú, Consultora Global, 2017.
10   The aquifers hold groundwater at different levels in the subsoil.
11
     The illiteracy rate in Tacumbú is 10.6%, which is the highest rate in the Bañado Sur and more than
     double the rate in the municipality of Asunción. Furthermore, 85% of the neighborhood population only
     has some grade-school education. And 40.1% of the labor force in Tacumbú are independent or self-
     employed workers, compared with 29.8% in the rest of the bañado. Bañado Sur census, 2017.
                                                       -3-




          perform some kind of economic activity, 7.3% stated that they do not. The
          residents engaged in economic activities indicated various occupations: builders,
          housekeepers, independent professionals, drivers, merchants, teachers, domestic
          workers and cleaners, civil servants, and mechanics. Other residents fish in the
          Paraguay River or collect recyclable waste [6].
1.9       Some groups living in the neighborhood are even more vulnerable, due to their
          housing conditions and the lack of formal services.12 Notable among them are low-
          income women, principally single mothers and female heads of household. For
          example, according to the neighborhood survey prepared by the Association of
          Neighborhoods United for the Riverfront (APUF) in 2017, 70% of neighborhood
          households are headed by women, compared with the rest of the bañado where
          the figure is 55%. Moreover, 63% of these women are employed in the service
          industry (as domestic workers, housekeepers, cooks, or in cleaning or childcare),
          meaning that their jobs are more informal and lower paid.13 The lack of access to
          basic services, community facilities, and property titles disproportionately impacts
          the women living in precarious areas. Furthermore, gender discrimination
          manifests in violence against women. In Paraguay, domestic gender-based
          violence is one of the most prevalent forms of violence.14
1.10      Urban planning and the riverfront. The Government of Paraguay, acting through
          the Ministry of Public Works and Communications (MOPC) and in partnership with
          the Municipality of the City of Asunción (MCA), is spearheading a a multistage
          riverfront development program (PDFC)15 that encompasses the city’s Bañado
          Norte and Bañado Sur. The objective of the PDFC is to comprehensively develop
          Asunción’s Bañados areas, since they are repeatedly affected by the cyclical
          flooding of the Paraguay River. The Riverfront Master Plan governing the PDFC
          follows the guidelines of the MCA’s urban and environmental development plan
          (PDUA) which is the plan in effect that has been approved by order of the
          municipal council.16 To support the efforts being made by the Paraguayan
12   A comparison of indicators of unmet basic needs in the project area and in Asunción reveals that in the
     former, housing quality is worse by a factor of three, health infrastructure by a factor of four, and lack of
     access to education by a factor of slightly more than two, while the indicator of insufficient income is
     nearly 50% higher. In short, quality of life in the project area is worse across all indicators. DGEEC,
     National Housing and Population Census, 2012.
13   Nationally, more men than women work in the construction and agricultural sectors (which employ 11.1%
     and 28.4% of the male population, respectively), while women hold more weight in the commercial
     sector (which employs 29.5% of women) and community services (39.6%). The average income for
     female heads of household (G 1,902) is lower than for male heads of household (G 2,609). Likewise, the
     quality of housing and the health infrastructure is lower in female-headed households.
     Source: UN Women (2015). Igualdad de género y principales brechas en Paraguay.
14   The first survey on domestic gender-based violence found that 18.5% of persons suffer domestic
     violence and that women are the most affected; 74.6% of victims of physical violence are women.
     Therefore, the crosscutting inclusion of gender in urban programs is fundamental to ensuring the
     minimum conditions for the economic and social development of women and their families.
15   In addition to this program, the riverfront development program includes the following works:
     (i) construction of Costanera Sur Avenue, for which the MOPC is conducting the private-financing
     bidding process based on Law 5074; and (ii) the hydraulic filling of 65 hectares for the construction of
     some 1,500 dwellings in the Capitán Bozzano area (which neighbors Tacumbú) and in zone 1 of Bañado
     Tacumbú with funds from the national government.
16   Among other issues, the master plan establishes how the land will be occupied, improved, and used,
     regulating residential and commercial zones and green and protected areas.
                                                      -4-




          government, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) has recently
          collaborated on Asunción’s urban planning process through the Emerging and
          Sustainable Cities Initiative (ESCI), whose action plan prioritizes the floodplain
          master plan and the Bañado Tacumbú project. Through operation ATN/OC-14255-
          PR, the Bank also financed the ASUviva initiative, which involved updating the
          PDUA and several of its instruments, including the riverfront master plan (optional
          link 11).
1.11      In this context, this program fits within a new stage of the PDFC, in which the
          families living in Bañado Tacumbú are the target population. The aim is to help
          them improve their living conditions and avoid the recurring impacts of the floods.
          The Bank intervention will focus on the construction of a new affordable housing
          project—located above the flood line—for some 1,500 families, to include
          infrastructure for services, public spaces, and facilities, as well as the cleanup and
          recovery of wetlands, streams, and lagoons near Tacumbú. The program’s direct
          beneficiaries will be the 1,500 families to be resettled in new dwellings in the new
          Tacumbú neighborhood. Future stages of the PDFC include expanding the number
          of beneficiaries to all households in Tacumbú.
1.12      The Tacumbú neighborhood is represented by several social organizations that
          have been working alongside the MCA, with support from the Paraguayan
          government, to find a definitive solution to the flooding problems that force, with
          growing frequency, the Tacumbú population to abandon their homes in advance of
          the rising river. The government, the MCA, the Tacumbú social organizations, and
          the direct impact of flooding from the Paraguay River on the neighborhood were all
          key factors in the selection of the project’s area of influence.
1.13      The proposal to transform the Tacumbú neighborhood includes actions to improve
          residents’ quality of life as well as to reduce the risks caused by the frequent
          flooding of the Paraguay River and Yrupé lagoon. In particular, the new Tacumbú
          neighborhood will be integrated into the city and will have a full array of climate-
          resilient public spaces, social facilities, public services, and affordable housing in
          line with sustainable urban planning.17 A subsequent stage will incorporate private
          investments to improve access to public services for all Bañado Sur residents and,
          in general, make the area an attractive destination for the people of Asunción.
1.14      The MOPC has been working with the Tacumbú families for around three years
          now to choose the households that will be resettled, and it has completed a
          population census and established preliminary agreements (optional link 2) on the
          need for relocation, the size of the properties, and the type of housing that each
          family will receive under the program. Specifically, the Municipality is already
          working with the Tacumbú community on transitioning away from the informal
          occupation of the land in a way that adheres to the national and municipal legal
          frameworks and is acceptable to the families. Although the program will not finance
          the purchase of land, it will provide assistance to help the Municipality develop a
          financing plan to buy property from residents who have individual lots. By law,
          property ownership may only be transferred against payment, even if the amount is
          symbolic. The housing will be fully subsidized in all cases (housing on individual or
          multifamily lots). To ensure sustainability of the investments, the families will be

17   Disaster risks and climate change adaptation (optional link 5).
                                                    -5-




          supported with educational and income-generating activities to ensure that the
          community takes care of and preserves the works.
1.15      Program strategy. The program is part of the Municipality of the City of
          Asunción’s PDFC and the PDUA, which include a set of initiatives that are
          spearheaded by the MOPC, including the ones mentioned in paragraph 1.10, and
          which receive complementary financial support from Itaipú Binacional.18
1.16      Specifically, in line with the PDFC and the PDUA, the program complements the
          construction of road works in the zone, including the construction of Costanera Sur
          Avenue19 and a 65-hectare area of hydraulic fill in Bañado Tacumbú. Likewise, with
          funds from Itaipú Binacional, the government is in the process of building some
          1,000 dwellings in the Capitán Bozzano area (adjacent to Tacumbú) and in zone 1
          of Bañado Tacumbú. The government program will serve the community via two
          different sources of financing (Itaipú and the IDB). The housing solutions are
          similar and in line with the general guidelines of the Master Plan. The beneficiary
          population for the entire program comprises 2,517 families, of which 1,500 will also
          benefit from the Bank program. The remaining 1,000 families will be the
          beneficiaries of government resources.
1.17      The decision to prioritize Tacumbú was made together with the Paraguayan
          government within the framework of the PDFC and the PDUA. The prioritization
          criteria were established based on: (i) vulnerability to risks, inasmuch as Tacumbú
          is the community that lies closest to the river and, therefore, is the lowest lying area
          (footnote or annex: at the 56 masl mark, compared with other neighborhoods in the
          Bañado, which are at the 59 masl mark) and the first to flood; (ii) socioeconomic
          criteria, inasmuch as Tacumbú is home to the most vulnerable population (see
          paragraph 1.9 and footnotes 11-13), a condition that is exacerbated by economic
          losses during floods. However, due to the permanent state of emergency there, it
          also happens to be one of the best organized neighborhoods in terms of social and
          community aspects.20 As previously mentioned, this operation focuses on providing
          a solution consisting of a single master plan and housing types to alleviate the
          situation of the 2,517 families living in Tacumbú. However, the Bank intervention
          will focus on the construction of a 1,500-unit affordable housing project, with
          infrastructure for services, public spaces, and facilities, as well as the cleanup and
          recovery of wetlands, streams, and lagoons near Tacumbú. The 1,500 beneficiary
          families of the Bank intervention were selected on the basis of geographic criteria,
          taking into account that the government will handle zone 1 of Tacumbú (the
          northern part) and the IDB will provide support for the remaining families in the
          southern part. The program involves a resettlement process, which will be carried
          out in stages and will: (i) relocate the families living in the risk zone that cannot be

18   The entity Itaipú Binacional was created by Paraguay and Brazil through an international treaty dated
     26 April 1973. It is in charge of developing the hydropower potential of the Paraná River, where the
     Itaipú hydropower plant is located. At the request of the country’s executive, Itaipú Binacional is
     financing a number of social projects with its own funds for Paraguay.
19   The Costanera Sur project will be 7.9 km long, with a 4-lane avenue and 15-meter-wide central
     promenade. The project also includes construction of a 1,000-meter linear park and 1,000-meter beach
     for the population. The avenue will border the Paraguay River from Colón to Lambaré Hill, crossing the
     Bañado Sur area, and in particular, the Tacumbú neighborhood.
20   There are 30 community organizations under the umbrella of APUF.
                                                  -6-




          mitigated; (ii) better integrate the neighborhood with the rest of the city;
          (iii) establish spaces that promote community engagement, such as public spaces
          and community facilities; and (iv) help create better economic opportunities for the
          population. To this end, a master plan has been designed that will focus on:
          environmental impact, climate change, integrated public spaces, and the balance
          between urban density and territorial integrity (optional link 12).21
1.18      Construction of the new Tacumbú neighborhood presupposes that the MOPC and
          Itaipú Binacional will complete the hydraulic filling of the project’s 65 hectares,
          make the necessary agreements with the community, and perform the necessary
          social work for the relocation of the population currently living in flood-prone zones.
1.19      Lastly, upon completion of the program, the cleared areas will be available to
          MOPC for other urban interventions, such as the extension of the riverfront
          avenue, new parks, and/or private enterprises (optional link 10). Program
          execution is therefore a priority in order to move ahead with construction of
          Costanera Sur Avenue, which can only proceed once execution of the program is
          completed.
1.20      Lessons learned. The program will benefit from the lessons learned from housing
          improvement programs financed by the Bank in the region. The design of the
          operation incorporates lessons learned from the execution of loans and technical-
          cooperation operations in the housing and urban development sector that the Bank
          has supported in Paraguay and other Latin American countries, as well as from
          experiences gleaned from the literature on this type of intervention. The program
          incorporates experience from the Improvement of Housing and Habitat loan
          program (3538/OC-PR) in Paraguay, especially the practice of involving the
          community in the project and the importance of complementing the physical works
          with support for productive activities.
1.21      The program also draws on lessons learned from other programs that involve
          resettling a large number of families, like the National Urban Development
          Program in Ecuador (2679/OC-EC). That program highlights the importance of
          performing an exhaustive census, ensuring social support is provided during
          implementation of the resettlement plan, and activating communication and
          participation mechanisms throughout the entire process.
1.22      Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional
          Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and the Corporate Results Framework
          2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6), specifically with the development challenge of
          social inclusion and equality via the eradication of extreme poverty, by offering
          inclusive infrastructure and greater access to quality public services and by helping
          to reduce the housing shortage. It is also aligned with the crosscutting themes of
          (i) sustainability and climate change, by improving the quality of life of the residents
          of Bañado Sur as well as the adaptive capacity of the community; and (ii) gender
          equality and diversity, by promoting home ownership by women and couples and
          by ensuring that the minimum conditions are in place to support the social and
          economic development of women and their families. Approximately 72.11% of
          program resources are invested in climate change mitigation and adaptation

21   Final adjustments are currently being made to this master plan and it should be approved by the MCA
     municipal council once the municipal executive sends the final version.
                                             -7-




       activities, according to the joint methodology of the multilateral development banks
       for tracking climate finance. These resources contribute to the IDB Group target of
       increasing financing for climate-related projects to 30% of approvals by the end of
       2020.
1.23   Likewise, the comprehensive nature of the intervention, as with most neighborhood
       improvement programs, is supported by the international evidence gathered in the
       Urban Development and Housing Sector Framework Document (document
       GN-2732-6), which reflects the basic principles for the development of sector
       policies and programs, such as: (i) multisector interventions with territorial integrity,
       designed as a function of the territory’s specific characteristics; (ii) sustainable and
       effective interventions, taking into account the short- and long-term impact on
       society, the environment, public finances, and urban governance; and
       (iii) interventions focused on the citizenry, improving quality of life and inclusion in
       the productive activities of urban households, particularly the most vulnerable
       ones. This sector framework document also maintains that comprehensive
       improvement programs like the one proposed herein have been evaluated
       positively in terms of access to and coverage of basic services and health and
       education services, satisfaction with living standards and security, and increased
       property values.
1.24   The program also contributes to the third and fourth dimensions of success of the
       Climate Change Sector Framework Document (document GN-2835-5), associated
       with: (i) effectively promoting climate-resilient low-carbon development; and (ii) the
       incorporation of climate considerations in sectors. It is aligned with the Gender and
       Diversity Sector Framework Document (document GN-2800-8), in that it aims to
       improve the wellbeing of women and children through an increase in access to
       culturally relevant quality public services. The operation is aligned with the Bank
       Country Strategy with Paraguay 2014-2018 (document GN-2769), and is included
       in the Update to Annex III of the 2018 Operational Program Report (document
       GN-2915-2). In addition, this operation contributes to one of the three priority pillars
       of the Government and Investment Plan 2015-2018 (Decree 1,560 of the
       Presidency of the Republic), namely, the poverty reduction and social development
       pillar, seeking to provide adequate, sustainable homes for families in the lowest
       income groups.
1.25   Evidence of the effectiveness of other programs. Despite the IDB’s long track
       record of support for neighborhood improvement programs, evidence from impact
       assessments is scarce and, where it exists, focused on “in situ” neighborhood
       improvement [7]. The evaluation of the Favela Bairro II program showed that the
       infrastructure and urban services improvement program had an impact on access
       to services, housing values, and income. It also had an impact on school
       attendance. However, there was little evidence of any impact on employment,
       participation in social and recreational activities, or other behavioral changes [8].
1.26   The literature also includes evaluations that focus on specific aspects of the
       infrastructure improvements that are applicable to the program, such as roads and
       housing improvements. The evaluation of the PROCIDADES program in Campo
       Grande, which combined an urban mobility component with a downtown
       revitalization component, found that the urban mobility component increased
       citizen wellbeing, reflected in a 6% increase in prices, while the revitalization
                                            -8-




       component did not appear to have a significant impact. An experimental study in
       Mexico City shows how paving local roads increased housing sales prices by 16%
       and also increased residents’ investments in their own homes [9]. Furthermore,
       there is evidence that street lighting, public spaces, and recreational activities
       increase residents’ satisfaction with their lives. Likewise, several evaluations of
       housing improvement programs show that the beneficiary communities ended up
       more satisfied with their housing and their lives [10]. This correlation is robust to
       studies based on the ability to pay for services and in studies that quantify the
       services’ monetary value equivalent [11].
1.27   Evidence from training programs to help vulnerable populations improve their
       employment conditions shows positive short-term results, especially for the
       younger population (Card, 2005) and for women (Acevedo, 2018, and Attanasio,
       2008) [12].
1.28   Compliance with the Public Utilities Policy (document GN-2716-6). The
       program and the country’s sector objectives are consistent with the policy
       principles set out in document GN-2716-6 and fulfill the economic evaluation and
       financial sustainability conditions. ANDE has collected sufficient revenue to cover
       service costs and make payments on its debt. In 2017, the government raised
       electricity rates for several categories of customer (except residential customers),
       in a measure intended to strengthen ANDE’s financial position. An analysis of the
       financial information indicates that ESSAP had sufficient operating income to cover
       all operating costs and maintenance, as reflected in an EBITDA margin of 18.9%,
       and obtain net positive earnings of 11.5% for the 2016 fiscal year. Recently, in
       August 2018, ESSAP adjusted the rates it charges for water and sewer services,
       raising them by 22% and 100%, respectively, in order to improve its operating cash
       flow, which will allow it to generate enough revenue to cover its operating and
       maintenance costs. It will also use this cash flow to finance a portion of its
       long-term investment plan, though it will need the national government’s support
       and external financing to execute it in its entirety. The works to be financed under
       the project are viable from a socioeconomic perspective. Both ESSAP and ANDE
       charge a subsidized rate for low-income households, and there is an adequate
       institutional framework in the sector (optional link 4).
B.     Objectives, components, and cost
1.29   The general objective is to improve the quality of life of the riverside population of
       the southern area of the city of Asunción (Bañado Sur) through: (i) the construction
       of quality urban infrastructure and affordable housing for the relocation of the
       Tacumbú neighborhood in line with sustainable urban planning standards; (ii) the
       environmental recovery of lagoons, streams, and wetlands and the protection of
       natural buffer zones; and (iii) the creation of conditions of economic and
       institutional sustainability and the improvement of the families’ adaptive capacities.
       This will be achieved through the following components:
1.30   Component I. Sustainable urban infrastructure (US$72,650,000). This
       component will finance the following: (i) the construction of approximately 1,500
       housing solutions for the population at risk of floods (30% of the dwellings will be
       multifamily units and the rest will be single family units based on length of time in
       the locale and family size); (ii) the provision of basic public services, such as
       drinking water, sanitation, street lighting, electricity, and road access; (iii) the
                                                      -9-




          establishment of quality urban public spaces and facilities, including community
          institutions like daycare centers and schools. To that end, and prior to bidding for
          works, criteria for sustainable, resilient construction will be developed for the
          infrastructure and the housing solutions (design, materials, construction, and use),
          to reduce the flood risk and ensure climate change adaptation. Accordingly, the
          component will finance the preliminary technical designs for the works to be built.22
          A financing strategy will also be developed to help vulnerable families pay for
          housing and basic services, with the emphasis on low-income female heads of
          household, older adults, and families that include persons with disabilities.
1.31      Component II. Green infrastructure and resilience (US$9,822,000). This
          component will finance: (i) the environmental sanitation and recovery of the
          existing streams, lagoons, and wetlands in the intervention area, through the
          cleanup and treatment of the bodies of water and the elimination of the sources of
          pollution of the lagoon and streams (solid waste and informal connections); (ii) the
          protection of natural buffer zones through the creation of biological corridors with
          natural species native to the area, which will help improve the hydrological,
          biological, and ecological functioning of the area of intervention and the interaction
          between lagoon, wetland, fill, and river, as well as reduce storm runoff and
          preserve the Asunción Bay ecological reserve;23 (iii) climate change adaptation
          measures like structural and nonstructural strategies for reducing storm runoff
          through green infrastructure, to lessen the pressure on the gray drainage
          infrastructure during extreme events, and for reducing the heat island effect in the
          Tacumbú neighborhood by creating public spaces and planting trees, thereby
          improving the levels of comfort in those public spaces, pedestrian zones, bicycle
          paths, and dwellings; and (iv) integrated waste management through the design of
          a sustainable waste collection system that includes recycling, which will in turn
          reduce the risk of floods resulting from clogged bodies of water.
1.32      Component III. Social and institutional sustainability (US$12,300,000). This
          component will finance initiatives to establish social sustainability and improve the
          families’ adaptive capacities, through local development actions such as job
          training and business development with a gender focus, adapted to the specific
          needs of low-income or unemployed individuals, to improve their socioeconomic
          situation, including a program to train and hire local workers for the infrastructure
          works. This component also calls for actions to improve governance and
          government and community management mechanisms to help institutions sustain
          the program-financed interventions. In addition, the component will implement the




22   The preliminary designs of the works to be built will be financed through the supporting technical-
     cooperation operation ATN/OC-16934-PR, to ensure that they are available before loan eligibility.
23
     Reserve zone due to the concentration of biodiversity and for conserving native and migratory bird
     species. Asunción is considered to be one of the cities with the most biodiversity in the urban area, with
     353 species of native birds that represent 49% of the country’s bird species (Reference: 2008 inventory
     performed by Guyrá Paraguay and Birdlife International).
                                                        - 10 -




          “Neighborhood without Violence” program, with activities for the prevention of
          domestic and gender-based violence.24
1.33      In addition, US$3,028,000 will be provided to finance program audits and
          evaluations and cover the executing agency’s expenses and contingencies. The
          executing agency’s expenses will include the costs of hiring: (i) the general
          coordinator for the program; (ii) technical specialists; (iii) financial administration
          specialists; (iv) procurement specialists; (v) a social sector specialist; (vi) a
          communications specialist; and (vii) an environmental specialist.
1.34      Program costs. The program will cost US$100 million, to be financed with
          Ordinary Capital resources. The table below presents the costs by component.

                                    Table 1. Summary of program costs (in US$)
                   Component                                                 IDB*                   %
                   Component I. Sustainable urban infrastructure           72,650,000              72.65
                   Component II. Green infrastructure and resilience        9,822,000               9.82
                   Component III. Social and institutional sustainability  12,300,000              12.30
                   Administration, supervision, and auditing                3,028,000               3.03
                   Contingencies                                            2,200,000               2.20
                   Total                                                  100,000,000             100.00
                   * These amounts include local taxes, in accordance with the Bank’s policies.

C.        Key impact and results indicators
1.35      The impact indicators identified for the program include: (i) the difference between
          the logarithm of the cost per dwelling in the new Tacumbú neighborhood (per m2)
          and the post-project sales price thereof (per m2); (ii) the reduction in the average
          economic value of losses per household due to climate disasters, specifically
          floods, in the Tacumbú neighborhood (%); (iii) the reduction in municipal expenses
          incurred due to flooding from the Paraguay River (%); and (iv) the percentage of
          households that indicate that their living situation has improved (%).
1.36      The outcome indicators include: (i) quality urban infrastructure and affordable
          housing financed in the Tacumbú neighborhood in line with sustainable urban
          planning standards; (ii) upgrading of Tacumbú’s green infrastructure, to include the
          environmental recovery of lagoons, streams, and wetlands, as well as the
          protection of natural buffer zones; and (iii) the creation of conditions of economic
          and institutional sustainability and improvement of the families’ adaptive capacities
          (details in Annex II: Results Matrix). Specifically, the program should improve the
          quality of life of the riverside population in the southern zone of the city of Asunción
          as a result of the resettlement of approximately 1,500 families in the new dwellings
          in Tacumbú and the planned investments in sanitation, drainage, containment, and

24   The “Neighborhood without Violence” program will finance: (i) participatory diagnostic assessments to
     identify the vulnerabilities of the resettled population by group (older adults, children, young people,
     women, single mothers, etc.); (ii) climate change and environmental and health education workshops
     (use of sanitation equipment, drain maintenance, trash collection and disposal, education on caring for
     the environment, home maintenance, adaptive capacity, etc.); (iii) development of a financing plan to
     help the vulnerable families pay for basic services, housing, and the maintenance thereof; (iv) household
     support and job training activities for productive development (the households to receive support will be
     determined depending on the specific needs identified during the social work with the community);
     (v) activities to prevent domestic, gender-based, and neighborhood violence.
                                                    - 11 -




          stream and lagoon recovery works, in line with resilient and sustainable design and
          construction parameters.
1.37      Economic analysis. An economic evaluation of the program was performed
          based on an analysis of Component I. This focus on Component I is justified by its
          importance within the program objective in terms of results and economic
          importance, inasmuch as 76% of program funds are allocated to Component I.
          Although the activities in the other components are important to the program
          objective, they are difficult, by their nature, to evaluate economically. Furthermore,
          the assumption is that their impact will be positive for the program. Within this
          framework, the cost-benefit analysis method was used to evaluate the economic
          return generated by the interventions. This analysis yielded a net present value of
          US$25,665,807 with an internal rate of return of 15%, indicating that the program
          will be economically viable.
1.38      A sensitivity analysis was also performed, and it showed that the variable to which
          the program is most sensitive is flood frequency. The program’s rate of return is
          virtually unaffected by any modification in the cost of the investment or in the dollar
          cost per square meter of the houses to be built. In contrast, an increase in the
          frequency of flooding pushes up the rate of return by underscoring the importance
          of the program for resolving the plight of the affected families. In other words, the
          more frequently that floods occur, the greater that the program’s rate of return will
          be, inasmuch as it seeks to resolve: (i) the plight of the affected families; and
          (ii) the costs associated with each flood.

                           II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       The Bank will provide US$100 million in financing for this operation,25 which will be
          delivered in the form of a specific investment loan as a charge against the Bank’s
          Ordinary Capital, under the Flexible Financing Facility. The table below shows the
          disbursement schedule.
2.2       Disbursement period and schedule. The disbursement period will be six years
          from the date of signature of the loan contract, and disbursements will be made
          according to the schedule below:
                                   Table 2. Disbursement schedule (US$ million)
            Year       Year 1       Year 2      Year 3     Year 4    Year 5           Year 6       Total
           IDB          4.56         8.97        28.59     35.47      20.85            1.56         100
           %           4.56%        8.97%       28.59%    35.47%     20.85%           1.56%        100%


25   This operation is part of the “Strengthening Urban Resilience in Riverside Asunción Program,” which is
     being designed in order for the Bañado Norte and Bañado Sur to both obtain access to concessional
     resources from the Green Climate Fund (GCF). The program was conceptualized under technical
     cooperation operation ATN/OC-15382-RG, “Regional Support for the Green Climate Fund (GCF),” for
     US$70,000. The studies necessary for the GCF financing proposal are being prepared under the
     technical cooperation operation ATN/AC-16705-PR, for US$450,000, and with US$548,205 in funds
     from the GCF Project Preparation Facility, which were notified as approved on 19 October 2018. The
     GCF resources will be used to scale up the project to Bañado Norte and to incorporate stronger
     sustainability and resilience elements not only in the design phase but also during construction of the
     housing units, public spaces, equipment, and services infrastructure. See chapter 5 in optional link 5.
                                                    - 12 -




B.        Environmental and social risks
2.3       The program has been classified as a category “A” operation, in accordance with
          the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy. The activated policies
          include: (i) Environment and Safeguards (operational policy OP-703); (ii) Disaster
          Risk Management (operational policy OP-704); (iii) Involuntary Resettlement
          (operational policy OP-710); (iv) Access to Information (operational policy OP-102);
          and (v) Gender Equality in Development (operational policy OP-761).
2.4       Overall, the program will have a positive impact on the families who are repeatedly
          affected by flooding from the Paraguay River, and it will contribute to the urban
          planning of the city of Asunción. However, given the magnitude of the operation, its
          proximity to the river, and the complexity of the facilities involved, some
          environmental and social impacts have been identified that must be prevented and
          mitigated. In that regard, and in compliance with the requirements of the
          Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703) and the Access to
          Information Policy (OP-102), the socioenvironmental documents suitable for
          disclosure were published for consultation prior to the analysis mission, and the
          final versions are available on the Bank’s website. In addition to the existing
          preliminary environmental and social impact assessment approved for the program
          area, complementary studies have been prepared for the associated dredging
          works, construction of housing, and integration of the new neighborhood into the
          regular municipal public utilities system. A study was also performed on the Yrupé
          lagoon and wetlands and found that these areas harbored a natural habitat,
          despite being in very poor condition and showing evidence of degradation caused
          by human activity. The study recommended adjusting the design of the master
          urban plan to make it compatible with the lagoon recovery and management plan.
2.5       The four environmental and social sustainability issues identified as high-level risks
          that could affect proper implementation of the program are explained below.
2.6       The first risk is that the resettlement plan will be improperly planned and executed,
          which could undermine existing support for the program. To mitigate this risk, the
          executing agency will: (i) provide a specialized team to work exclusively on
          resettlement and on coordination with the execution of the works; and (ii) maintain
          the same participatory approach that it has used throughout program preparation.
          To that end, Component III will finance an outreach and participation plan to be
          implemented over the course of program execution, as well as actions to support
          and strengthen the various community organizations. Furthermore, as an essential
          element for the success of the project, the executing agency will keep the channel
          of communication with the community open until the program is eligible.
2.7       From the social perspective, the relocation of the families to the new neighborhood
          will not only improve their current living conditions but also allow them to maintain
          their social cohesion and organization, which is one of the program’s strengths. In
          this operation, resettlement is a project objective,26 since the idea is to protect the
          families that are repeatedly affected because they live in a flood zone. To address




26   Operational policy OP-710 Chapter IV Special Considerations: 2. Relocation as a Project Objective.
                                                       - 13 -




          this situation, the government analyzed two technical alternatives,27 and carried out
          a consultation process (2017) prior to the official start of the Bank’s intervention.28
          In this process, most of the Tacumbú neighborhood families opted for the so-called
          riverfront proposal and initial agreements for the move to the new neighborhood
          were established (optional link 2). The preparation of the program draws on these
          agreements for the design of the master plan as a key element. This master plan
          presents a flexible model for matching beneficiaries, size of properties, types of
          dwellings, and social and services infrastructures that will be financed by the
          program. In the framework of this category “A” program, two significant public
          consultations were held, on 27 September 2018 and 4 October 2018, after
          interested and affected parties had been identified. During the consultations, the
          resettlement plan and socioenvironmental analyses were presented, the
          attendees’ questions and concerns were addressed, and their suggestions and
          recommendations were heard.
2.8       The prepared resettlement plan includes: (i) a population census (2,517 families)
          and an analysis of the families’ vulnerability; (ii) a tally of the productive activities in
          the area;29 (iii) an inventory of the services infrastructure; (iv) an evaluation of the
          community organizations; (v) identification of the impacts; and (vi) the mitigation
          options, with costs and responsibilities. The resettlement plan was developed
          using a participatory approach that included consultations with the grassroots
          organizations (100 community leaders) and directly with residents in every section
          of the Tacumbú neighborhood. This process made it possible to corroborate the
          census of beneficiaries and their approval of the program, as well as to identify
          their priorities, which will be incorporated into the master plan, and their concerns,
          which will be addressed in the mitigation proposals.
2.9       Since one of the high-level risks identified was the potential for resistance from the
          fishermen’s association, the program calls for the design and execution of a
          specific strategy within the master plan for a specific type of dwelling that will allow
          them to stay in their current locations but avoid flood damage. Good
          communication and community relationships should be able to mitigate this risk.
          Furthermore, measures have been incorporated into the environmental and social

27   Two alternatives were presented for relocating the affected individuals in the Tacumbú neighborhood:
     (i) the flood protection project, and (ii) the riverfront project. The flood protection project consists of the
     construction of an embankment to prevent the river from reaching the currently inhabited flood-prone
     zones. The riverfront project is the technical option of filling the entire flood zone, taking into account all
     aspects of the project (environmental sanitation, housing, avenues, streets, squares, parks, and basic
     services). Most of the residents expressed their preference for the second option, which was selected.
28   All told, the Centro de Ayuda Mutua de Salud para Todos [Health for All Mutual Assistance Center] led
     60 informational workshops with the active participation of MOPC and MCA technical staff.
     Subsequently, a popular consultation was held to determine which project the residents preferred.
     According to the consultation, 91% of residents preferred the riverfront project, 7% preferred the flood
     protection project, and 1% were undecided. After the elections, the community formed an organization to
     represent the entire Bañado population in favor of the riverfront option and to bring together
     organizations like neighborhood committees, the Centro de Ayuda Mutua de Salud para Todos, the
     association of longline fishermen, fishermen, cooperatives, and individuals who do not belong to any
     organizations. This led to the formation of APUF, with 122 representatives, 4 officers, and 4 alternates
     per zone, all elected in their sectors.
29   The master plan includes the construction of homes and businesses that will be based on the census in
     the resettlement plan.
                                           - 14 -




       management plan to ensure that the works associated with dredging operations do
       not negatively impact the fishing areas.
2.10   Another high-level risk that was identified is that implementation of the works could
       exacerbate the risk of floods in nearby areas. Accordingly, a disaster risk analysis
       is being prepared, taking into account climate change factors, which will provide
       inputs for the incorporation of structural and nonstructural measures for risk
       reduction in the detailed designs. The findings of the study will be included in the
       final design of the master plan, as well as in the bidding documents for the
       construction and operation phases of the works (optional link 5). The study will be
       available in the third quarter of 2019, prior to the first disbursement under the
       program.
2.11   Lastly, to ensure that the program interventions do not have the effect of triggering
       the emergence of new informal settlements on municipal land in Bañado Sur
       beyond the already affected area, the program proposes to boost municipal and
       social coordination by training and strengthening organizations. Agreements are
       being established with the local population to institute a social control mechanism
       to prevent new occupations of land within the project area. The MCA planning also
       includes urban regulation actions with the same purpose. In addition, the program
       includes recovery of the Yrupé lagoon and a management plan with protected
       areas to check the advance of urban sprawl into the ecosystem.
C.     Fiduciary risks
2.12   The executing agency will be the Ministry of Public Works and Communications
       (MOPC), acting through the Office of Strategic Projects (DIPE). A program
       coordination unit (PCU) will be created for execution and will be responsible for
       coordinating the fiduciary execution and supervising the procurement processes. It
       will also guarantee: (i) financial management; (ii) the presentation of reports;
       (iii) program auditing; and (iv) compliance with Bank policies. The growing portfolio
       of projects under MOPC administration entails a medium-level fiduciary risk. To
       mitigate this risk, the Bank will provide training on procurement and financial
       issues.
D.     Other project risks
2.13   The project team, together with its counterpart in the country, also identified a
       medium-level public management and governance risk, since a low level of
       commitment from and/or participation of certain relevant participating institutions
       could affect the program’s potential for success. Effective communication,
       coordination, and monitoring by the MOPC and the other participating institutions,
       as well as with the community at large, will be necessary for the development and
       implementation of the program. The planned mitigation action involves establishing
       institutional agreements through the formalization of new contracts with Tacumbú
       neighborhood community organizations, to guarantee the participation of actors
       important to the project. It also involves actions to strengthen the executing
       agency’s capacity to coordinate the various entities involved in the program.
                                          - 15 -




                   III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1   Borrower and executing agency. The borrower is the Republic of Paraguay,
      which, acting through the Ministry of Public Works and Communications (MOPC),
      will also be the executing agency. Within the MOPC, program execution will be
      handled by the Office of Strategic Projects (DIPE). For program execution, the
      DIPE will incorporate environmental and social specialists with the ability to
      oversee compliance with the program’s environmental and social management
      plan, and in particular, a team in charge of resettlement that will coordinate
      execution with the planned works.
3.2   The executing agency will be in charge of the overall coordination, monitoring, and
      evaluation of the program components as well as monitoring of the planning
      instruments: the multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, and procurement
      plan. Specifically, the executing agency will be responsible for fiduciary execution,
      supervising the procurement processes and guaranteeing: (i) financial
      management; (ii) the presentation of reports; (iii) program auditing; and
      (iv) compliance with Bank policies.
3.3   To ensure that program activities are coordinated under the terms to be specified
      in the program Operating Regulations, an interinstitutional body (the
      Interinstitutional Committee for the Tacumbú Neighborhood Project) will be
      established to coordinate the institutions whose participation is fundamental for
      successful program implementation, including: the MCA, ANDE, ESSAP, MOPC,
      and the Ministry of Urban Planning, Housing, and Habitat (MUVH). The committee
      will facilitate coordination of program activities to ensure deadlines are met and to
      minimize the risk of delays. Itaipú Binacional will be invited to participate in this
      committee. The MOPC may also form other coordinating bodies that will include
      public and private sector organizations that provide services and support to the
      Bañado Sur community.
3.4   The environmental impact study and the resettlement plan will be part of the
      program Operating Regulations. The responsibilities and functions assigned to the
      MCA and/or to other entities in the Operating Regulations will also be included in
      the agreements referred to in item (iii) of the following paragraph and item (ii) of
      paragraph 3.6.
3.5   The specific conditions for the execution of each component will be described in
      detail in the draft program Operating Regulations. As special contractual
      conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan, the borrower will
      provide evidence to the Bank’s satisfaction of the following: (i) approval of
      the program Operating Regulations by the competent authority of the
      executing agency, under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank,
      including, among other documents, the program’s environmental and social
      documents; (ii) approval by the Municipality of the City of Asunción (MCA) of
      the master urban plan, including, among other items, the program area,
      under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; (iii) assignment of
      the program to the Office of Strategic Projects (DIPE) at the Ministry of
      Public Works and Communications (MOPC) through a ministerial resolution;
      (iv) creation of the program execution unit and commencement of the
                                            - 16 -




       process of appointing the members thereof, in accordance with the profiles
       agreed upon with the Bank; and (v) entry into force of a coordination and
       partnership agreement or agreements for program execution and the
       subsequent maintenance of the works, between the executing agency, the
       MCA, and the institution or institutions responsible for the works associated with
       construction of the housing, based on the master urban plan, and in the case of
       the MCA, for the subsequent maintenance and transfer of the program
       works, residential utilities, and the mechanisms for legalizing land
       ownership, and in the case of the Itaipú Binational Entity, for the
       construction of the housing units as provided in the master urban plan. The
       first two conditions are justified by the need for the detailed regulatory framework
       for program execution that is provided in the Operating Regulations and by the
       need to ensure the legality of the DIPE’s role through the corresponding delegation
       of functions established in the aforementioned resolution.
3.6    Special contractual conditions of execution. Prior to the call for the first tender
       for Component 1 works, evidence will be presented of the entry into force of
       partnership agreements between the executing agency and ANDE and ESSAP for
       the delivery of services under the terms set forth in the master urban plan, and the
       National Department of Housing and Habitat (SENAVITAT) under the terms
       previously agreed upon with the Bank. The first condition is necessary in order to
       ensure the legality and stability of the program’s urban planning.
3.7    Procurement of works, goods, and services. Goods, works, related services,
       and consulting services will be procured in accordance with the Policies for the
       Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development
       Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of
       Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document
       GN-2350-9). The goods, works, and services to be procured are defined in the
       procurement plan and will be procured in accordance with Annex III: Fiduciary
       Agreements and Requirements.
3.8    Auditing. During the disbursement period, the borrower will submit the program
       financial statements, audited by an independent external auditing firm acceptable
       to the Bank, within 120 days after the close of each borrower fiscal year. The final
       audited financial statements will be presented within 120 days after the date of the
       last disbursement.
B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.9    Monitoring and supervision system. To ensure adequate supervision of this
       operation, the following and other activities will be carried out: (i) monitoring of the
       program through the results matrix, multiyear execution plan, annual work plan,
       and procurement plan; (ii) preparation of semiannual and annual progress reports;
       and (iii) audits of the program’s financial management and technical verification.
3.10   The monitoring and evaluation plan will track program execution according to the
       targets and progress indicators defined in the results matrix. For program
       evaluation, the executing agency will commission and monitor the following
       activities: (i) the initial baseline evaluation, the objective of which will be to
       establish the baseline values corresponding to the impact and results indicators.
       The evaluation will be performed by consultants or consulting firms that have staff
                                          - 17 -




       members in all of the evaluation areas with solid, proven experience in evaluating
       housing and/or social development programs financed with funds from multilateral
       organizations. The terms of reference for the evaluations will be agreed upon with
       the Bank; and (ii) the final evaluation, which will be based on a closing survey
       showing the status of project execution, will evaluate the impacts, outcomes, and
       outputs of the three loan components, as established in the results matrix. The
       final evaluation will include: evaluation of processes, results, and impacts and an
       ex post cost-benefit evaluation of the program.
3.11   The evaluation will be performed on a timeline and in accordance with terms of
       reference agreed upon with the Bank. The budget for evaluation was agreed upon
       with the executing agencies and is included in the monitoring and evaluation plan
       (required link 2).
                                                                                                                                                                                    Annex I- PR-L1152
                                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 1




                                                                           Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                   Summary
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
1. IDB Development Objectives                                                                                                          Yes
                                                                                               -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                               -Gender Equality and Diversity
   Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes
                                                                                               -Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability


                                                                                               -Property value within project area of influence (% change)*
                                                                                               -Households benefitting from housing solutions (#)*
                                                                                               -Households with new or upgraded access to drinking water (#)*
                                                                                               -Households with new or upgraded access to sanitation (#)*
   Country Development Results Indicators                                                      -Households with wastewater treatment (#)*
                                                                                               -Households with solid waste disposed in a sanitary landfill (#)*
                                                                                               -Households protected from flood risk (#)*
                                                                                               -Households with new or improved access to electricity supply (#)*


2. Country Development Objectives                                                                                                      Yes

   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                     GN-2769          Equity and Social Inclusion


                                                                                                                        The intervention is included in the 2018 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                     GN-2915-2
                                                                                                                        Program.

   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to
   country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                           Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                 8.5
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                              2.4
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                            3.6
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                         2.5
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                            8.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                     3.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                   3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                         0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                           2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                0.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                            7.2
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                          1.8
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                5.4
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                     Low
                              Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                            Yes
                                   Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks                                            Yes
                     Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation                                             Yes
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                              A
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems
                                                                                                                        Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and
                                                                                                                        Reporting, External Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)             Yes
                                                                                                                        Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison.

                                                                               Non-Fiduciary             Yes            Monitoring and Evaluation National System.


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public
                                                                                                         Yes
sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

The Bañado Sur Rehabilitation and Housing Program in Asunción (Barrio Tacumbú) aims to improve the quality of life of the coastal population of the southern area of the
city of Asunción (Bañado Sur) through: (i) the construction of housing of social interest and quality urban infrastructure under sustainable urbanism standards for the
reallocation of the population; (ii) the environmental recovery of lagoons, streams and wetlands, and the protection of natural buffer zones; and (iii) the generation of
conditions of economic and institutional sustainability and improvement of the adaptive capacity of families. The program expects to benefit 1,500 of the 2,517 households
surveyed that live in flood-prone areas of the Tacumbú neighborhood. The continuity of future stages within the framework of the Coastal Strip Development Program
contemplates expanding the number of beneficiaries to the rest of the neighborhood's population. The vertical logic presented in the POD is consistent, covering the
activities, products, results and impacts. The diagnosis presents the main problems that the project must address in the settlements, and presents robust evidence for most
of them, although it must be reinforced for socioeconomic problems.

The results matrix includes indicators of the main outputs, results and impacts of the program and these comply with the SMART criteria, including the initial values and goals
except for some of the outcome indicators, whose baseline values are not yet known. The impact indicators associated with the first component include the price differential
of old homes compared to new ones, the reduction in the economic value of household losses in climate disasters (calculated on the basis of a model), and an index for
satisfaction of the households. The outcome indicators related to infrastructures include variables related to the sustainability of the rehousing and the sustained formal use
of basic water, sanitation and electricity services, the increase in patrimony and the use of social facilities. On the side of environmental sustainability, they include the quality
of the Laguna's water, the percentage of households that count with the garbage collection service, and the number of mitigation and adaptation measures to climate change
reported by the Strategic Projects Directorate (DIPE) to the Ministry. As part of the results of the economic sustainability component, indicators of certification of the offered
courses, increase in the knowledge of environmental care, reduction of unemployment and reduction of the acceptance of intrafamily violence are included.

The Executing Agency will be the MOPC, through the DIPE. The DIPE will be the unit that represents the executor in the administration aspects of the program, for which it will
create a Program Coordination Unit (PCU) who will have to work in coordination with the VMAF and the UOC. Monitoring and evaluation activities have been planned and
budgeted. The program presents an economic analysis that shows the economic viability of the project, although the inclusion of some assumptions must be justified and
there is no clear link between the benefits of the report and those of the results matrix. An evaluation of results and an ex-post cost-benefit evaluation have also been
budgeted.
                                                                                                                                                                                   Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 6



                                                                                    RESULTS MATRIX


    Project objective:                      The general objective is to improve the quality of life of the riverside population of the southern area of the city of Asunción
                                            (Bañado Sur) through: (i) the construction of quality urban infrastructure and affordable housing for the relocation of the
                                            Tacumbú neighborhood in line with sustainable urban planning standards; (ii) the environmental recovery of lagoons,
                                            streams, and wetlands and the protection of natural buffer zones; and (iii) the creation of conditions of economic and
                                            institutional sustainability and the improvement of the families’ adaptive capacities.

                                                                                   EXPECTED IMPACT

                                               Unit of                          Baseline                          Final
                Indicators                                       Baseline                         Year                                         Means of verification
                                             measurement                          year                           target

    IMPACT #1
    Difference between the
    logarithm of the cost per dwelling
    in the new Tacumbú                                                                                                        Real estate experts’ measurements of housing
                                                    %                 0           2018            2026             15
    neighborhood (per m 2) and the                                                                                            prices in the existing and new Tacumbú
    price per dwelling in the current                                                                                         neighborhoods
    Tacumbú neighborhood (per m 2)
    Reduction in the average
    economic value of losses per                                                                                              Indicator of expected annual loss resulting from the
    household due to climate                        %               N/A           2018            2026            501         climate risk evaluation model measurements of the
    disasters, specifically floods, in                                                                                        existing and new Tacumbú neighborhoods
    the Tacumbú neighborhood (%)
    % of households that report that
    they are satisfied with where                   %              2018            N/A            2026             15         Censuses taken at program start and end
    they live




1    This percentage will be reviewed when the model is run to establish the baseline, at which time it will be possible to make a better estimate since the risk is mitigated not eliminated.
Annex II
Page 2 of 6


                                                                   EXPECTED OUTCOMES

                                               Unit of                 Year      Year     Final
                 Indicators                                Baseline                                              Means of verification
                                             measurement              Baseline   2026    target1
  OUTCOME #1:
  Component I: Quality urban infrastructure and affordable housing financed in the Tacumbú neighborhood in line with sustainable urban planning
  standards
                                                                                                   Baseline and follow-up surveys of a panel of
  Household wealth index                        Index        N/A       2018      12%     +12%
                                                                                                   families
  % of households with formal ANDE
  electricity services that have paid for
                                                                                                   ANDE report with the number of connected
  the services in the past month over all        %           N/A       2018       90       90
                                                                                                   households that paid in the past month
  households surveyed (measured at
  6 months after relocation)

  % of households with formal ESSAP                                                                Final works report
  water and sanitation services that have                                                          Technical verification audit reports
  paid for the services in the past month        %           N/A       2018       90       90      Semiannual and annual program monitoring
  over all households surveyed                                                                     reports prepared by the DIPE
  (measured at 6 months after relocation)                                                          Censuses taken at program start and end
  Percentage of households that report                                                             Censuses taken at program start and end
  having used at least one community             %           N/A       2018      +30%    +30%      Community facilities include: 2 community
  facility at least once in the past month                                                         centers and 1 fishermen’s center
  Percentage of households that report                                                             Censuses taken at program start and end
  having used at least one social facility       %           N/A       2018      +30%    +30%      Social facilities include: 2 schools and 2 health
  at least once in the past month                                                                  centers
  Percentage of households that live in                                                            Semiannual and annual program monitoring
  the program dwellings after six months,                                                          reports prepared by the DIPE
                                                 %            0        2018       90       90
  over the total households assigned a
  dwelling                                                                                         Final program census
                                                                                                                                                     Annex II
                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 6



                                                 Unit of                     Year      Year     Final
                Indicators                                       Baseline                                             Means of verification
                                               measurement                  Baseline   2026    target1
OUTCOME #2:
Component II: Upgrading of Tacumbú’s green infrastructure
Improvement of the quality of the Yrupé
                                               BOD5 in mg/l        24        2018       10       10      Water quality reports at program start and end
lagoon
% of dwellings with collection services
                                                     %             21        2018      100      100      Censuses taken at program start and end
over total dwellings registered
Number of climate change mitigation
                                               # of mitigation
and adaptation measures reported by
                                                    and                                                  Semiannual and annual program monitoring
DIPE to the National Climate Change                                 0        2018       10       10
                                                 adaptation                                              reports prepared by the DIPE
Office of the Ministry of Environment
                                                 measures
and Sustainable Development
OUTCOME #3:
Component III. Creation of conditions of economic and institutional sustainability and improvement of the families’ adaptive capacities
% of households that have knowledge                                                                      Survey of a panel of households at program start
                                                     %             N/A       2018      +30      +30
of basic environmental care activities                                                                   and end
% of participants in the job training
                                                     %             N/A       2018       90       90      Censuses taken at program start and end
activities that obtain certificates
% of female participants in the job
                                                     %             N/A       2018       50       50      Censuses taken at program start and end
training activities that obtain certificates
Difference in the unemployment rate in
                                                                                                         Censuses taken at program start and end and
the neighborhood compared to the                 Percentage
                                                                   -3%       2018      -2.7%   -2.7%     comparison of the difference from data from the
average employment rate in the                     points
                                                                                                         Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses
Asunción metropolitan area
                                                                                                         Based on the questions on the acceptance of
Decrease in social acceptance of                 Percentage                                              intimate partner violence in the Demographic and
                                                                   N/A       2018      20%      20%
domestic gender-based violence                     points                                                Health Surveys empowerment module
                                                                                                         (5 questions listed under item 826)
Annex II
Page 4 of 6


                                                                     OUTPUTS
                                                 Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final
   Output indicators        Unit      Baseline                                                                       Means of verification
                                                  2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target
 COMPONENT I. SUSTAINABLE URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE
 P1. Hydraulic filling
                          Hectares       0       10.25    18.46     6.29       0       0        -       35      Works progress certificate
 completed
 P2. Urban
                             #                                       1                          -        1      Works progress certificate
 infrastructure built
 P2.1. Number of
                                                                                                                Detailed designs for:
 detailed designs            #           0         1        2        -         -       -        -        3
                                                                                                                (i) infrastructure and (ii) housing
 completed
 P2.2. Linear meters of
 drinking water network    Meters        0         -      2,949    2,051       -       -        -      5,000    Works progress certificate
 installed
 P2.3. Number of
                            # of
 individual residential
                          connec-        0         -      1,000     500        -       -        -      1,500    Works progress certificate
 sanitary sewer
                           tions
 connections
 P2.4. Linear meters of
 sanitation network        Meters        0         -      2,949    2,051       -       -         -     5,000    Works progress certificate
 installed
 P2.5. Number of
                            # of
 individual residential
                          connec-        0         -      1,000     500        -       -         -     1,500    Works progress certificate
 water connections
                           tions
 finished
 P2.6. Square meters
 of roadways
 constructed (including
                            m2           -         -      52,260   36,240      -       -        -      88,500   Works progress certificate
 pavement, storm
 drainage, and street
 lighting)

 P3. Number of              # of                                                                                Works progress certificate. The
                                         -         -        -       433      567      500       -      1,500    dwellings fulfill the basic
 dwellings built          dwellings
                                                                                                                characteristics and
                                                                                                                                       Annex II
                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 6


                                               Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final
  Output indicators       Unit      Baseline                                                                      Means of verification
                                                2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target
                                                                                                              classifications established in
                                                                                                              the master plan and agreed
                                                                                                              upon with the community:
                                                                                                              (1) 90 m2 plot and 60 m2
                                                                                                              dwelling; (2) 140 m2 plot and
                                                                                                              60 m2 dwelling; (3) 180 m2 plot
                                                                                                              and 80 m2 dwelling; (4) 70 m2
                                                                                                              duplex.
COMPONENT II. GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE AND RESILIENCE
P4. Environmental
                                                                                                              Works progress certificate. The
sanitation works and
                                                                                                              works will include cleaning and
recovery of bodies of
                           #           0         -        -        2        -        1        -        3      strengthening the riverbanks
water in the existing
                                                                                                              and the removal of waste and
Tacumbú
                                                                                                              sediment.
neighborhood area
                                                                                                              Works progress certificate. The
                                                                                                              natural zones will be
P5. Natural buffer                                                                                            rehabilitated and protected
zone areas                                                                                                    through forestation with native
                        Hectares       0        10       20        0        0        0        -        30
rehabilitated and                                                                                             flora, the creation of biological
protected                                                                                                     corridors, and plans for the
                                                                                                              management of unoccupied
                                                                                                              areas.
COMPONENT III. SOCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL SUSTAINABILITY
                                                                                                              Construction of social and
                                                                                                              community facilities to include
P7. Social and
                          # of                                                                                2 community centers,
community facilities                   0         -        -        -       11        -        -        11
                        buildings                                                                             1 fishermen’s center, 2
built
                                                                                                              schools, 2 health centers, and
                                                                                                              4 squares.
P8. % of temporary
                                                                                                              Transfer for the
accommodation plan         %           0         -       20       30       30       20        -       100
                                                                                                              accommodation plan
executed
Annex II
Page 6 of 6


                                                Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final
   Output indicators        Unit     Baseline                                                                      Means of verification
                                                 2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target
 P9. Number of health,
 climate change, and
 environmental                #         0         -        -        -        2        3        3        8      List of workshop participants
 education workshops
 held
 P10. Number of job
 training workshops                                                                                            List of training workshop
                              #         0         -        -        1        2        2        1        6
 with a gender focus                                                                                           participants
 held
 P11. Number of
 workshops and
 activities organized as
 part of the
 “Neighborhood without
 Violence” program,
 including activities to     #          0         -        -        1        3        3        3        10     List of activity participants
 prevent gender and
 domestic violence in
 the neighborhood, as
 part of the
 neighborhood
 outreach strategy
                                                                                                               1 report with draft strategy and
 P12. Outreach
                             #          0         -        1        1        1        -        -        3      2 reports with evidence of
 strategy developed
                                                                                                               implementation
 P13. Assisted             Persons
                                        0         -        -       15       15       15       15        60     Contracts signed
 resettlement               hired
                                                                                     Annex III
                                                                                   Page 1 of 6




                     FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS



 Country:                 Paraguay
 Project name:            Housing and Rehabilitation Program for Bañado Sur in
                          Asunción (Tacumbú neighborhood)
 Project number:          PR-L1152
 Executing agency:        Ministry of Public Works and Communications (MOPC)

 Prepared by:             Fernando Glasman, Bruno Candia, and Jorge Luis Gonzalez
                          (VPC/FMP)

                               I.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.1   The institutional assessment for the fiduciary management of the project was
      conducted based on: (i) the fiduciary context of the country; and (ii) the findings from
      the fiduciary risk assessment and the project risk management workshop; and
      (iii) working meetings with the project team. This assessment was used to prepare
      the fiduciary agreements on procurement and financial management applicable to
      project execution.

      II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE COUNTRY AND THE EXECUTING AGENCY

2.1   Overall, the country systems for financial management have a medium level of
      development. However, these systems must be supplemented for the execution of
      Bank-financed projects. Specific financial reports are prepared through auxiliary
      accounting systems. Financial control tools such as the Integrated Financial
      Administration System (SIAF), the Integrated Accounting System, and other
      subsystems allow executing agencies to manage payment transfers to suppliers
      under acceptable conditions through the Central Bank of Paraguay. The integration
      of these tools will make it possible to prepare audited financial statements for a
      program or project in the SIAF in the future. Until then, parallel systems are used.
      External control is currently handled by private auditing firms.
2.2   The efficiency and transparency of the country system for public procurement has
      greatly improved as a result of the creation of the governing body, the National Public
      Procurement Department, which has made it possible to implement a transactional
      platform for procurements with electronic procedures like the electronic reverse
      auction, a system of suppliers, and the statistical information system. For Bank-
      financed operations, the public procurement information system has been used, as
      have the national electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems,
      for the amounts and categories established in the agreement on the use thereof
      signed by Paraguay and the Bank on 17 June 2014.
2.3   The executing agency will be the MOPC, acting through the Office of Strategic
      Projects (DIPE). The DIPE will be the unit that represents the executing agency in
Annex III
Page 2 of 6


        program administration aspects. To that end, it will create a program coordination
        unit (PCU) that will work together with the Office of the Deputy Minister for
        Administration and Finance and the procurement operations unit.
2.4     From the fiduciary management perspective, the executing agency is considered
        medium risk, since the PCU and the fiduciary team that will be in charge of the
        operation have yet to be created. However, historically, the MOPC has proven to do
        good work and has: (i) a long track record in executing and managing similar
        projects; (ii) proven prior experience in procurement under IDB regulations; and
        (iii) solid internal control, financial, and administrative processes.

               III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS

3.1     The evaluations of the DIPE show that the opportunities for improvement should
        focus on:
        a. the design and development of the profiles of the PCU positions;
        b. strengthening the accounting and internal control areas in Bank financial
           management policies through courses and training sessions;
        c. strengthening the procurement area with regard to Bank procurement policies.
3.2     Procurement management. The DIPE was established in 2014 to strengthen the
        execution of MOPC strategic projects. Today, the growing portfolio of projects under
        MOPC administration represents a challenge to future execution. To mitigate this
        risk, the DIPE will contract the fiduciary support of the Office of the Deputy Minister
        for Administration and Finance and the procurement operations unit. Furthermore,
        a program coordination unit (PCU) will be formed under the DIPE for project
        execution. This new structure must be fortified with staff members who have
        competence in and knowledge of the policies of multilateral organizations and
        through specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies.
3.3     Financial management. The program coordination unit must be created, which
        means that a team must be assembled. To mitigate this risk, the Bank will provide
        training on procurement and financial issues.

      IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

4.1     The following agreements and requirements should be included in the special
        provisions:
        a. For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties agree
           that the exchange rate to be applied will be the one indicated in section (b)(i)
           thereof. The agreed-upon exchange rate will therefore be the exchange rate in
           effect on the date on which the approval currency or disbursement currency is
           converted to the local currency of the borrower’s country. This program does
           not have a local counterpart contribution. To determine the equivalent
           expenditure amount to be reimbursed from the loan proceeds, the agreed-upon
           exchange rate will be the exchange rate on the date of the reimbursement
           request.
                                                                                          Annex III
                                                                                        Page 3 of 6


         b. The annual financial statements for the program will be submitted within
            120 days after the close of the fiscal year, and the final financial statements
            will be submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.

    V. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

5.1      The procurement policies that apply to this loan are the Policies for the Procurement
         of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document
         GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants
         financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2350-9). The
         Bank’s Board of Executive Directors also approved (document GN-2538-11) the use
         of Paraguay’s public sector contracting electronic reverse auction and competitive
         bidding subsystems (Law (2051/03). Use of other country systems approved after
         project approval will be adopted automatically and so indicated in the procurement
         plan.
         Procurement execution
5.2      Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for
         works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international competitive
         bidding (ICB) will be executed using the standard bidding documents issued by the
         Bank. In turn, the bidding processes subject to national competitive bidding (NCB)
         will be executed using national competitive bidding documents agreed upon with the
         Bank. The project’s sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical
         specifications for procurement during the preparation of selection processes. No
         direct selection processes are initially planned.
5.3      Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services
         generated under the project will be executed using the standard request for
         proposals issued by or agreed upon with the Bank. The project's sector specialist is
         responsible for reviewing the terms of reference for procuring consulting services.
         a. Selection of individual consultants. Pursuant to procurement policies
            contained in document GN-2350-9.
         b. Training. Procurement workshops will be held.
         c. Use of country systems. Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of
            October 2013, the use of Paraguay’s public procurement system electronic
            reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems in Bank-financed
            operations will apply to:
               (i)   All contracts for goods and nonconsulting services subject to the use of
                     the electronic reverse auction procedure under Paraguay’s public
                     procurement system and involving amounts below the Bank’s
                     established threshold for the shopping method for off-the-shelf goods
                     (for reference, US$250,000);
              (ii)   All contracts for works involving amounts below the Bank’s established
                     threshold for use of the shopping method for complex works (for

1   Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank
    (document GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods.
Annex III
Page 4 of 6


                         reference, US$250,000), and contracts for goods and nonconsulting
                         services up to the amount established by the Bank for the use of the
                         shopping method for complex goods and services (for reference,
                         US$50,000).
                 (iii)   Contracts for amounts equal to or greater than the aforementioned
                         amounts will be governed by Bank policies (document GN-2349-9).
5.4        Section 1 of the Bank policies (document GN-2349-9) will remain applicable to all
           executed contracts, regardless of the amount or procurement method. Any system
           or subsystem approved subsequently will be applicable to the operation. The
           procurement plan for the operation and updates thereto will indicate which
           procurement processes are to be executed using the approved country systems.2
5.5        Advance procurement/Retroactive financing. Not planned under this operation.
5.6        Domestic preference. Not planned under this operation.

          Table 1. Thresholds for international competitive bidding and international short list (US$)
                                                  ICB goods and                  International shortlist for
           Method           ICB works
                                               nonconsulting services               consulting services
          Threshold          3,000,000               250,000                              200,000


                                         Table 2. Main procurement items
                                                                                                    Estimated
                                                                                      Process
                                 Activity                                 Method                     amount
                                                                                      number
                                                                                                      (US$)
    Works
    Contracting of construction firm to build the dwellings. (Two sets)    ICB            3         45,000,000
    Contracting of construction firm for public utilities works            ICB            2         11,160,000
    Contracting of construction firm for the hydraulic filling             ICB            1         9,765,000
    Contracting of construction firm for the recovery of riverbeds,
    cleanup of the Yrupé lagoon, and recovery of the natural buffer        ICB            4         8,709,780
    zones
    Contracting of construction firm for social and community
                                                                           ICB            5         5,000,000
    facilities
    Nonconsulting services
    Temporary relocation plan                                              ICB                      3,750,000
    Consulting firms
    Contracting of oversight for the construction of the housing          QCBS           10         3,150,000
    Consulting service to develop the detailed designs and permits
                                                                          QCBS            8         2,000,000
    for urban infrastructure and housing




2    If another system or subsystem is approved by the Bank, it will be applicable to the operation, in
     accordance with the loan contract.
                                                                                                   Annex III
                                                                                                 Page 5 of 6


                                             Table 3. Categories
                                 Categories                 Total amounts (US$)
                                   Works                          79,364,180
                                   Goods                             350,000
                          Nonconsulting services                   3,750,000
                              Consulting firms                    11,237,220
                           Individual consultants                  2,296,800
                             Training sessions                       500,000
                          Total, procurement plan                 97,768,800



5.7       Procurement supervision. All procurement and/or contracting processes
          governed by the procurement policies GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 will be subject to
          ex ante review by the Bank, taking into account the position of the Ministry of Finance
          on the matter. Supervision of all procurement processes governed by Paraguay's
          public sector contracting electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding
          subsystems (document GN-2538-11) will be conducted under the country system.3
5.8       Special provisions. No special provisions are anticipated other than those
          indicated in paragraph 4.1.
5.9       Records and files. Project reports will be prepared and filed using the systems,
          formats, and procedures available to or agreed upon with the Bank.

       VI. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL EXECUTION

      Financial management
6.1       Programming and budget.
          a. The DIPE, under the authority of the Office of the Minister for Public Works and
             Communications, will centrally coordinate execution, with support from the
             Office of the Deputy Minister for Finance and its bureaus, as necessary.
          b. The PCU, under the DIPE, will be responsible for budget programming,
             administration, and execution, under the zero-based budget system.
6.2       Accounting and information systems. The country uses modified cash basis
          accounting; however, cash basis accounting is used for IDB-financed project
          accountability processes.
          a. Information systems. The DIPE will have access to the SIAF through the
             Financial Management Department. The country systems do not issue the
             reports required by the Bank. These reports are prepared using different
             systems, which creates additional work for the DIPE and the procurement
             operations unit.
          b. Disbursements and cash flow. Program disbursements will typically be made
             through advances of funds, which must be corroborated through the monthly
             presentation of one itemized financial plan for up to six months, and one for a

3   Depending on the scope of system use, supervision may be supplemented by project audits. If so, it should
    be indicated herein.
Annex III
Page 6 of 6


               longer period, which can be used to determine the program’s actual demand
               inferred from the multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, and procurement
               plan. The second and subsequent disbursements will be subject to justification
               of at least 80% of the previous advance. If requested, disbursements may also
               be made as direct vendor payments or reimbursements for payments made.
        c. Exchange rate. The exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for
           reporting will be the monetization exchange rate, unless the Ministry of Finance
           in its capacity as borrower decides otherwise during the loan negotiations.
        d. Internal control and internal audit. There is an advanced level of internal
           control.
        e. External control and reports. The executing agency will deliver annual
           program audit reports prepared by an independent auditing firm acceptable to
           the Bank, in accordance with the terms of reference previously approved by
           the Bank. The project’s financial statements include a cash flow statement,
           statement of accrued investment income, the notes to these financial
           statements, and the statement from the project management team (executing
           agency). The audit report will include an evaluation of the internal control
           system.
        f.     An eligible-level independent auditing firm will be selected for the project.
        g. External audits will be paid for with loan proceeds and are estimated to cost
           US$250,000 over the planned six years of loan execution.
        h. Financial supervision plan. Financial supervision may be adjusted based on
           project execution and audit reports.

                                        Table 4. Financial supervision plan.

                                                Nature/scope                                 Frequency

             Ex post review of disbursements                                                  1 per year
             Financial audit and delivery of financial statements                               Annual
                                                                                             2 or 3 times
             Review of disbursement requests and attached reports
                                                                                               per year
             Inspection visit/analysis of internal controls and control environment at the
                                                                                               Annual
             executing agency


6.3     Execution mechanism: As defined in section III. A of the loan proposal.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/18



     Paraguay. Loan ____/OC-PR to the Republic of Paraguay. Housing and Rehabilitation
               Program for Bañado Sur in Asunción (Tacumbú Neighborhood)




       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary
with the Republic of Paraguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing to cooperate in
the execution of the Housing and Rehabilitation Program for Bañado Sur in Asunción (Tacumbú
Neighborhood). Such financing will be for an amount of up to US$100,000,000 from the Ordinary
Capital resources of the Bank, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                              (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2018)


LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-746870777-11447
PR-L1152
