                                                                                         PUBLIC
                                                                       SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                           ECUADOR


   CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)
    “FINANCING THE HOUSING AND MICROBUSINESS NEEDS OF THE
     POPULATION OF THE POPULAR AND SOLIDARITY ECONOMY”

                                         (EC-O0014)

FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CCLIP “FINANCING HOUSING
     SOLUTIONS FOR THE POPULAR AND SOLIDARITY ECONOMY”

                                         (EC-L1290)



                                        LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Paloma Acevedo (CSD/HUD),
Project Team Leader; Paloma Silva (CSD/HUD), Alternate Project Team Leader; Omar
Villacorta (IFD/CMF), Alternate Project Team Leader; Diego Herrera (IFD/CMF), Alternate
Project Team Leader; Jason Hobbs, Silvia Pérez, Sofía del Castillo, Gabriel Torres, Dianela
Ávila, Denisse Paredes, Jorge Guerrero, and Juan José Cervantes (CSD/HUD); Roberto
Laguado, Mylenna Cárdenas, and Cristian Suárez (VPC/FMP); Aurea Fuentes and José
Jimenez (IFD/CMF); Roberto Esmeral (CSD/CCS); Karina Calahorrano (CAN/CEC); Javier
Jiménez (LEG/SGO); Suzanne Duryea and Diana Bocarejo (SCL/GDI); Maria Laura Oliveri
(SCL/LMK); Gabriela Mera (INO/FLI); and Franklin Mendoza (INO/SMC).


This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding
and replacing the original version.
                                                      CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY


I.     PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS ..................................................................... 1

       A.     Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.     Objective, components, and cost ................................................................ 12
       C.     Strategic alignment ..................................................................................... 15
       D.     Viability analysis ......................................................................................... 16

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS .............................................................. 17

       A.     Financing instruments ................................................................................ 17
       B.     Environmental and social safeguard risks ................................................... 18
       C.     Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 19
       D.     Other risks and key issues .......................................................................... 19

III.   EXECUTION MECHANISM AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR MONITORING AND EVALUATION
       OF RESULTS ......................................................................................................... 19

       A.     Execution mechanism ................................................................................ 19
       B.     Arrangements for monitoring and evaluation of results ............................... 22

IV.    ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ............................................................................................ 23




                                                    APPENDICES


Proposed resolution
                                                   - ii -



                                                ANNEXES
Annex I        Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary
Annex II       Results Matrix
Annex III      Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                             REQUIRED LINKS
          1.   Project execution plan
          2.   Monitoring and evaluation plan
          3.   Environmental and social review summary


                                             OPTIONAL LINKS
          1.   Economic viability analysis
          2.   Climate change and sustainability
          3.   Theory of change
          4.   Program Credit Regulations
          5.   Housing Solutions Through Financing for the Popular and Solidarity Economy
          6.   Bibliography
                                     - iii -


                              ABBREVIATIONS


CCLIP      Conditional credit line for investment projects
CONAFIPS   Corporación Nacional de Finanzas Populares y Solidarias (National
           Corporation for Popular and Solidarity Finance)
GDP        Gross domestic product
IMF        International Monetary Fund
LOVIS      Ley Orgánica de Vivienda de Interés Social (Organic Law on Social-
           Interest Housing)
MIDUVI     Ministry of Urban Development and Housing
OSFPS      Organizaciones del sector financiero popular y solidario (popular and
           solidarity finance sector organizations)
PIH        Public interest housing
PSE        Popular and solidarity economy
SBU        Salario básico unificado (unified basic wage)
SIH        Social interest housing
                                                           PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                                  ECUADOR

      CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) “FINANCING THE HOUSING AND MICROBUSINESS
                       NEEDS OF THE POPULATION OF THE POPULAR AND SOLIDARITY ECONOMY”
                                                  (EC-O0014)
        FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CCLIP “FINANCING HOUSING SOLUTIONS FOR THE POPULAR AND
                                             SOLIDARITY ECONOMY”
                                                   (EC-L1290)
  Financial Terms and Conditions
  Borrower:                                                                                   Flexible Financing Facility(a)
  Corporación Nacional de Finanzas Populares y Solidarias (National                           Amortization
                                                                                                                25 years
  Corporation for Popular and Solidarity Finance) (CONAFIPS)                                  period:
  Guarantor:                                                                                  Disbursement
                                                                                                                4 years
  Republic of Ecuador                                                                         period:
  Executing agency:
                                                                                              Grace period:         5.5 years(b)
  CONAFIPS
  Loan modality:
                                                                                              Interest rate:        SOFR-based
  Global credit investment loan
                                         Amount (US$ millions)                                Inspection and
                                                                                                                    (c)
  Source                                              1st Operation -                  %      supervision
                                CCLIP EC-O0014
                                                         EC-L1290                             fee:
                                                                                              Weighted
  IDB (Ordinary Capital):                    300                      70              100                           15.25 years
                                                                                              average life:
                                                                                              Approval
  Total:                                     300                      70              100                           United States dollar
                                                                                              currency:
  Project at a Glance
  The general objective of the multisector CCLIP is to contribute to developing markets for housing loans and productive
  credit for the population of the popular and solidarity economy, with a focus on sustainability and the financial inclusion of
  women, persons with disabilities, and Indigenous peoples and nationalities, among others (paragraph 1.27).
  The general objective of the first operation is to meet the housing needs of the population of the popular and solidarity
  economy through delivery of financial resources to popular and solidarity finance sector organizations (OSFPS), and to
  contribute to developing markets for housing loans, with a focus on sustainability and the financial inclusion of women, persons
  with disabilities, and Indigenous peoples and nationalities, among others. The specific objective of the first operation is to
  better meet the popular and solidarity economy population’s housing needs by financing the OSFPS (paragraph 1.28).
  Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: As a special contractual condition
  precedent to the first disbursement of the loan, CONAFIPS will approve and implement the program Credit Regulations, under
  the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank. This condition is necessary in order to establish the instructions, structure,
  guidelines, and procedures to be followed by the executing agency to ensure successful execution of the components
  established for addressing the housing shortage, institution-strengthening, and program administration and management
  (paragraphs 1.29 and 3.4).
  Exceptions to Bank policies: The Board of Executive Directors is asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank Policy on
  Guarantees Required from the Borrower (OP-303), for the Republic of Ecuador to guarantee only the financial obligations,
  including interest and fees, derived from the loan contract between CONAFIPS and the Bank (paragraph 3.5).
  Strategic Alignment
  Objectives:(d)                             O1 ☒                          O2 ☐                                  O3 ☐
  Operational focus                            OF2-G ☒
                                   OF1 ☐                      OF3 ☒       OF4 ☒           OF5 ☒            OF6 ☒        OF7 ☐
  areas:(e)                                    OF2-D ☒
(a)    Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization
       schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, and commodity conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management
       considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)
      Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do
      not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)
      The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its
      review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies.
(d)
      O1 (Reduce poverty and inequality); O2 (Address climate change); and O3 (Bolster sustainable regional growth).
(e)
      OF1 (Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action); OF2-G (Gender equality); OF2-D (Inclusion of diverse population groups); OF3
      (Institutional capacity, rule of law, and citizen security); OF4 (Social protection and human capital development); OF5 (Productive
      development and innovation through the private sector); OF6 (Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure); and OF7 (Regional
      integration).
                             I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Background. The socioeconomic scenario for Ecuador is complex, and the
          country is focusing its efforts on bringing about a swift recovery. Real gross
          domestic product (GDP) grew 9.8% in 2021, 6.2% in 2022, and 2.4% in 2023. The
          Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) project
          0.1% GDP growth in 2024. In addition, the authorities calculate a 94% probability
          that the El Niño phenomenon will occur, which will also impact economic
          activity [1].1,2 Public debt as a percentage of GDP fell to 55.3% in 2023 from 57%
          in 2022. At year-end 2023, the country faced fiscal difficulties, with the overall
          deficit reaching 2.6% of GDP. In addition, unemployment and poverty edged up
          between December 2022 and 2023 (from 3.8% to 3.9% for the former and from
          25.2% to 26.0% for the latter). In this context, the Government of Ecuador, elected
          in October 2023 with a term running through February 2025, increased the
          value-added tax (VAT) rate (from 12% to 15%) and the tax on transfers abroad,
          and put forward temporary tax incentive and revenue measures to stimulate
          growth. Leveraging those measures, the Government of Ecuador reached a new
          US$4 billion arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility with the IMF. The
          program pursues balanced fiscal consolidation, expansion of the social safety net,
          and implementation of structural reforms. By 2028, the program expects to close
          the fiscal gap and achieve a return to the path of long-term growth of 2.5%.
          Ecuador should be able to access debt markets in 2025.
1.2       Against this backdrop, there is a complex economic context with critical social
          needs. Ecuador had one of the lowest growth rates in Latin America and the
          Caribbean in 2023 [2] and has a housing shortage of 46.2% [3]. Accordingly, it
          must promote strategic development sectors that address social needs while
          reviving the economy.
1.3       Two such strategic sectors are housing and productive microbusiness, which, due
          to their high social impact and significant economic recovery potential, can meet
          the population’s basic needs and spur the economy. According to estimates, in
          emerging economies, the social housing sector can provide up to 16% of GDP [4]
          and create up to six direct and indirect jobs with the construction of each
          dwelling [5]. In Ecuador, 98.3% of companies are microenterprises and small
          businesses [6], but while this productive sector employs over 40% of the country’s
          workers, it accounts for only 12% of the business sector’s total sales. One cause
          limiting development of the housing and productive sectors is the population’s
          difficulty accessing medium- and long-term credit, particularly for the
          middle-income and lower-middle income population3 [7]. There are structural
          factors underlying this. On the one hand, there are market failures, including
          information assymmetries, and high concentration in the market. Information
          assymmetries in financial institutions are reflected in difficulties evaluating the
          credit profile of low-income users who, despite being able to pay, have more
1     The bibliographic references identified in brackets [#] are found in optional link 6.
2     The agriculture, livestock farming, aquaculture and fisheries, construction, lodging and food services,
      transportation, and financial services sectors will be most affected.
3     The population with an average monthly income under US$500 had a 13.45% participation rate in all loan
      transactions in the country from 2018 to 2022.
                                                       -2-



          volatile and often informal income. On the other hand, there is high concentration
          among financial institutions, with five of them concentrating 80% of the market.4 In
          addition, the products in the portfolios of the country’s financial institutions (banks,
          credit unions, and rotating savings and credit associations known as “mutualistas”)
          are very heterogenous. While banks have 6% real estate portfolio loans, 45%
          productive loans, and 8% microcredit, credit unions on average have 4% in real
          estate, 1% in productive loans, 49% in microcredit.5 Lastly, sources of financing in
          Ecuador’s financial market are not well diversified, and there are mismatches
          between their liabilities (primarily short-term deposits) and demand for long-term
          assets (including demand for real estate loans and productive credit) which limits
          the supply of credit6 [8]. The foregoing results in limited development of credit
          markets and, more circumstantially, a shortage of medium- and long-term credit,
          particularly for the middle- and lower-middle-income population.
1.4       In Ecuador, the economic sector that includes most of the middle- and
          lower-middle-income population with microenterprises or other economic activities
          is called the “popular and solidarity economy” (PSE) and is recognized by the
          Organic Law on the Popular and Solidarity Economy.7 According to the National
          PSE Institute,8 this economy is made up of 6.28 million people (56.43% men and
          43.57% women) with 5.83 million economically active persons (representing
          69.4% of the country’s economically active population),9 mostly living in urban
          areas (55.6%), with an average of 8.84 years of education and average income of
          US$303.4; of these individuals, 25.73% are living in poverty. Notably, only one out
          of every five members of the PSE population is enrolled in the social security
          system, meaning there is a high level of vulnerability (79.47% of the population
          lacks a social safety net). Only 21.51% of the PSE population is adequately
          employed [11], [12].10 Despite these indicators, in 2023, 5.7 million people in the
          PSE belonged to a popular and solidarity finance sector organization [13]. In a
          survey conducted by the sector in June 2023, average monthly family income of
          those in the PSE sector was US$901.11
1.5       Ecuador’s popular and solidarity financing sector is made up of OSFPS, primarily
          comprising credit unions and mutualistas, and governed by the regulations of the
          Office of the Superintendent of the Popular and Solidarity Economy, which
          supervises their solvency and financial health [27]. In 2022, the popular and
          solidarity finance sector posted a positive trend overall, with a portfolio balance of

4     Boletín Financiero Mensual IQ Superintendencia de Bancos del Ecuador.
5     Reportes Financieros Mensuales IQ Superintendencia de Economía Popular y Solidaria.
6     Informe CONAFIPS 2023 “Proyecto Soluciones Habitacionales”.
7     Defined in the Organic Law on the Popular and Solidarity Economy.
8     Population and education data is from the 2022 Bulletin of the PSE Institute. For all other indicators, the
      most recent data available is from the 2018 Bulletin.
9     National Survey of Employment, Unemployment, and Underemployment 2023.
10    People with jobs who, during the reference week, earned employment incomes equal to or greater than
      minimum wage working 40 or more hours per week, regardless of whether they want to work more hours
      or are available to do so. Also included in this category are people with jobs who, during the reference
      week, earned employment incomes equal to or greater than minimum wage working less than 40 hours
      per week, and who do not want to work any more hours.
11    Survey conducted by CONAFIPS in June 2023.
                                                       -3-



          US$17.59 billion and average rate of arrears of 4%. In the context of developing
          their business, OSFPS regularly turn to second-tier funding solutions that include
          both public and private options. Since the OSFPS are typically small or medium-
          sized,12 they also face constraints on accessing second-tier financing from the
          private market (both domestically13 and internationally) and therefore turn to public
          entities.
1.6       The main public financing entity that the OSFPS rely on is the Corporación
          Nacional de Finanzas Populares y Solidarias (National Corporation for Popular
          and Solidarity Finance) (CONAFIPS)—a second-tier public development bank that
          serves the OSFPS by providing financial and nonfinancial products and services
          for the economic and social development of their members and clients.14 All told,
          318 of the total 414 OSFPS [31] do business with CONAFIPS [32]. Moreover,
          CONAFIPS has a high penetration in areas with medium to high poverty rates,15
          executing 60% of its lending operations in areas with poverty rates of over 65%,
          and 23% in areas with poverty rates of 38% to 65%, measured according to the
          Unmet Basic Needs index [33]. Given CONAFIPS’ importance, it is considered a
          “market developer,” since it is a pioneer in leading the way with the population that
          is in greatest need or exposed to major market failures. It is also a strategic player,
          as it has the potential to have a crowding-in effect with the private sector, given its
          capacity to strengthen credit unions so they can develop and potentially finance
          themselves in the private marketplace.
1.7       In this context, the IDB and CONAFIPS have the opportunity to pursue a short-
          and medium-term agenda through a conditional credit line for investment projects
          (CCLIP) that meets the housing and productive sector needs of the PSE population
          by facilitating access to credit for OSFPS, while meeting the more structural needs
          financing markets are facing, thereby contributing to their development. The first
          operation will be aimed at meeting housing needs through financing solutions,
          while developing that market.
1.8       Problem addressed by the first operation under the CCLIP to meet PSE
          housing needs. Ecuador has a housing shortage of approximately 2.7 million
          units, mainly among families in the middle- and low-income strata [8], with a
          greater incidence in vulnerable groups like women, Indigenous peoples and

12    Of the total OSFPS portfolio as of June 2023, only 8.69% was for housing loans. The OSFPS that grant
      housing loans are in segments 1, 2, and 3, which according to the classification carry larger balances
      (S1=greater than US$80 million; S2=US$20 million-US$80 million; S3=US$5 million-US$20 million;
      S4=US$1 million-US$5 million; S5=up to US$1 million). Notably, 74% of all OSFPS (including
      mutualistas) belong to segments 3 to 5 and only 26% are in segments 1 and 2. Due to the size of their
      assets, the OSFPS can only access certain sources of funding.
13    Other than exceptions like Mutualista Pichincha and Mutualista Azuay, the rest of CONAFIPS’s OSFPS
      clients are not large enough to access loans from IDB Invest or other private sector financial institutions.
14    CONAFIPS Vision.
15    The study, “Inclusión Financiera en Ecuador: el cooperativismo de ahorro y crédito como alternativa,”
      found that credit unions have significantly greater reach than banks in cantons with lower-middle and low
      socioeconomic status, characterized by high levels of poverty based on unmet basic needs, higher
      rurality, and low levels of schooling. According to the study “La economía popular y solidaria y su aporte
      al crecimiento económico y desarrollo humano en Ecuador” 25% of deposits in PSE entities (credit unions
      and mutualistas) and 33.9% of its lending are in areas that are more than 50% rural, compared to just
      4.3% and 4.2%, respectively, for private banks.
                                                        -4-



          nationalities,16 and persons with disabilities.17 Furthermore, the housing sector is
          not exempt from the threat of climate change, which calls for resilient, sustainable
          housing solutions.
1.9       In all, 40% of the low-income population, which includes the PSE population, is
          unable to access homes worth more than US$23,000, and 80%, homes worth
          more than US$71,000 [9]. To address this problem, the Ministry of Urban
          Development and Housing (MIDUVI), as the agency in charge of national housing
          policy, has offered solutions through the Organic Law on Social-Interest Housing
          (LOVIS), with a strategy defined in the National Urban Policy.18 These solutions
          have focused on serving both the poor, vulnerable population (through subsidies
          and incentives via CCLIP EC-O0004) and the middle-income population with
          formal jobs, through access to bank loans (via guarantee 4699/OC-EC)
          (paragraph 1.22). As a result, the country does not currently have any public-sector
          housing-access facilities for a large percentage of families in the two income
          segments, namely middle- and lower-middle-income families (paragraph 1.23),
          that make up 45% of the population [10]. Furthermore, many of these families earn
          informal incomes, which makes it difficult for them to access financing at private
          banks. According to the National Survey of Employment, Unemployment, and
          Underemployment, in 2023, 28.7% of the middle- and lower-middle-income
          population lived in unfit housing.
1.10      Gender gaps. Women-led households face the largest housing deficits in the
          country. In 2021, 26% of households in Ecuador were led by women, and 21% of
          those (312,470 households) were vulnerable and living in poverty, with 17.6% of
          them living in moderate poverty. The housing shortage among this group is high
          (43.5%) [14]. These gaps are also seen in the middle- and lower-middle-income
          segments, in which women have more trouble accessing housing loans [15].




16    Ecuador’s 2022 census asked respondents to self-identify their ethnicities. The Council for the
      Development of the Nationalities and Peoples of Ecuador has determined that there are 14 nationalities
      and 18 Indigenous peoples living in the country.
17    The Government of Ecuador considers the following types of disabilities to exist in Ecuador, each of which
      can manifest in different ways and to different degrees, or in combination with any other: hearing, physical,
      intellectual, language, psychosocial, and visual.
18    The LOVIS establishes housing subsidies and incentives in the country. Executive Decree 405 defines
      the applicable legal regime, and Ministerial Agreement MIDUVI-2023-0023-A specifies the requirements
      and procedures for accessing the subsidies and incentives. Within this regulatory framework, there are
      two housing modalities: social interest housing (SIH), for poor or vulnerable beneficiaries and low-income
      individuals, and public interest housing (PIH), focused on the middle-income segment. The SIH and PIH
      regulations establish shared requirements, namely that: the dwelling is the beneficiary’s first property and
      is habitable according to MIDUVI standards; the beneficiary has not previously received similar support;
      and the maximum value of the property falls within the stipulated ranges (which during preparation of this
      operation were up to 178 unified basic wages (SBU) for SIH and from 178.01 to 229 SBU for PIH; these
      ranges may be modified in the future).
                                                      -5-



1.11     Housing gaps in households with persons with disabilities.19 All told, 28% of
         persons with severe or very severe disabilities are living in poverty [16].20 An
         estimated 7 of every 10 persons with disabilities living in poverty lack housing
         solutions, and an estimated 4,543 households include persons with severe or very
         severe disabilities living in poverty [17].21
1.12     Housing gaps for Indigenous peoples and nationalities.22 In Ecuador, the
         Indigenous and Afro-descendant populations make up around 12% of the total
         population.23 Housing conditions for Indigenous persons and Afro-descendants are
         worse than for the rest of the population, since their dwellings are made out of
         inadequate materials and may lack sufficient access to essential services.
         Nationwide, 10% of households are overcrowded, but this figure is almost
         9 percentage points higher for the Indigenous population (18.9%) and around
         5 percentage points higher for the Afro-descendant population (15.4%) [18].
         Notably, 17.9% of Indigenous households do not have access to the water supply
         system [19], compared to 9.3% of Mestizo households. Furthermore, 28.4% of
         Indigenous households lack sanitation services and 5.7% do not have electricity
         [20]. The quantitative housing deficit for Indigenous households is 29.3%,
         compared to 12% for Mestizo households.24 Moreover, the provinces with higher
         percentages of Indigenous population have larger gaps. For example, Napo and
         Chimborazo have quantitative housing deficits of 57.2% and 41%, respectively.
         Meanwhile, in provinces like Pichincha, which has a higher percentage of
         Mestizos, the deficit does not exceed 4.62% [21].
1.13     Impacts of climate change. Climate change has exacerbated Ecuador’s
         vulnerability, leading to higher temperatures and spatial and seasonal variations in
         rainfall observed throughout the national territory. Extreme events associated with
         rainfall have the potential to reach a total of 40,860 square kilometers of floodable
         area, or 15.9% of the country’s surface area, where approximately 7.17 million
         inhabitants live (2010). The inadequate housing infrastructure located in climate
         risk zones increases vulnerability to the effects of climate change [22]. In addition,
         an estimated 22% of the country’s energy consumption is associated with the
         residential and construction sectors, which together account for 16.6% of
         greenhouse gas emissions (with 8.9% coming from residential energy use) [23].
         Ecuador’s population is still not very aware of this problem, and despite recent
         efforts to promote the inclusion of sustainability strategies and climate change

19   These statistics only count individuals with severe disabilities (meaning the majority of tasks involved in
     daily life present significant challenges or are impossible; the individual requires help for self-care
     activities; disability of 50%-74%) and very severe disabilities (symptoms gravely impede the execution of
     daily activities; the person is unable to overcome environmental barriers and requires support and care
     from a third party; the disability severely affects their daily activities; disability of 75% to 95%). These
     classifications are set by the Ministry of Health for granting certificates of disability.
20   In Ecuador, 2 of every 10 people have some kind of disability. Of them, 14% (a total of 65,685 persons
     with disabilities) are living in poverty.
21   Simple estimate of housing need of 6.4%.
22   Defined in the Organic Law on Social-Interest Housing as “communes, communities, peoples, and
     nationalities.”
23   National Statistics and Census Institute, Ecuador Census 2022 reports 12.5%, while the National Survey
     of Employment, Unemployment, and Underemployment 2022 reports 12.4%.
24   The national deficit is 13.8%. Idem.
                                                      -6-



         considerations in housing solutions, the supply of and demand for such residences
         in the country are low.
1.14     Causes of the problem. There are two main causes of the housing shortage
         among the middle- and lower-middle-income population: (i) the first, which is
         circumstantial in nature, is the lack of access to finance,25 which has underlying
         credit supply and demand factors; and (ii) the second, which is more structural and
         sweeping in nature, is the lack of development of a housing market.
1.15     There are supply and demand factors underlying the PSE’s access to housing
         loans. On the demand side, imperfect information hampers proper assessment of
         potential clients’ risk profiles and restricts access to credit for the PSE middle- and
         lower-middle-income population (especially for individuals earning informal
         incomes). In Ecuador, three types of financial institutions provide first-tier housing
         loans: banks, credit unions, and mutualistas. In the PSE, housing needs are
         primarily met by credit unions and mutualistas, which constitute OSFPS. These
         OSFPS are strategic players in the housing sector, since they provide 26% of
         housing loans in the country [24]. Their main advantage is that unlike commercial
         banks, they have a high level of penetration in the country and significant
         knowledge of their members, which (partially) solves the problem of imperfect
         information, allowing them to better assess their clients’ risk profiles and, therefore,
         reach at least part of the low-income population [25] and even cover the population
         with informal incomes and the ability to pay that would otherwise be excluded from
         financing. In 2023, the OSFPS housing portfolio was worth approximately
         US$437.6 [26], with an average housing loan amount of US$62,515. In 2022, 25%
         of housing loans were for social housing with a rate of arrears of 2.5% [28].
1.16     On the supply side, as mentioned above (paragraph 1.3), the OSFPS face
         limitations on offering long-term financing for housing [29] since they are mainly
         funded by demand or fixed-term deposits from the public, which makes it
         impossible for them to obtain a sufficient flow of funds to cover loans over longer
         periods. These constraints have restricted the supply of housing loans, as well as
         the development of new lines of credit and the number of financial institutions that
         provide them [30].26 Due to this lack of long-term financial resources, the OSFPS
         need support from “second-tier” financial institutions. As mentioned above,
         CONAFIPS is the main institution operating as a strategic player given its
         penetration in low-income regions of the country and its market development
         capacity (paragraph 1.6). In the 2019-2023 period, CONAFIPS lent

25   Another major cause of the housing shortage problem, according to the 2021 Value Chain Study is the
     lack of supply of affordable housing. Although this is not expanded upon in this document and the
     operation does not address it directly, the operation is expected to have an indirect impact in two ways:
     (i) greater housing credit boosts demand and spurs supply; and (ii) the operation can create new financial
     instruments for promoting the supply of social housing.
26   The institutions do not have passive resources with sufficiently long tenors to enable them to offer housing
     loans. In other words, since mortgage loans are recovered over the long term and take a very long time
     to be paid back, they lead to a mismatch on the balance sheet. Typically, microloans granted by the
     OSFPS have an average term of 30 months, and housing loans, up to 140 months. In turn, CONAFIPS
     obtains funds for its operations through internal sources, with a maximum term of 1.5 years, and from
     external sources via development banks, with maximum terms of 15 years and 6 years (French
     Development Agency and IDB lending operations in different housing sectors, respectively). As a result,
     the long-term resources it can offer to the OSFPS are limited.
                                                       -7-



         US$94.5 million in second-tier loans [34] to finance housing, through 38 OSFPS.
         Behind those numbers is considerable unmet demand for housing loans that
         cannot be covered due to the aforementioned matching problems (the constraints
         faced by the OSFPS on offering long-term loans). In 2022, the unmet demand for
         housing loans from CONAFIPS was estimated to be US$208 million, and in 2023,
         it was US$279 million [35].27 These figures include demand from credit unions that
         already have housing product lines but have trouble raising funds, as well as from
         credit unions that are interested in offering housing products but are unable to do
         so because of their lack of experience and capacity.28,29 In 2022, CONAFIPS was
         estimated to have met the housing needs of 374 families in the PSE.
1.17     From the standpoint of more structural causes of housing credit market
         development for the PSE, there are a range of underlying factors: (i) weak
         institutional capacity; (ii) lack of adequate financial tools; and (iii) very limited
         financial products [8]. For instance, CONAFIPS—the most relevant strategic
         player for developing the housing finance market for this population—does not
         have a specific department for developing and monitoring the housing area.
         Accordingly, it cannot create basic tools for the market, such as systems for home
         appraisal and assessing borrowers’ credit profile, or support credit unions in doing
         so, nor can it further develop new housing products better tailored to the vulnerable
         population that promote sustainability considerations. These capacity constraints
         are heightened in OSFPS, due in part to their small size, with 58.2% of them
         holding less than US$5 million in assets.30
1.18     The financial market has mixed results in terms of inclusion of the vulnerable
         population and development of sustainable solutions. In lending to vulnerable
         populations, CONAFIPS has posted relatively high levels of inclusion. The
         cumulative amount of housing loans granted by CONAFIPS to women accounts
         for 42% of the funds it allocated to housing loans in 2022, near parity. Studies
         show that some women refrain from applying for housing loans out of fear and a
         lack of information [36]. However, in the case of CONAFIPS, the institution’s
         inclusion efforts31 are helping them overcome these barriers. For Indigenous
         peoples and nationalities, the gap is also relatively small, since the amount lent to
         persons who identify as part of this population segment accounts for 7% of the
         funds allocated to housing loans. According to national statistics, these individuals
         make up 8.6% of the population of employed persons over 18 in income quintiles
         3 and 4 [37]. For persons with disabilities, the gap is wider, as the amount lent by

27   Study of the credit unions’ demand for credit from CONAFIPS, 2021, in a universe of 318 OSFPS, of
     which 177 have real demand. Note that the CONAFIPS credit lines for housing are only for dwellings that
     fall within the parameters of the maximum social housing amounts.
28   From the financial perspective, it is difficult for the portfolios of OSFPS to offer housing loans, which are
     for larger amounts and require longer repayment periods; as a result, many OSFPS lack experience with
     them. In addition, and sometimes for the same reason, the OSFPS do not have effective methodologies
     in place to analyze borrowers’ payment capacity before granting loans, as required by the Office of the
     Superintendent of the Popular and Solidarity Economy.
29   Note that only 10% of the OSFPS with which CONAFIPS works offer housing finance. Source:
     CONAFIPS.
30   Office of the Superintendent of the Popular and Solidarity Economy, 2023.
31   In 2023, CONAFIPS was named Impact Champion (a prize for inclusive management) by the Financial
     Alliance for Women.
                                                   -8-



         CONAFIPS to such individuals represents only 1% of the total mortgage lending
         amount, even though persons with disabilities make up 4.6% of the population of
         employed persons over 18 [38]. To maintain the high levels of inclusion of women
         and Indigenous peoples and nationalities, and to increase the inclusion of persons
         with disabilities, the OSFPS must continue to receive training on these issues, and
         that training must be strengthened. Furthermore, campaigns are required on the
         financial inclusion of persons with disabilities for mortgages.
1.19     As for climate aspects, there is a low supply of and demand for housing with
         climate change considerations. Although Ecuador has made headway over the
         past few years on regulatory frameworks and public and private initiatives to
         promote sustainable construction, to a large extent these have not been applied
         or scaled up, and the country still needs to move forward with establishing
         processes to identify dwellings in areas that will face climate vulnerability in the
         future. As a result, few climate change considerations have been incorporated into
         the housing supply. One of the underlying causes behind this limited
         implementation of the frameworks developed, like the Ecuadorian Building
         Standards on Energy Efficiency, is that they have not been adopted locally.
         Furthermore, implementation requires additional technical capacities that are often
         not available [39]. Other challenges have also been identified, with regard to the
         development of local regulations on sustainable construction with climate change
         considerations, as well as to the respective mechanisms and processes for
         monitoring and controlling implementation [40]. This is compounded by the lack of
         awareness among stakeholders throughout the housing value chain, the OSFPS,
         and the PSE population of the potential impacts of climate change, sustainable
         construction strategies, and the costs and benefits of those strategies in housing
         projects, reflected in the scant supply of and limited demand for green housing
         finance in the sector.32 Notably, this situation demonstrates the need to strengthen
         institutions on issues of climate sustainability in the housing sector ecosystem in
         Ecuador, by training and raising awareness among PSE stakeholders, as well as
         by promoting and performing outreach about these types of dwellings and the
         associated regulatory framework, with a view to building the technical capacities
         required to foster the supply of and demand for sustainable housing.33
1.20     Rationale for the CCLIP and the first individual operation. In the context of the
         problems outlined above, the IDB will respond to the CONAFIPS request for a
         credit line through a multisector CCLIP (under multisector modality I), called
         “Financing the Housing and Microbusiness Needs of the Population of the Popular
         and Solidarity Economy” (EC-O0014) [41]. The first operation under this CCLIP,
         “Financing Housing Solutions for the Popular and Solidarity Economy” (EC-L1290)
         will focus on meeting the PSE population’s housing needs. Subsequent operations
         will be broader in scope, to also address the specific challenges of financing the
         productive sector. CONAFIPS estimates the total unmet demand for loans was
         US$818 million for 2023, broken down into US$279.7 million for housing loans and
         US$538.2 million for microloans [42]. The Bank has executed multiple projects to
         finance housing (4699/OC-EC, 5765/OC-BR, and 5352/OC-ES) and the

32   Currently, CONAFIPS’s green portfolio primarily contains productive loans.
33   MIDUVI is spearheading initiatives to promote green housing through various efforts to coordinate with
     strategic players, most notably the creation of a national sustainability certification.
                                                       -9-



         productive sector. These experiences demonstrate the soundness of the program
         strategy. Moreover, in several of these programs (EC-U0001 and ES-O0009) the
         IDB’s knowledge and experience in the housing and capital market sectors have
         proven to be highly complementary, leading to very positive outcomes. For
         example, the complementarity of knowledge between the two sectors made it
         possible for program EC-U0001 to flexibly adjust its program Operating
         Regulations to meet sector criteria, which translated into very satisfactory
         performance.
1.21     Strategy of the first operation. This first operation results from MIDUVI and
         CONAFIPS’s coordination to provide housing solutions to the middle- and
         lower-middle-income population (with formal and/or informal jobs) in the PSE
         through financing for housing loans and development of that market. CONAFIPS
         will be the borrower and executing agency for the operation and will have the dual
         task of contributing to the development of the country’s housing loan markets and
         channeling the funds through the OSFPS to enable the end beneficiaries in the
         PSE to access housing solutions. Given CONAFIPS’s and the OSFPS’s lack of
         long-term resources, this operation, through the credit it provides, is expected to
         increase the supply of housing loans in the market (relevant portfolio), which will
         ultimately address the housing sector’s unmet demand for housing solutions, while
         maintaining loan quality (to be reflected in an acceptable level of arrears). In
         addition to providing financial resources for the OSFPS, this operation will
         contribute to the development of housing loan markets, by allocating funds to the
         institutional strengthening of CONAFIPS and the OSFPS to bolster and develop
         strategic instruments including home appraisal tools, credit scoring for clients, tools
         for developing a secondary market for foreclosed homes, as well as the
         development of products and new housing lines for supply and demand. Moreover,
         resources will be allocated to strengthen climate change considerations and the
         inclusion of women, persons with disabilities, Indigenous peoples and nationalities,
         etc., as well as to perform outreach with and raise awareness among the end
         beneficiaries on these issues.
1.22     Bank experience in the country. This operation contributes to the IDB’s strategy
         of meeting housing needs in Ecuador through a comprehensive approach in the
         housing sector, contributing to creating housing loan and subsidy markets and
         diversifying attention to the various population segments in the country.
         Specifically, by focusing on the PSE population (middle and lower-middle income
         population), this operation complements the IDB’s prior operations there to meet
         the housing needs of the very vulnerable, low-income population (EC-O0004) and
         the middle- and upper-middle-income population with formal jobs (4699/OC-EC).
         More specifically, from 2013 to 2018 the Bank financed the National Social
         Housing Program – Stage II (2797/OC-EC), which achieved the primary objective
         of improving housing conditions for Ecuadorian households in the two
         lowest-income quintiles and benefited 16,320 households. In 2019, the CCLIP
         “Casa para Todos [Housing for All] Sector Program” (EC-O0004) was approved
         for US$200 million. It was focused on reducing the housing shortage for the two
         lowest-income quintiles of the Ecuadorian population through total and partial
         subsidies.34 At present, 83% of funds have been disbursed for the first operation

34   In the current regulations, partial subsidies are called “incentives.”
                                             - 10 -



       under the CCLIP “Housing Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable Households”
       (4788/OC-EC), approved for US$93.9 million. This operation has achieved the
       expected outcome of addressing the housing shortage, with a total of 2,299
       families occupying and using their homes as of December 2022. In
       November 2023, the second stage of the CCLIP “Housing Solutions for the Poor
       and Vulnerable Population” (5821/OC-EC) was approved for US$106.1 million
       (with an additional US$1.6 million from the grant facility to serve migrants). This
       stage also focuses on the lower-income segments of the population, by addressing
       the quantitative deficit, and for the first time, the qualitative deficit (that prevails in
       the country). In addition, in 2019, the Bank granted the Government of Ecuador a
       guarantee to issue a social bond (4699/OC-EC), which makes it possible, through
       a trust, for the country’s financial institutions that meet certain requirements to
       grant mortgage loans at preferential interest rates for the purchase of social
       interest housing (SIH) and public interest housing (PIH), thereby serving the
       banked middle and lower-middle-income population.
1.23   In addition to the Bank’s experience in the country’s housing sector, it has a
       successful track record executing effective operations with CONAFIPS in other
       areas. It financed CONAFIPS with loans 2651/OC-EC (“Global Credit Program for
       Microfinance Support in Ecuador,” for US$50.7 million, in 2012) and 5024/OC-EC
       (“Global Credit Program for Safeguarding the Productive Fabric and Employment,”
       for US$93.8 million, between 2020 and 2022), to support the economic recovery
       from the COVID-19 pandemic (this operation has closed financially, and the project
       completion report is being prepared). The Bank also has two other operations in
       Ecuador with CONAFIPS in its portfolio: loan 5183/OC-EC to finance sustainable
       electric transportation, approved in 2020, and loan 5857/OC-EC for biobusiness
       financing for a sustainable Amazon, approved in 2024.
1.24   In addition to these operations with the public sector, the IDB Group has a strategic
       relationship with the private sector through IDB Invest, with a view to seeking out
       and coordinating ways to address the housing shortage. Notably, IDB Invest is in
       dialogue with construction firms and developers in the country and with financial
       intermediaries. As for the construction sector, IDB Invest has held dialogues with
       Ecuador’s main builders and developers but has not finalized any operations yet,
       primarily due to the companies’ indebtedness (their borrowing levels exceed the
       risk parameters acceptable to IDB Invest) and also because such large- and
       medium-sized construction firms tend to build housing for high-end segments,
       given the greater risk entailed in transactions targeting the low-income population
       and so as not to be dependent on execution of subsidies and government capacity
       in the case of public funds. Notwithstanding, possibilities for working with private-
       sector builders continue to be explored, to develop affordable housing for the
       middle- and lower-middle income population. In that regard, this operation is
       expected to have a positive impact on private sector construction of affordable
       housing, since one of the main concerns of builders in this segment [8] is that the
       shotarge of financing for this population limits housing demand. Thus, heightened
       demand for housing solutions could motivate construction, which could be financed
       with IDB Invest resources. As for the financial sector, there is the possibility that
       IDB Invest could finance OSFPS directly. However, with the exception of credit
       unions of relevant size with a sound financial position (like Mutualista Pichincha),
       the rest of CONAFIPS’s OSFPS clients are not large enough to access loans from
                                             - 11 -



       IDB Invest or other private sector financial institutions. Nevertheless, this operation
       will seek to coordinate with IDB Invest, to strategically support those private
       institutions with the potential to develop to the point they can be financed in the
       private sector, reducing their dependance on the public sector and creating
       synergies within the IDB Group.
1.25   Lessons learned. This operation has been developed due to several lessons
       learned from IDB-financed housing operations with MIDUVI. In particular, one of
       the major challenges encountered in earlier operations was the difficulty
       addressing the housing problems of the middle- and lower-middle-income
       population through bank loans. This problem is amplified in the population with
       informal jobs. Specifically, loan 4788/OC-EC, “Housing Solutions for Poor and
       Vulnerable Households,” initially included a component that provided a US$6,000
       subsidy towards the purchase of social housing. This subsidy was complemented
       by a preferential interest rate offered by the institutions belonging to the trust in the
       “Financing Low-Income Housing in Ecuador” project (4699/OC-EC). However, it
       turned out that the families eligible for the US$6,000 subsidy (with household
       incomes of less than twice the unified basic wage) did not meet the minimum credit
       profile to obtain mortgage loans from the banking institutions that belonged to the
       trust with which they would have obtained the preferential interest rate. This
       highlighted the need to pursue new solutions to improve housing conditions for the
       population without access to bank loans. On the one hand, this led to the second
       stage of the CCLIP (5821/OC-EC, approved by the Board of Executive Directors
       on 15 November 2023), which addresses the qualitative housing deficit for this
       population by improving existing housing (paragraph 1.22). On the other, the need
       became evident for the Bank to work with new financial entities like CONAFIPS
       through the credit unions and mutualistas in order to support the low- and lower-
       middle-income population that is not eligible to take out loans in traditional banks,
       which was one of the primary motives behind this operation. Along the same lines,
       the value chain study (2021) [43] (that evaluated the status of the country’s housing
       sector ecosystem) identified that there is still a significant gap in access to housing
       for the middle- and lower-middle-income population (mostly earning informal
       incomes). This finding reaffirmed the aforementioned need to work with new
       financial intermediaries in the housing sector, like CONAFIPS, that do business
       with this population. Furthermore, in terms of more operational lessons learned
       and based on the Bank’s prior experience executing programs with CONAFIPS
       (paragraph 1.23), it is important to highlight the utility and importance of collecting
       detailed information on the end beneficiaries in order to measure the development
       impact—which means the Bank must not be limited to the administrative
       information provided by the OSFPS. To apply these lessons, the operation will
       further strengthen institutional capacity, with a view to establishing the
       mechanisms needed to collect such information. The Bank also plans to
       complement these initiatives with technical-cooperation funding (in preparation) to
       support training, outreach, and information-gathering on the climate sustainability
       of the housing, which is an especially weak area in the PSE sector.
1.26   Nonfinancial additionality. This operation will address the housing needs of the
       PSE population that, due to its income levels (low and medium-low), is not being
       served by other housing policy programs in the country. As described above, this
       is a challenge that MIDUVI has faced in executing previous operations, and this
                                            - 12 -



       operation will tackle it for the first time. In addition, the program will contribute to
       developing housing loan markets, and CONAFIPS will be able to strengthen
       consolidation of housing departments in the financial system, create tools and
       products to efficiently manage housing loans (primarily mortgages), explore
       models that can be replicated with funds from Ecuadorian financial sector
       institutions seeking to expand their participation by providing accessible,
       affordable loans for the population whose housing needs are not currently being
       met. It will also improve CONAFIPS’s and its financial intermediaries’ balance
       sheet management, by matching financing terms without the risks of prepayment
       and default typically involved in housing loans. In addition, concurrently with the
       operation, the Bank will provide support for strengthening CONAFIPS and its
       intermediaries regarding the housing shortage, through exchanges with other
       development banks and national and international housing organizations in Latin
       America and the Caribbean like Sociedad Hipotecaria Federal, Findeter, Caixa
       Econômica, and Infonavit, so they can develop new financing products to address
       the supply of and demand for housing. Some of these exchanges are already
       taking place; for example, CONAFIPS participated in the Regional Forum on Urban
       and Housing Financing held in Ecuador in September 2023. Lastly, CONAFIPS
       will be able to step up its measurement and contribution to climate change
       considerations and improve financial inclusion in housing products for vulnerable
       populations.
B.     Objective, components, and cost
1.27   The general objective of the multisector CCLIP is to contribute to developing
       the market for housing loans and productive credit for the PSE population with a
       focus on sustainability and the financial inclusion of women, persons with
       disabilities, and Indigenous peoples and nationalities, among others.
1.28   The general objective of the first operation is to meet the housing needs of the
       PSE population through the delivery of financial resources to the OSFPS, and to
       contribute to the development of housing loan markets with a focus on
       sustainability and the financial inclusion of women, persons with disabilities, and
       Indigenous peoples and nationalities, among others. The specific objective of the
       first operation is to better meet the PSE population’s housing needs by financing
       the OSFPS.
1.29   To achieve these objectives, the operation was structured into a first component
       to address the housing shortage by providing financing to OSFPS and a second
       for institution-strengthening for market development. It will also include a program
       administration and management component. The theory of change annex
       (optional link 3) illustrates the problem’s relationship to the components and the
       specific objectives.
1.30   Component 1. Housing finance solutions for the PSE population
       (US$68.9 million). This component will help the country better meet housing
       needs by increasing the housing loan resources available in the market (supply),
       which is expected to address the unmet demand for credit and thus increase the
       number of families in the PSE whose housing needs are met. CONAFIPS will lend
       resources to the OSFPS, which will in turn provide loans to the PSE population to
       help them meet their housing procurement and improvement needs. CONAFIPS
       offers the “Mi Casa” (My Home) housing line, funds from which can be used to
                                                   - 13 -



         purchase, build, expand, or renovate a dwelling. The eligibility parameters that set
         the amounts, terms, interest rates, and type of dwelling to be financed by each
         credit line are defined in the product datasheets in the program Credit Regulations,
         equivalent to program Operating Regulations (optional link 4). This component
         may also finance other CONAFIPS financial products in the area of housing policy
         that were agreed upon beforehand with the IDB in the program Credit Regulations
         and will foster achievement of the specific objective. As part of this component,
         and in conjunction with the additional efforts financed under Component 2, the
         operation is expected to maintain or improve inclusion of vulnerable PSE
         populations, such as women, persons with disabilities, and Indigenous peoples
         and nationalities, to meet their housing needs (home purchase, construction,
         expansion, or improvement). Accordingly, relevant indicators and targets have
         been established.
1.31     Component 2. Development of emerging housing loan markets
         (US$1 million). This component will contribute to the operation’s general and
         specific objective by contributing to the development of housing loan markets, with
         a focus on sustainability and financial inclusion. The component will strategically
         work on market development by strengthening the housing ecosystem through:35
         (i) an in-depth diagnostic assessment and preparion of a roadmap for the strategic
         development of housing markets for the PSE population; (ii) designs and/or
         redesigns to improve specific housing products and tools tailored to the PSE.
         Although the designs will be based on the conclusions of the diagnostic
         assessment and the roadmap, at this stage we estimate the following could be
         potentially relevant: tools for assessing assets underlying home mortgage loans,
         credit scoring mechanisms for PSE clients, development of a secondary housing
         market, development of construction credit, and design of new credit lines for
         conventional, sustainable, and inclusive housing, among others; (iii) staff training
         and consolidation to form full-time housing teams in financial institutions to manage
         specific housing products and instruments; and (iv) training workshops and
         campaigns for outreach on and promotion of the OSFPS housing products
         (including new housing, sustainable housing, and inclusive housing products
         available for women, persons with disabilities, and Indigenous peoples and
         nationalities, etc.). The Bank plans to supplement the institution-strengthening
         efforts with technical-cooperation funds to enable the interagency exchange of
         knowledge (with MIDUVI and other national and international housing loan
         organizations) to further strengthen the country’s housing ecosystem.
1.32     Program administration and management expenses (US$100,000). Given
         CONAFIPS’s institutional capacity (reflected in the institutional capacity analysis
         platform document) and the fact that execution will not be particularly complex, the
         Bank does not consider it necessary to form a specific management team for this
         monitoring the operation. However, CONAFIPS will designate a contact person on
         its staff who will be responsible for delivering the information the Bank needs
         throughout execution and until the project is closed. Moreover, US$50,000 will be
         allocated to supporting operation management and implementation, including
         hiring staff to support procurement and technical aspects, and US$50,000 will be


35   The value-added tax generated in this component can be considered a local counterpart contribution.
                                           - 14 -



       allocated to contracting auditing services to prepare the annual audited financial
       statements.
1.33   Main results indicators. As an outcome of Component 1, the number of
       households whose housing needs are met by OSFPS is expected to grow, through
       the increase in the amount of funds delivered to PSE households to meet their
       housing needs. This will be accompanied by improvement in the OSFPS’s relevant
       housing portfolio, with quality parameters remaining constant (measured by the
       relative nonperforming housing loan portfolio). As an expected outcome of
       Component 2, the country will establish conditions that will make it possible to
       better address the housing shortage in a more inclusive way that will be
       sustainable over the long term. This operation is expected to strengthen the
       OSFPS’s capacities, to be measured through the indicators on the establishment
       and/or strengthening of housing departments in OSFPS, implementation of
       housing loan instruments and products, and the number of credit unions that have
       passed the various training modules (management of housing lines; climate
       change sustainability and risk management; gender inclusion and the inclusion of
       persons with disabilities and Indigenous peoples and nationalities). It is also
       expected to implement a pilot that puts into operation one of the products or tools
       designed under the component. The pilot is expected to have a demonstration
       effect making it possible to scale up solutions to the entire system. Note that
       despite its much smaller allocation, Component 2 is highly strategic, as it
       represents the very first effort to diversify housing loan tools and products and to
       raise awareness and strengthen the OSFPS ecosystem’s capacities for
       addressing the crosscutting issues of sustainable and inclusive housing. The two
       components, coupled with successive operations under the CCLIP, are expected
       to have long-term impacts on market development and on addressing at scale the
       needs of the PSE.
1.34   Beneficiaries. The program beneficiaries will be CONAFIPS itself and the OSFPS
       that will meet the demand for housing loans with long-term resources and benefit
       from the institution-strengthening activities for developing the financing market, by
       creating new housing products and strengthening their current ones, making them
       more inclusive and climatically sustainable. To be eligible for the first component,
       the OSFPS will have been authorized by CONAFIPS and will have in place the
       methodology for managing mortgage loans. For the second component, the
       eligible OSFPS will also include ones that do not have a mortgage lending
       methodology established but are interested in offering such loans and have the
       potential to do so, as well as other organizations that are strategic for developing
       the mortgage loan market. The end beneficiaries of the operation will be the
       families and individuals who belong to Ecuador’s PSE, are considered eligible by
       the OSFPS, earn middle and lower-middle incomes, and have access to financing
       (through credit unions and mutualistas); they will be able to improve their living
       conditions and those of their families thanks to the new access to housing loans.
       Lastly, the housing improvements are expected to positively impact their quality of
       life. With the first component, the program is expected to serve some 5,062 [44]
       families nationwide through 75 second-tier loan operations, and with the second
       component, some 10 OSFPS. The specific eligibility parameters are set out in
       paragraph 3.3. The eligibility criteria for the OSFPS and the end beneficiaries, as
       well as the specific parameters, will be included in the program Credit Regulations.
                                                    - 15 -



C.       Strategic alignment
1.35     Strategic alignment of the CCLIP and first operation. The CCLIP and its first
         operation are consistent with the IDB Group Institutional Strategy: Transforming
         for Scale and Impact (CA-631) and are aligned primarily with the objective
         of reducing poverty and inequality, by facilitating access to housing for the
         middle- and lower-middle-income population and providing training for gender
         inclusion and the inclusion of persons with disabilities and Indigenous peoples and
         nationalities. They also align with the following operational focus areas: (i) gender
         equality and inclusion of diverse population groups; (ii) institutional capacity, rule
         of law, and citizen security; and (iii) sustainable, resilient, and inclusive
         infrastructure by promoting formal housing with sustainability features; (iv) social
         protection and human capital development, by providing access to better living
         conditions resulting in better quality of life for the most vulnerable population; and
         (v) productive development and innovation through private sector participation; as
         well as the following sector framework documents: Urban Development and
         Housing (GN-2732-11), Long-Term Financing (GN-2768-12), and Gender and
         Diversity (GN-2800-13); and the IDB Group Country Strategy with Ecuador
         2022-2025 (GN-3103-1) priority areas of “strengthening of social progress,” by
         contributing to the strategic objective to “expand access to and improve coverage
         of basic and social services” by reducing the housing shortage, and “develop the
         productive sector.”
1.36     This operation has been analyzed using the Joint MDB Assessment Framework
         for IDB Group Paris Alignment (GN-3142-1), and it is deemed to be aligned with
         the Paris Agreement adaptation target and the Paris Agreement mitigation target,
         in both cases based on a specific analysis for financial intermediaries. This
         alignment derives from the development of a roadmap, trainings, and outreach to
         support CONAFIPS in managing the physical and transition risks of climate change
         in its risk management systems.
1.37     It bears noting that this operation will trigger, for the first time, CONAFIPS initiatives
         to measure, promote, and include climate change mitigation and adaptation
         measures for its housing finance products. These initiatives will be carried out
         through the Component 2 institution-strengthening activities that entail providing
         training and outreach on housing sustainability considerations for the various
         strategic players in the sector, including CONAFIPS, the OSFPS, and the end
         beneficiary. In addition, the IDB will support CONAFIPS in developing instruments
         to monitor the implementation of green housing measures.36 These dwellings will
         be leveraged through the financial intermediaries and financed by Component 1.
         According to the joint methodology of the multilateral development banks for
         tracking climate change adaptation finance, at least 14.5% of the total operation
         amount is conservatively estimated to be invested in climate finance, for measures
         that contribute to the dwellings’ resilience and energy and water efficiency. To
         bolster these efforts and reach higher climate finance percentages in the future,
         the IDB will allocate technical-cooperation resources (in preparation) to support,

36   These include energy and water efficiency mitigation measures (like efficient lighting and thermal
     insulation, and water-saving bathroom fixtures, respectively) in accordance with the Ecuadorian Building
     Standards, and location-dependent adaptation measures pursuant to the climate risk maps generated by
     the Ministry of the Environment and Ecological Transition.
                                                - 16 -



         among other measures, creation of a mechanism to measure climate financing for
         housing for the OSFPS, strengthening of the system and the green building codes,
         and development of a nationwide green housing certification tool.
D.       Viability analysis
1.38     Technical viability. According to the institutional capacity analysis platform
         review, the program is highly viable due to the executing agency’s capacity and
         experience with housing finance lines of credit. The institutional capacity analysis
         platform document indicates that CONAFIPS has recent experience executing
         public investment projects with international cooperation funds, and that its
         performance in the projects executed over the past three years has been
         satisfactory. The staff members of all the technical finance departments that will
         be in charge have sufficient capacity, experience, and time to manage new
         operations. For the areas in which the institution needs to update its knowledge,
         such as procurement, the operation provides for resources to retain an individual
         who possesses the specific knowledge needed. For issues that require
         institution-strengthening, like housing and the crosscutting inclusion aspects
         (gender, diversity, and climate change), funds will be used through Component 2.
         The operation details will be specified in the program Credit Regulations.
1.39     Socioeconomic viability. An economic analysis was performed to determine if
         the program would be economically profitable. It was based on the cost-benefit
         analysis methodology, which monetizes all of the planned elements. The
         intervention is assumed to start in 2024 and, to account for the program’s long-term
         effects, the benefits are estimated for a period of 35 years at a discount rate of
         12%. The results of this analysis suggest that the program’s net benefit in the
         period will be US$1,071.85 million. In terms of benefit-cost ratio, the program will
         provide an estimated benefit of US$2.45 for every dollar invested, with an internal
         rate of return of 25.9%. Sensitivity analyses were also conducted, and they show
         that the program will continue to be socially profitable even when more
         conservative values are assumed for various parameters in the analysis.
1.40     Socioenvironmental viability. Pursuant to the environmental and social policy
         framework (GN-2965-23), the program is classified as a financial intermediary
         operation, with a moderate environmental and social risk rating. The climate
         change and disaster risk is also rated as moderate. The program supports the
         provision of mortgage loans for the PSE population to finance, for example, the
         purchase, construction, or improvement of dwellings through the OSFPS. The
         results of the environmental and social due diligence show that the subprojects to
         be financed by the operation will have a low level of socioenvironmental risk, since
         the average financing value per subproject will be under US$50,000. A maximum
         amount was established for PIH, currently 229 SBU37 per subproject. The program
         will not finance subprojects that are category A or B or have heightened
         socioenvironmental risks.
1.41     The program’s potential environmental and social impacts will be managed
         through implementation of an environmental and social risk management system
         to be based on application of the executing agency’s socioenvironmental
         management policies and tools, including the environmental and social risk

37   For 2023, the SBU in Ecuador is US$450, so the maximum amount per subproject would be US$103,050.
                                           - 17 -



       management system, compliance with the IDB exclusion list, local legislation, and
       additional exclusion and eligibility criteria (required link 3). These environmental
       and social requirements will form the “program environmental and social
       management system” and will be included in the program Credit Regulations.
1.42   Institutional and financial viability. The institutional capacity analysis platform
       review found no major institutional weaknesses. The only area of improvement
       identified was in project management, with the recommendation to provide training
       on earned value management, which is a tool the institution has not used in the
       past three years. The review also identified strengths in project management, as
       well as in technical quality management, human resources management,
       procurement management, and financial management. Given the institution’s
       extensive experience in managing credit lines, and its good financial rating, it is
       considered to have the necessary institutional and fiduciary elements in place to
       be viable. Even so, Component 2 includes activities to strengthen specific housing
       considerations and incorporate inclusion and climate change considerations in
       housing.

                     II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.     Financing instruments
2.1    Modality and financial structure. The proposed modality I multisector CCLIP is
       for up to US$300 million. It will be led by the Housing and Urban Development
       Division (CSD/HUD) and the Connectivity, Markets, and Finance Division
       (IFD/CMF) and is expected to contain three individual operations. In 2022, the
       OSFPS had a housing portfolio of approximately US$551.9 million, of which
       25.74% (US$142.1 million) was for social housing loans. The CONAFIPS request
       is based on estimated unmet demand for housing finance and microloans
       (US$149 million in 2021, US$208 million in 2022, and an estimated
       US$279 million in 2023 for housing finance; and US$311 million in 2021,
       US$385 million in 2022, and an estimated US$538 million in 2023 for microloans)
       (optional link 5). The Government of Ecuador asked for CONAFIPS to be the
       borrower and executing agency for the CCLIP and one of the individual operations.
       CONAFIPS satisfactorily complies with all of the eligibility requirements
       established for the CCLIP and with the operational guidelines (paragraph 3.1).
2.2    The multisector CCLIP is a strategic instrument designed to provide the country
       with sustained financial and technical support, to help it reach its medium- and
       long-term housing and productivity targets. As for housing, not only will the CCLIP
       improve accessibility to housing for the middle- and lower-middle-income
       population, but it will also expand and diversify housing options over time, making
       them more inclusive and allowing for the establishment of a long-term agenda for
       developing markets and delving deeper into climate change issues, which have
       not been adequately addressed. As for productivity, the CCLIP will make it possible
       to provide the target population with funds to improve their business productivity.
       Furthermore, positive synergies throughout the CCLIP can reasonably be
       assumed to exist due to the relationship between housing for this population and
       its productivity. According to CONAFIPS [45], 46% of the population that accesses
       its funds conducts at least some of their productive activity in the home. Therefore,
       improving housing conditions could positively impact their businesses.
                                               - 18 -



      Furthermore, individuals who take out productive microloans will be able to
      establish a credit history, which could facilitate their access to a mortgage loan.
      From the operational perspective, the CCLIP will make it possible to streamline the
      preparation of subsequent operations, by bringing down transaction costs. It will
      also help mitigate the risk of an increased incidence of poverty by improving
      habitability conditions and strengthening the productive sector, an issue identified
      in the IDB Group country strategy.
2.3   The first operation under the CCLIP has been structured as an investment loan
      under the global credit modality, pursuant to Operational Policy OP-309. Funds will
      be delivered to the financial intermediaries (meaning the OSFPS), which will in turn
      finance housing projects. The multisector CCLIP will be for a total of
      US$300 million, and this first loan operation will be for US$70 million, to be
      financed with the Bank’s Ordinary Capital resources and disbursed over a period
      of four years. Demand for the second operation is estimated at US$120 million,
      focused on productive credits. The remainder of the resources under the CCLIP
      will be determined in accordance with client demand based on market needs in
      Ecuador, giving priority to a productive credit approach. The CCLIP is expected to
      last a total of 10 years, depending on the pace of resource execution pursuant to
      the CCLIP Operational Guidelines (GN-2246-15) and the use of Ordinary Capital
      resources, in a global credit operation.

                                 Table 1 - Cost and financing (US$ millions)*
       Components                                                         IDB        Total        %
      Component 1. Housing finance solutions for the PSE population        68.9        68.9      98.43
      Component 2. Development of emerging housing loan markets             1.0         1.0       1.43
       a. Diagnostic study and roadmap                                      0.2         0.2       0.29
       b. Design of housing finance tools and products                      0.3         0.3       0.43
       c. Housing teams trained and consolidated                            0.2         0.2       0.29
       d. Outreach and awareness campaigns                                  0.1         0.1       0.14
       e. Training workshops on inclusion and climate change                0.2         0.2       0.29
      Program administration and management                                 0.1         0.1       0.14
       a. Audited financial statements                                     0.05        0.05       0.07
       b. Program management support                                       0.05        0.05       0.07
       Total                                                                  70         70        100
      * Costs for subcomponents and main activities are indicative (see details in required link 1).

                             Table 2 - Disbursement schedule (US$ millions)
       Components                                 Year 1 Year 2      Year 3         Year 4       Total
       Component 1                                17.225 17.225      17.225         17.225        68.9
       Component 2                                   0.55    0.35        0.5           0.5         0.3
       Program administration and management        0.025   0.025      0.025         0.025         0.1
       Total                                         17.8    17.6       17.3          17.3        70.0
       Percentage (%)                               25.43   25.14      24.71         24.71       100.0


B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks
2.4   Pursuant to the environmental and social policy framework (GN-2965-23), this is
      classified as a financial intermediary operation, with a moderate environmental and
      social risk rating (paragraph 1.40).
2.5   The program’s potential environmental and social impacts will be managed
      through implementation of an environmental and social risk management system
                                            - 19 -



      to be based on enforcement of the executing agency’s socioenvironmental
      management policies and tools, including the environmental and social risk
      management system, compliance with the IDB exclusion list, local legislation, and
      additional exclusion and eligibility criteria (required link 3). These environmental
      and social requirements will form the program environmental and social
      management system and will be included in the program Credit Regulations
      (optional link 4).
C.    Fiduciary risks
2.6   According to the fiduciary team, and as noted in Annex III, no fiduciary risks are
      foreseen.
D.    Other risks and key issues
2.7   A change in CONAFIPS’s top authorities, due to the government transition and
      upcoming elections (paragraph 1.1) could push back the start of the operation.
      This risk is being mitigated through the IDB’s ongoing dialogue and engagement
      with the new CONAFIPS and government authorities, who confirmed their interest
      in moving forward with processing the operation, to support timely, proper
      fulfillment of the commitments made. Therefore, the risk of a delayed program start
      is low. That said, there is a high risk that higher interest rates in international capital
      markets could mean the IDB financing will not be profitable for CONAFIPS or the
      OSFPS, since maximum first-tier rates are fixed and established by the Central
      Bank of Ecuador. Although this risk should be avoided, it is not within the IDB’s
      control. Notably, in recent months there has been an increase in the maximum rate
      that would make housing finance viable at this time. This is the result of a process
      that has benefitted from the dialogue between the authority and financial
      institutions for housing; if not possible, an adjustment to the rate ceiling would
      affect the sector nationwide, with social consequences (restricted credit for
      housing, which will perpetuate the housing shortage) as well as economic ones
      (paralysis of a sector that drives the country’s GDP and creates jobs).
2.8   Sustainability of the operation. Once the operation has been executed, the
      sustainability of the specific objective will be based on market development
      through the institutional strengthening and awareness-raising of CONAFIPS and
      its financial intermediaries, which will be able to offer more sustainable and
      inclusive housing products and enable OSFPS that did not previously offer housing
      loans to do so. Likewise, this strength will allow the OSFPS to access other
      sources of financing or funds from CONAFIPS, without having to depend on
      international financing. The end beneficiary population will be able to enjoy their
      homes over the long term and will have greater access to inclusive and climatically
      sustainable housing.

                III. EXECUTION MECHANISM AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR
                       MONITORING AND EVALUATION OF RESULTS

A.    Execution mechanism
3.1   Borrower, executing agency, and guarantor. The CCLIP borrower and
      executing agency will be CONAFIPS, whose objective is to foster financial
      inclusion in Ecuador’s PSE sector, through the OSFPS. CONAFIPS has
                                                      - 20 -



          satisfactorily executed IDB loans 2651/OC-EC (“Global Credit Program for
          Microfinance Support in Ecuador,” for US$50.7 million, in 2012) and 5024/OC-EC
          (“Global Credit Program for Safeguarding the Productive Fabric and Employment,”
          for US$93.8 million, between 2020 and 2022). It will also be the executing agency
          for the First Individual Operation under the CCLIP for the Financing of Sustainable
          Electric Transportation in Ecuador (5184/TC-EC, being modified) and the BASE
          Program – Biobusiness Financing for a Sustainable Amazon in Ecuador
          (EC-L1286, approved in February 2024),38 and complies with IDB Operational
          Policy OP-301 on eligible borrowers. The institutional capacity analysis platform
          report,39 its findings, and the risk matrix all conclude that the institution has
          sufficient capacity to execute several operations simultaneously.
3.2       CONAFIPS has been rated AA+ by Union Ratings and obtains funds from public
          sector financial institutions, as well as from multilateral organizations. In late 2022,
          CONAFIPS had assets worth US$637 million, liabilities of US$362 million, and
          US$17 million in profits. These figures reflect its technical and financial solvency.
          The CONAFIPS team that currently executes the housing lines’ resources will be
          in charge of executing the resources for this operation, following the usual
          procedures (specified in the Credit Regulations, optional link 4). For the purposes
          of this program, only occasional management support will be needed, and a
          special execution unit is not required. Therefore, CONAFIPS will execute the
          project within the framework of its existing organizational, administrative, and
          financial structure. The Financial Products Office will be responsible for program
          administration and coordination with the IDB. The Risk Management Office will
          work with the institution’s various administrative, operational, and financial bodies
          to ensure compliance with credit conditions, pursuant to internal procedures. The
          Popular and Solidarity Finance System Organizations Development Office will
          handle the environmental and social aspects of the loans and will ensure that the
          appointed employees have the necessary skills and receive appropriate training.
3.3       Eligibility of the OSFPS and the end beneficiaries. To access resources under
          Component 1, the OSFPS will have successfully passed the comprehensive
          performance assessment done by CONAFIPS to work with its products. This
          means that they will have the real-estate loan management methodology in place
          and will have satisfied the requirements for requesting the funds as needed. To be
          eligible to use the funds under Component 1, the end beneficiaries must belong to
          the PSE pursuant to its policies and procedures. The funds must be granted to
          middle- and lower-middle-income individuals, as established by the regulatory
          framework of the national housing policy. The OSFPS must also deem the
          beneficiaries creditworthy. The beneficiaries of the “Mi Casa” products will be able
          to use the funds for finished housing, construction of housing on their own land,
          renovations, expansion, reconstruction and repair of housing, purchase of land,
          and construction of housing. Note that historically, 89% of all the funds transferred
          to the OSFPS for housing loans are executed within eight months of receipt. For
          Component 2, the funds may be used by CONAFIPS and by all OSFPS that
          currently meet the CONAFIPS requirements for working with its products and that
          need institutional strengthening, workshops, and awareness-raising campaigns for

38    In preparation.
39    Since this report was prepared recently, it does not need to be redone for this operation.
                                           - 21 -



      the PSE beneficiary population on conventional, sustainable, and inclusive
      housing products for women, persons with disabilities, and Indigenous peoples
      and nationalities, among others. They could also be used by other OSFPS that are
      deemed strategic for market development. The eligibility parameters will be
      established in the program Credit Regulations.
3.4   Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan.
      As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the
      loan, CONAFIPS will approve and implement the program Credit
      Regulations, under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank. This
      condition is necessary in order to establish the instructions, structure,
      guidelines, and procedures to be followed by the executing agency to ensure
      successful execution of the components for addressing the housing
      shortage, institution-strengthening, and program administration and
      management (paragraph 1.29).
3.5   Partial waiver of Bank policies. The Board of Executive Directors is asked to
      approve a partial waiver of the Bank Policy on Guarantees Required from the
      Borrower (OP-303), for the Republic of Ecuador to guarantee only the financial
      obligations, including interest and fees, derived from the loan contract between
      CONAFIPS and the Bank. Pursuant to the Code of Planning and Public Finance,
      and to its organic statute, CONAFIPS is a public agency of the State and, as the
      borrower, is responsible for executing the projects financed with those resources.
      Furthermore, it enjoys financial and legal stability that allows it to guarantee
      long-term legal certainty in its operations, while maintaining its administrative,
      financial, economic, and management autonomy and adhering to the Constitution
      of the Republic and the country’s other laws. Precedents for this request are found
      in operations with similar execution arrangements in Ecuador (5676/OC-EC,
      5024/OC-EC, and 4759/OC-EC) and the region (5169/TC-CO, 4939/OC-CO,
      5083/OC-ES, 4567/GN-ES, and 3271/OC-ES, among others).
3.6   CONAFIPS will be responsible for: (i) administering the financial resources;
      (ii) planning execution of the loan, preparing the annual work plans, and updating
      the procurement plan; (iii) hiring and supervising consulting firms, services;
      (iv) preparing and processing payments; (v) preparing financial statements and
      disbursement requests; and (vi) contracting the financial auditing services that will
      prepare the annual audited financial statements.
3.7   Procurement. Procurement processes conducted under Component 2 and the
      project administration and management component will adhere to the Policies for
      the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (GN-2349-15), and the
      Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB
      (GN-2350-15).
3.8   Annual work plan. The annual work plan will guide implementation of the program
      components. It will contain the program’s physical and financial targets and will
      serve as the foundation for the periodic reviews of program progress.
3.9   Program Credit Regulations. All program implementation considerations will be
      steered by the program Credit Regulations. Among other items, these regulations
      will specify the: (i) executing agency’s required institutional capacities; (ii) process
                                            - 22 -



       of granting and delivering funds to the OSFPS; (iii) Component 2 execution
       considerations; and (iv) environmental and social requirements (required link 3).
3.10   Retroactive financing. The project is expected to retroactively finance, as a
       charge against the loan proceeds, up to US$14 million (20% of the proposed loan
       amount) in expenses incurred, first for the activities described in Component 1
       (housing finance) and Component 2 (institution strengthening), provided they align
       with the program Credit Regulations, and provided that requirements substantially
       similar to those established in the loan contract have been satisfied. These
       expenses must have been incurred on or after 10 August 2023 (the project profile
       approval date), but in no case will expenses incurred more than 18 months before
       the loan approval date be included.
3.11   Financial management and audits. Financial management will follow the
       Guidelines set forth in document OP-273-12. Annual audited financial statements
       will be delivered within 120 days following the closing date of each fiscal year and,
       for the final audit, following the date of the final disbursement. If retroactive
       financing is applied, reasonable assurance reports will be required for recognition
       of the funds assigned to Component 1.
B.     Arrangements for monitoring and evaluation of results
3.12   Monitoring. Program progress will be monitored through the following
       instruments: (i) semiannual progress reports on execution by output, prepared by
       CONAFIPS and reviewed jointly with the Bank; (ii) semiannual reports updating
       the annual work plan and procurement plan; (iii) monthly reports on the use of the
       disbursed proceeds; (iv) final program report prepared by CONAFIPS, to be
       submitted to the Bank in the 90 days following the final justification of funds for the
       first operation under the program; (v) regular IDB-CONAFIPS meetings;
       (vi) financial audits performed by an independent auditing firm acceptable to the
       IDB; and (vii) on-site supervisions by the Bank.
3.13   Evaluations. The monitoring and evaluation plan (required link 2) details the
       evaluation arrangements. A midterm evaluation will be conducted at 90 days after
       the date on which 50% of proceeds have been disbursed or after 24 months of
       execution, whichever occurs first, to identify the progress made on the output,
       outcome, and process indicators. A final evaluation will also be conducted and will
       make it possible to verify achievement of the specific objective and to determine
       attribution. This final evaluation will be conducted once the final disbursement has
       been paid out. It will include an ex post economic analysis (cost-benefit), financed
       by the Bank as part of program closing, to assess the social returns of program
       activities. It will be conducted at the end of program execution using
       nonreimbursable resources.
3.14   The Bank will prepare a program completion report documenting the results
       obtained from project implementation. It will also carry out a qualitative evaluation
       to validate the program’s theory of change in the Ecuadorian context, as a first step
       towards a potential impact assessment that will rigorously measure the program’s
       contribution to the general objective with attribution.
                                         - 23 -



                               IV. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

4.1   Eligibility of the CCLIP. The CCLIP complies with the eligibility conditions
      established in the CCLIP Operational Guidelines (GN-2246-15), since: (i) its
      objective and the spheres to be financed are included in the IDB Group Country
      Strategy with Ecuador 2022-2025 (GN-3103-1), due to its contribution to
      expanding access and improving coverage of basic social services; (ii) it can
      comprise a series of individual operations that leverage prior operations to support
      achievement of the objectives established in the general framework; and (iii) the
      proposal includes the targets whose achievement is considered crucial for
      processing and approving the second and subsequent individual operations.
4.2   Eligibility of the first operation. The first operation satisfies the eligibility
      conditions established in Bank Policies (GN-2246-15), since: (i) an institutional
      capacity analysis of the executing agency was conducted (using the institutional
      capacity analysis platform); (ii) the objective of this first individual operation
      contributes to the CCLIP’s sector objective, since it will help expand access to and
      improve the coverage of basic social services, as well as promote social inclusion
      and equality, through equal access to housing solutions for the vulnerable
      population; (iii) this operation is for the housing sector, as defined in the CCLIP
      objective; and (iv) the design of the program execution mechanisms includes
      specific actions to improve the institutional capacities of the executing agency and
      the housing sector ecosystem in Ecuador, by training and raising the awareness
      of PSE stakeholders.
4.3   The eligibility criteria for the second and subsequent operations under the CCLIP
      will adhere to the CCLIP Operational Guidelines (GN-2246-15), which establish
      the following requirements: (a) institutional capacity analysis of the executing
      agency; (b) report on progress in implementing institutional capacity measures;
      (c) satisfactory execution of the prior operation, with likely achievement of the
      specific development objectives; and (d) evaluation of the preparation status that
      justifies proceeding with the new operation and describes the overall execution
      status of the previous one.
                                                                                                                                                                   Annex I - EC-O0014 / EC-L1290
                                                                                                                                                                                      Page 1 of 1




                                                                         Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                  Summary       EC-O0014 / EC-L1290
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Institutional Strategy Alignment


                                                                                               -Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups
                                                                                               -Institutional capacity, rule of law, citizen security
                                                                                               -Social protection and human capital development
 Operational Focus Areas
                                                                                               -Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure
                                                                                               -Productive development and innovation through the private sector




 [Space-Holder: Impact framework indicators]

2. Country Development Objectives


                                                                                                                       Expand access to and improve coverage of basic and social
  Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                    GN-3103-1
                                                                                                                       services




                                                                                                                       The intervention is not included in the 2024 Operational
  Country Program Results Matrix
                                                                                                                       Program.


   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                          Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                7.6
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                             2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                           1.6
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                        3.5
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                           7.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                    1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                  0.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                        2.5
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                          2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                               1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                           9.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                         4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                               5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                Medium Low
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                             FI
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems


                                                                                                                       Accounting and Reporting.
                                                                Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)




                                                                               Non-Fiduciary


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:


Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




Evaluability Assessment Note: The general objective of the multi-sectoral CCLIP line is to contribute to the development of housing and productive credit financing markets for
the population of the Popular and Solidarity Economy (EPS) with a focus on sustainability and financial inclusion for women, people with disabilities and peoples and
nationalities, among others. The general objective of the first operation is to address the housing needs of the EPS population through the provision of financial resources to the
Popular and Solidarity Financial Sector Organizations (OSFPS), as well as to contribute to the development of housing finance markets with a focus on sustainability and
financial inclusion for women, people with disabilities and peoples and nationalities, among others. The specific objective of the first operation is to expand attention to the
housing needs of the EPS population through the financing of the OSFPS.

The project has a clear diagnosis, based on evidence for middle and lower middle income households (deciles 3-5), which would be an approximation of those EPS households.
The indicators associated with the specific objectives included in the results matrix are SMART and have means of verification.

The economic analysis of the project used a cost-benefit analysis approach over a 35-year period, it considered both the seed capital and the revolving effect of the financing
resources. The estimated benefits include: imputed income (rent), residual value of the asset, added value in the construction and real estate services sector, and efficiencies in
energy and water. The net present value is US$130.4 million, and the IRR is 25.9%. The sensitivity analysis indicates that if the main parameters change (default rate, loan
maturity term, or decrease in imputed income-rent-), the project would continue to be economically viable.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan in accordance with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured through an
evaluation that uses the before and after methodology, accompanied by a qualitative analysis. Additionally, the expost efficiency of the project will be evaluated using a cost-
benefit analysis.
                                                                                                                                                                  Annex II
                                                                                                                                                               Page 1 of 10


                                                                         RESULTS MATRIX
Project             The specific objective of this operation is to better meet the popular and solidarity economy (PSE) population’s housing needs by financing the popular
objective:          and solidarity finance sector organizations (OSFPS). The general objective of the first operation is to meet the housing needs of the PSE population
                    through delivery of financial resources to the OSFPS and to contribute to developing markets for housing loans, with a focus on sustainability and the
                    financial inclusion of women, persons with disabilities, and Indigenous peoples and nationalities, among others. Achieving this will contribute to the
                    general objective of the multisector CCLIP of contributing to developing housing loan and productive credit markets for the PSE population, with a
                    focus on sustainability and the financial inclusion of women, persons with disabilities, and Indigenous peoples and nationalities, among others.



                                                                GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
                        Unit of        Baseline        Baseline     Expected year                      Means of
   Indicators                                                                            Target                                        Comments
                       measure           value           year           achieved                      verification
General objective of the first operation: To meet the housing needs of the PSE population by delivering financial resources to the OSFPS and contributing to
the development of housing loan markets, with a focus on sustainability and the financial inclusion of women, persons with disabilities, and Indigenous peoples
and nationalities, among others
1. OSFPS              Percentage          N/A            2024             2033             N/A      Survey          Numerator: Members of the OSFPS that are
members with a                                                                                                      CONAFIPS clients with a quantitative and/or
reduced housing                                                                                                     qualitative housing shortage.
shortage                                                                                                            Denominator: Total members of the OSFPS
(quantitative and                                                                                                   that are CONAFIPS clients.
qualitative)                                                                                                        Quantitative housing shortage: households
                                                                                                                    without housing (either they do not have any
                                                                                                                    housing at all or their housing lacks
                                                                                                                    adequate conditions).
                                                                                                                    Qualitative housing shortage: households
                                                                                                                    that do not have access to water and/or
                                                                                                                    sanitation, lack security of tenure, and/or
                                                                                                                    whose dwellings are overcrowded.
2. Amount of          Percentage           42            2022             2033              42      CONAFIPS        Numerator: US$ millions in executed
CONAFIPS                                                                                            report          housing funds delivered to women end
housing funds that                                                                                                  beneficiaries (regardless of marital status)
the OSFPS deliver                                                                                                   by the OSFPS.
to women                                                                                                            Denominator: US$ millions in CONAFIPS
                                                                                                                    funds delivered to the OSFPS.
                                                                                                                    The baseline is calculated according to year-
                                                                                                                    end 2022 data.
                                                                                                                    Only CONAFIPS’s own funds are included
                                                                                                                    (not counting the emergency housing line
                                                                                                                    from the French Development Agency).
                                                                                                                    Note that CONAFIPS already has a high
                                                                                                                    level of financial inclusion of women;
Annex II
Page 2 of 10


                                                      GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
                       Unit of     Baseline   Baseline      Expected year               Means of
     Indicators                                                             Target                                     Comments
                      measure       value       year          achieved                 verification
                                                                                                      however, its own funds for meeting
                                                                                                      vulnerable populations’ needs and
                                                                                                      promoting their inclusion are running out,
                                                                                                      and it will depend on this program to
                                                                                                      maintain (or increase) this high percentage.
                                                                                                      This development objective will not
                                                                                                      necessarily be observed over the life of the
                                                                                                      project, and achievement will not affect the
                                                                                                      final project evaluation.
                                                                                                      Although the final effects are expected to be
                                                                                                      long term, the final evaluation will cover
                                                                                                      program closing.
 3. Amount of         Percentage      4        2023             2033          6       CONAFIPS        Numerator: US$ millions in executed
 CONAFIPS                                                                             report          housing funds (delivered to Afro-
 housing funds that                                                                                   descendant, Indigenous, and Montubio end
 the OSFPS deliver                                                                                    beneficiaries) by the OSFPS.
 to persons who                                                                                       Denominator: US$ millions in CONAFIPS
 identify as                                                                                          funds delivered to the OSFPS.
 members of                                                                                           Only CONAFIPS’s own funds are included
 Indigenous                                                                                           (not counting the emergency housing line
 peoples and                                                                                          from the French Development Agency).
 nationalities                                                                                        This development objective will not
                                                                                                      necessarily be observed over the life of the
                                                                                                      project, and achievement will not affect the
                                                                                                      final project evaluation.
                                                                                                      Although the final effects are expected to be
                                                                                                      long term, the final evaluation will cover
                                                                                                      program closing.
 4. Amount of         Percentage      1        2022             2033         1.5      CONAFIPS        Numerator: US$ millions in executed
 CONAFIPS                                                                             report          housing funds delivered by the OSFPS to
 housing funds that                                                                                   end beneficiaries with disabilities.
 the OSFPS deliver                                                                                    Denominator: US$ millions in CONAFIPS
 to persons with                                                                                      funds delivered to the OSFPS.
 disabilities                                                                                         Only CONAFIPS’s own funds are included
                                                                                                      (not counting the emergency housing line
                                                                                                      from the French Development Agency).
                                                                                                      The target is expected to increase slightly
                                                                                                      since the population of persons with
                                                                                                      disabilities who are eligible to take out loans
                                                                                                      is small. Furthermore, if the program is not
                                                                                                                                         Annex II
                                                                                                                                      Page 3 of 10


                                                     GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
                      Unit of     Baseline   Baseline      Expected year               Means of
    Indicators                                                             Target                                    Comments
                     measure       value       year          achieved                 verification
                                                                                                     carried out, the percentage would be
                                                                                                     expected to shrink.
                                                                                                     This development objective will not
                                                                                                     necessarily be observed over the life of the
                                                                                                     project, and achievement will not affect the
                                                                                                     final project evaluation.
                                                                                                     Although the final effects are expected to be
                                                                                                     long term, the final evaluation will cover
                                                                                                     program closing.
5. Trained credit    Percentage      0        2022             2027         30       CONAFIPS        Numerator: Credit unions that open new
unions that open                                                                     report          financing lines for housing or
new financing                                                                                        strengthen/update/redesign existing ones.
lines for housing                                                                                    Denominator: Credit unions that were
or strengthen/                                                                                       trained on housing finance by CONAFIPS.
update/redesign                                                                                      The strengthening, updates, and redesigns
existing ones                                                                                        counted in this indicator must comply with
                                                                                                     the parameters of the CONAFIPS housing
                                                                                                     lines and the Office of the Superintendent of
                                                                                                     the Popular and Solidarity Economy. These
                                                                                                     criteria will be specified in the kickoff
                                                                                                     workshop.
                                                                                                     The development target will not be reached
                                                                                                     during the life of the project, and
                                                                                                     achievement will not affect the final project
                                                                                                     evaluation.
6. Amount of         Percentage      0        2022             2027        14.42     CONAFIPS        Numerator: US$ millions of housing funds
CONAFIPS                                                                             report          executed by the OSFPS identified as green
housing funds                                                                                        measures that will contribute to climate
delivered to the                                                                                     change mitigation and/or adaptation. These
OSFPS identified                                                                                     green measures include but are not limited
as green                                                                                             to resilience measures, energy efficiency
measures that will                                                                                   measures (such as efficient lighting and
contribute to                                                                                        thermal insulations), and water efficiency
climate change                                                                                       measures (like water-saving bathroom
mitigation and/or                                                                                    fixtures) in accordance with the Ecuadorian
adaptation                                                                                           Building Standards, as well as location-
                                                                                                     dependent adaptation measures pursuant to
                                                                                                     the climate risk maps generated by the
                                                                                                     Ministry of the Environment and Ecological
                                                                                                     Transition.
Annex II
Page 4 of 10


                                              GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
                   Unit of   Baseline   Baseline    Expected year              Means of
     Indicators                                                     Target                                    Comments
                  measure     value       year        achieved                verification
                                                                                             Denominator: US$ millions in CONAFIPS
                                                                                             funds delivered to the OSFPS.
                                                                                             Only CONAFIPS’s own funds are included
                                                                                             (not counting the emergency housing line
                                                                                             from the French Development Agency).
                                                                                             Note that this is the first effort to include
                                                                                             climate change considerations in the OSFPS
                                                                                             sector as well as to track them, so the target
                                                                                             is quite conservative. However, this target is
                                                                                             expected to be raised in subsequent
                                                                                             operations under the CCLIP, as these
                                                                                             considerations are bolstered in the sector.
                                                                                             The target should be achieved, thanks to the
                                                                                             program’s Component 2 training sessions.
                                                                                             Note that the target only includes the
                                                                                             Component 1 funds; adding the
                                                                                             Component 2 funds yields the 14.5%
                                                                                             reported as the operation’s climate finance.
                                                                                                                                                     Annex II
                                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 10


                                                          SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                           Unit of         Baseline       Baseline      End of project         Means of
     Indicators                                                                                                                Comments
                          measure            value          year            (2027)            verification
Specific objective: To expand attention to the PSE population’s housing needs by financing the OSFPS.
1.1. Number of           Households          1,028          2023             5,062        CONAFIPS report    Number of housing loans granted by OSFPS to
households with                                                                                              end beneficiaries and financed by the
housing needs met by                                                                                         CONAFIPS program in the preceding four
the OSFPS in the                                                                                             years. Households with housing needs are
preceding four years                                                                                         considered to be ones that apply for loans to
                                                                                                             improve, build, expand, or purchase a home.
                                                                                                             The target number of families was calculated
                                                                                                             using a loan amount estimated based on the
                                                                                                             conservative scenario of the historical average
                                                                                                             of loans granted by CONAFIPS. It includes all
                                                                                                             the CONAFIPS housing product lines
                                                                                                             (improvement, construction, purchase, etc.).
                                                                                                             The baseline is calculated according to the
                                                                                                             historical number of households served by
                                                                                                             CONAFIPS in the past four years (from
                                                                                                             August 2020 to August 2023). Note that this
                                                                                                             represents a conservative scenario.
                                                                                                             Source: Database of CONAFIPS operations
1.2. Funds delivered    Percentage          89            2022               89          CONAFIPS report     Numerator: US$ millions in executed housing
to PSE households to                                                                                         funds (delivered to end beneficiaries and
meet their housing                                                                                           reported) by the OSFPS.
needs                                                                                                        Denominator: US$ millions in CONAFIPS funds
                                                                                                             delivered to the OSFPS.
                                                                                                             Note that since the OSFPS have up to eight
                                                                                                             months to justify the housing funds to
                                                                                                             CONAFIPS, when the IDB loan operation
                                                                                                             closes, the OSFPS will still have eight months
                                                                                                             more in which to justify the funds received.
                                                                                                             Therefore, although it is expected that 100% of
                                                                                                             the funds will be granted as loans, there is a
                                                                                                             high probability that at program closing, a lower
                                                                                                             percentage will be reported.
                                                                                                             The baseline is calculated based on the
                                                                                                             execution reported by CONAFIPS.
                                                                                                             The target is expected to remain equal to the
                                                                                                             baseline, since the baseline reflects appropriate
                                                                                                             execution standards, as shown by the
                                                                                                             institution’s financial health (paragraph 3.2 of
                                                                                                             the Proposal for Operations Development).
Annex II
Page 6 of 10


                                                        SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                              Unit of      Baseline   Baseline    End of project       Means of
       Indicators                                                                                                      Comments
                             measure        value       year         (2027)           verification
                                                                                                     Source: CONAFIPS
 1.3. Relevant housing      US$ millions     83        2023            100         CONAFIPS report   This indicator counts the stock of funds lent by
 portfolio in the                                                                                    CONAFIPS to the OSFPS. It counts the
 CONAFIPS portfolio                                                                                  resources under the “Mi Casa” housing line
                                                                                                     (which at program design was the line best
                                                                                                     suited to the program’s characteristics. It does
                                                                                                     not count resources from the emergency
                                                                                                     housing line from the French Development
                                                                                                     Agency).
                                                                                                     The target was estimated when the operation
                                                                                                     was designed and can be revised at the kick-off
                                                                                                     workshop.
 1.4. The relative          Percentage        1        2022             1          CONAFIPS report   The numerator is the average nonperforming
 nonperforming loan                                                                                  loan rate of CONAFIPS’s relevant housing
 rate in the relevant                                                                                portfolio (Mi Casa).
 portfolio over the total                                                                            The denominator is the average nonperforming
 nonperforming loan                                                                                  loan rate of the housing portfolio in the PSE
 rate in the PSE                                                                                     financial system.
 system.                                                                                             The baseline and target were estimated when
                                                                                                     the operation was designed and can be revised
                                                                                                     at the kick-off workshop.
 1.5. OSFPS that            Percentage        0        2023            80          CONAFIPS report   Numerator: OSFPS that passed the housing
 passed the training                                                                                 module.
 module on managing                                                                                  Denominator: OSFPS trained in the housing
 housing lines                                                                                       module.
                                                                                                     The target is justified by CONAFIPS’s prior
                                                                                                     training experience.
                                                                                                     The program will train the persons involved in
                                                                                                     the value chain of awarding the housing loan,
                                                                                                     who may vary in each of the credit unions
                                                                                                     depending on their organizational structure.
                                                                                                     Accordingly, the names of the specific posts
                                                                                                     cannot be provided at the design stage;
                                                                                                     however, all actors involved in properly granting
                                                                                                     the credit line will be included.
                                                                                                     For a credit union to be counted as having
                                                                                                     passed, all participants must have passed the
                                                                                                     training.
                                                                                                                                         Annex II
                                                                                                                                      Page 7 of 10


                                                   SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                          Unit of     Baseline   Baseline    End of project       Means of
      Indicators                                                                                                   Comments
                         measure       value       year         (2027)           verification
                                                                                                The credit union and CONAFIPS will coordinate
                                                                                                the number of persons and profiles that should
                                                                                                be trained.
1.6. OSFPS that          Percentage      0        2023            80          CONAFIPS report   Numerator: OSFPS that passed the
passed the training                                                                             sustainability module.
module on climate                                                                               Denominator: OSFPS trained in the
change sustainability                                                                           sustainability module.
and risk management                                                                             The target is justified by CONAFIPS’s prior
                                                                                                training experience.
                                                                                                As part of a roadmap, value chain participants
                                                                                                will be trained on sustainability, climate change,
                                                                                                and risk management considerations in the
                                                                                                housing loan granting process. These
                                                                                                individuals may vary in each of the credit unions
                                                                                                depending on their organizational structures.
                                                                                                Accordingly, the names of the specific posts
                                                                                                cannot be provided at the design stage;
                                                                                                however, all sustainability-related actors
                                                                                                involved in properly granting the credit line will
                                                                                                be included.
                                                                                                For a credit union to be counted as having
                                                                                                passed, all participants must have passed the
                                                                                                training. The credit union and CONAFIPS will
                                                                                                coordinate the number of persons and profiles
                                                                                                that should be trained.
1.7. OSFPS that          Percentage      0        2023            80          CONAFIPS report   Numerator: OSFPS that passed the training
passed the training                                                                             module on gender, persons with disabilities,
module on gender                                                                                and Indigenous peoples and nationalities,
inclusion and the                                                                               intersectionality, and interculturalism.
inclusion of persons                                                                            Denominator: OSFPS that underwent the
with disabilities and                                                                           training module on gender, persons with
Indigenous peoples                                                                              disabilities, and Indigenous peoples and
and nationalities,                                                                              nationalities, intersectionality, and
intersectionality, and                                                                          interculturalism.
interculturalism                                                                                For a credit union to be counted as having
                                                                                                passed, all participants must have passed the
Milestone 1.7.1                                                                                 training. The target is justified by CONAFIPS’
OSFPS that passed                                                                               prior training experiences.
the training module                                                                             The company hired must have sufficient
                                                                                                capacity to successfully manage separate
Annex II
Page 8 of 10


                                                   SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                            Unit of   Baseline   Baseline    End of project       Means of
      Indicators                                                                                                   Comments
                           measure     value       year         (2027)           verification
 on gender inclusion                                                                            modules for the needs of women, persons with
 and intersectionality                                                                          disabilities, and Indigenous peoples and
                                                                                                nationalities from an intersectional, intercultural
 Milestone 1.7.2                                                                                perspective.
 OSFPS that passed                                                                              All participants in the value chain will be trained
 the training module                                                                            on inclusion and diversity considerations within
 on inclusion of                                                                                the process of awarding the housing credit.
 persons with                                                                                   These individuals may vary across the credit
 disabilities                                                                                   unions depending on their organizational
                                                                                                structure. Accordingly, the names of the specific
 Milestone 1.7.3                                                                                posts cannot be provided at the program design
 OSFPS that passed                                                                              stage; however, all sustainability-related actors
 the training module                                                                            involved in properly granting the credit line will
 on inclusion of                                                                                be included.
 Indigenous peoples                                                                             CONAFIPS and the individual credit unions will
 and nationalities and                                                                          coordinate the number of persons and profiles
 interculturalism                                                                               that should be trained.
                                                                                                The indicator will be broken down into
                                                                                                milestones for gender, persons with disabilities,
                                                                                                and Indigenous peoples and nationalities, from
                                                                                                an intersectional, intercultural perspective, all
                                                                                                with a target of 80%.
 1.8 Pilot on the use of     Pilot       0        2023             1          CONAFIPS report   This pilot must be conducted in at least one
 tools and/or financing                                                                         OSFPS and include the use of at least one new
 products                                                                                       tool or new product developed as part of the
 implemented in an                                                                              program outputs.
 OSFPS                                                                                          Note that implementation at the OSFPS level
                                                                                                does not depend exclusively on CONAFIPS and
                                                                                                therefore is considered an outcome. By way of
                                                                                                impact, the use of the tools and new housing
                                                                                                lines is expected to be scaled up beyond the
                                                                                                pilot.
                                                                                                                                               Annex II
                                                                                                                                            Page 9 of 10


                                                                         OUTPUTS
                           Unit of      Baseline     Baseline                                         End of       Means of
       Indicators                                               Year 1     Year 2   Year 3   Year 4                                   Comments
                          measure         value        year                                           project     verification
Component 1. Housing finance solutions for the PSE population
1. Program funds         US$ millions      8.66       2023      17.225     17.225   17.225   17.225    68.9     CONAFIPS         Only CONAFIPS’s
allocated to housing                                                                                            semiannual       own funds are
loans for the OSFPS                                                                                             report           included (not counting
                                                                                                                                 the emergency
                                                                                                                                 housing line from the
                                                                                                                                 French Development
                                                                                                                                 Agency).
Component 2. Development of emerging housing loan markets
2.1 Diagnostic study and   Study          0         2023          1          0        0        0         1      Study
roadmap for developing                                                                                          generated
housing loan markets for
the PSE
2.2 Designs of housing    Designs         0         2023          0          2        1        0         3      Designs
finance products and                                                                                            delivered
tools
2.3 # of housing teams in Teams           0         2023          1          0        0        0         0      CONAFIPS         Note that at the time
CONAFIPS consolidated                                                                                           semiannual       the program was
and trained                                                                                                     report           designed CONAFIPS
                                                                                                                                 did not have a full-
                                                                                                                                 time expert with
                                                                                                                                 specific knowledge in
                                                                                                                                 the area of housing
                                                                                                                                 finance. Over the
                                                                                                                                 course of the
                                                                                                                                 program, the aim is
                                                                                                                                 for one or more
                                                                                                                                 persons to be
                                                                                                                                 appointed full time to
                                                                                                                                 make up that team.
2.4 # of outreach and        Campaigns      0         2023        1          1        0        0         2      CONAFIPS         Every campaign
awareness campaigns                                                                                             semiannual       commissioned will
implemented (to promote                                                                                         report           cover the three
housing finance and                                                                                                              topics.
housing sustainability
and inclusive housing
considerations, with
regard to gender,
persons with disabilities,
Indigenous peoples, etc.)
Annex II
Page 10 of 10


                                                                         OUTPUTS
                               Unit of    Baseline   Baseline                                         End of       Means of
        Indicators                                              Year 1     Year 2   Year 3   Year 4                                   Comments
                              measure      value       year                                           project     verification
 2.5 # of training               # of        0        2023        1          1        0        0         2      CONAFIPS         The workshops will
 workshops given, with        workshops                                                                         semiannual       be divided into five
 separate modules for                                                                                           report           modules: (1) housing
 housing finance,                                                                                                                finance;
 sustainability                                                                                                                  (2) sustainability, to
 considerations, and                                                                                                             include preparation of
 inclusive housing with                                                                                                          a roadmap for
 regard to gender,                                                                                                               financing green
 persons with disabilities,                                                                                                      housing; (3) housing
 and Indigenous peoples,                                                                                                         with a gender and
 etc.                                                                                                                            intersectional
                                                                                                                                 perspective;
                                                                                                                                 (4) housing geared
                                                                                                                                 towards persons with
                                                                                                                                 disabilities; and
                                                                                                                                 (5) housing for
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous peoples
                                                                                                                                 and nationalities and
                                                                                                                                 interculturalism.
                                                                                                               Annex III
                                                                                                             Page 1 of 5



     Country: Ecuador           Division: CSD/HUD           Operation no.: EC-O0014; EC-L1290           Year: 2024


                                    FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Executing agency:          Corporación Nacional de Finanzas Populares y Solidarias (CONAFIPS)
Operation name:            Financing Housing Solutions for the Popular and Solidarity Economy

                                 I. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1.         Use of country system in the operation1


       Budget            Reports                 Information system            National competitive bidding (NCB)

       Treasury          Internal audit          Shopping                      Other

       Accounting        External Control        Individual Consultants        Other


2.         Fiduciary execution mechanism


         Cofinancing                  The multisector CCLIP will be for a total of US$300 million, and this first loan
                                      operation will be for US$70 million, financed with the Bank’s Ordinary Capital
                                      resources. The funds for the first operation must be disbursed within four
                                      years. The objective of the program is to meet the housing and productive
                                      financing needs of the popular and solidarity economy (PSE) through the
                                      popular and solidarity finance sector organizations (OSFPS), with a focus on
                                      sustainability and the financial inclusion of women, persons with disabilities,
                                      and Indigenous peoples, among others. This objective aligns with the priority
                                      areas of the Country Strategy 2022-2025.

         Special features of          The program seeks to better meet the PSE population’s housing needs by
         fiduciary execution          financing the OSFPS. In Component 1, CONAFIPS will lend long-term
                                      resources to the OSFPS so they can meet the PSE’s needs. Component 2
                                      will provide strategic institutional strengthening of Ecuador’s housing sector
                                      ecosystem by training and raising awareness among PSE stakeholders.


3.         Fiduciary capacity


    Fiduciary           CONAFIPS has the institutional and fiduciary capacity to implement this program, as well
    capacity of the     as experience managing funds with multilateral entities like the Development Bank of Latin
    executing           America (CAF), French Development Agency (AFD), Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
    agency              (AIIB), and the IDB for US$300 million. Most recently, it executed loan 5024/OC-EC
                        (operation EC-L1269) for a total of US$93.8 million, with satisfactory performance. It has
                        been concluded that CONAFIPS does not present fiduciary risks and its risk classification
                        is LOW.



4.         Fiduciary risks and risk response: There are no fiduciary risks associated with project execution.



1     Any system or subsystem approved subsequently may be used for the operation, under the terms of the Bank’s
      approval.
Annex III
Page 2 of 5


5.      Fiduciary policies and guidelines applicable to the operation: Documents GN-2349-15 and GN-2350-15
        apply to execution of Component 2 and the project administration and management component; and
        document OP-273-12.
6.      Exceptions to fiduciary policies and guidelines: Not applicable.

                II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

 Special conditions precedent to the first disbursement: There are no prior special conditions associated with
 fiduciary aspects.

 Exchange rate: For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties agree that the exchange
 rate to be used will be the rate stipulated in Article 4.10(b)(ii). The exchange rate will be the rate in effect on
 the date the borrower, the executing agency, or any other person or corporation with delegated authority to
 incur expenditures makes the respective payments to the contractor, vendor, or beneficiary.

 Type of auditing: Within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year and the date of the final disbursement,
 CONAFIPS will submit the project’s annual special-purpose financial statements, duly audited by an
 independent auditing firm acceptable to the Bank. Likewise, the auditors will issue a report of the internal control
 findings (management letter). The independent audit firm will be retained at least 120 days before the close of
 each fiscal year and the date of the final disbursement.

 Green Climate Fund requirements: From program start until the end of the 20-year period, CONAFIPS will send
 the IDB a financial report whose contents will be agreed upon by CONAFIPS and the IDB at a later time.


                   III. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

      Bidding              The Bank’s standard bidding documents or other documents agreed upon by the
      documents            executing agency and the Bank for a specific procurement will be used for the
                           procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services provided for in
                           Component 3, executed in accordance with the procurement policies (document
                           GN-2349-15). Likewise, the selection and contracting of consulting services provided
                           for in Component 3 will be executed according to the Policies for the Selection of
                           Consultants (document GN-2350-15) using the Bank-issued standard request for
                           proposals or the request form agreed upon by the executing agency and the Bank for
                           the specific selection processes. The project’s sector specialist will be responsible for
                           reviewing the technical specifications and terms of reference for procurement during
                           the preparation of processes. This technical review may be conducted ex ante and is
                           independent of the procurement review method.

      Recurring costs      Any recurring financed expenses required for project implementation that are
                           approved by the Project Team Leader will be incurred pursuant to the executing
                           agency’s administrative procedures. These procedures will be reviewed and
                           accepted by the Bank, provided they do not infringe the principles of economy,
                           efficiency, and competition (see Guidelines for the Treatment of Recurring Expenses
                           and Expense Eligibility Policy (document GN-2331-5 and updates thereto)).

      Procurement          Supervision of the procurement processes provided for in Component 3 will be
      supervision          ex post, except where ex ante supervision is justified, as identified in the procurement
                           plan. Procurement processes conducted through the country system will be overseen
                           by the country supervision system. The method ((i) ex ante, (ii) ex post, or (iii) country
                           system) will be determined for each selection process. Ex post reviews will be
                           conducted every calendar year as per the project supervision plan, which is subject
                           to changes during execution. Ex post review reports may include at least one physical
                           inspection visit of the procurement processes subject to ex post review, chosen
                                                                                                       Annex III
                                                                                                     Page 3 of 5


                           randomly and with no less than 10% representation. The thresholds for ex post review
                           are:
                                Executing                                                   Consulting
                                                        Works        Goods/services
                                 agency                                                       services
                                CONAFIPS               3 million           250,000             200,000

      Records and files    CONAFIPS will keep complete, ordered records, organizing them chronologically,
                           independently, and by process and financing source.

Main procurement items
                                                                                                   Estimated
                                                                       New
                                                   Selection                       Estimated        amount
          Procurement description                                  procedures/
                                                    method                           date            (US$
                                                                      Tools
                                                                                                  thousands)

 Nonconsulting services

 Training workshops with separate modules           National                       05/01/2024          200
 for housing finance, sustainability              competitive
 considerations, and inclusive housing with      bidding (NCB)
 regard to gender, persons with disabilities,
 and Indigenous peoples, etc.


 Preparation and implementation of the                NCB                          04/01/2024          100
 project outreach and publicity campaigns

 Firms

 External audit of the program                     Least-cost                      07/01/2024           50
                                                    selection



 Individuals

 Consultant to serve as the project focal         Selection of                     04/01/2024           50
 point at CONAFIPS                                 individual
                                                   consultant
                                                     (3CV)

To access the execution plan, click here.
Annex III
Page 4 of 5


                      IV. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

      Programming and        As a public financial institution, CONAFIPS complies with the provisions of the
      budget                 Organic Monetary and Financial Code and the regulations issued by the Monetary
                             and Financial Regulation and Policy Board, to permanently maintain its capital
                             adequacy.

      Treasury and           Disbursements will be made through the online disbursements electronic platform,
      disbursement           as advances of funds, for second-tier allocations and the institution-strengthening
      management             activities; and as direct payments, to establish hedge funds to back subloans.
                             Bank account: CONAFIPS will keep the advance payment funds in a bank account
                             exclusive to the program. The borrower will also open an account at the Central
                             Bank of Ecuador to receive the disbursements.
                             Flow of project proceeds: The funds will be disbursed to the borrower in the account
                             opened at the Central Bank of Ecuador. From there, they will be transferred to the
                             single treasury account and subsequently the borrower will transfer them to the
                             CONAFIPS exclusive account, if they are advance payments, or to the account
                             indicated by CONAFIPS, if they are reimbursements of payments.
                             Advance payments will be made to cover a period of up to 180 days, based on the
                             actual liquidity needs, in accordance with the financial plan.
                             All told, 80% of the accumulated balances of prior advances must be justified.

      Accounting,            CONAFIPS applies the codification of resolutions issued by the Office of the
      information            Superintendent of the Popular and Solidarity Economy in the conceptual framework
      systems, and           and sole chart of accounts for the accounting of the entities subject to its control.
      generation of          CONAFIPS also applies the regulations on financial risk reports.
      reports
                             CONAFIPS uses its own accounting system called VIMASIF, which consists of four
                             modules: (i) Production Assets, for the administration of fixed assets and goods
                             subject to control; (ii) Procurement, used for tracking purchases and inventory
                             management; (iii) Accounting, for recording transactions as well as the manual and
                             automatic accounting records; and (iv) Financial, for portfolio administration,
                             involving disbursements, reserves, maturity of portfolio categories, and loan
                             recovery. Also administered are the accounts receivable, own portfolio, second-tier
                             portfolio, and coercive measures.
                             The VIMASIF system, along with the spreadsheets it generates, is the foundation
                             for preparing, on a cash basis, the cash flow statement and statement of accrued
                             investment income. VIMASIF is also able to generate all kinds of portfolio reports.
                             The legal tender and reporting currency in Ecuador is the United States dollar
                             (US$).

      Internal control and   CONAFIPS uses two internal auditing services: the Office of the Comptroller
      internal auditing      General, which is in charge of directing the public sector control system and whose
                             sphere of action includes reviewing procurement processes and the applicable
                             regulations; and the bank internal audit area, which reports directly to the board of
                             directors to provide assurance services for the financial activity and compliance
                             with banking regulations.

      External control       CONAFIPS, in agreement with the Bank, will select and retain a Bank-eligible
      and financial          auditing firm to audit its special-purpose financial statements, as per the Financial
      reports                Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects; the Guide for Financial Reports
                             and Management of External Audits; and the agreements with the terms of
                             reference previously agreed upon with the Bank. The external audit services may
                                                                                                       Annex III
                                                                                                     Page 5 of 5


                     be financed with the loan proceeds. CONAFIPS must also submit a financial report
                     for the next 20 years, as a GCF requirement.

Financial            Due to CONAFIPS’s prior experience with the IDB and other multilateral
supervision of the   institutions, as well as to the soundness of its financial system, corporate
operation            governance, and financial performance, and the management capacity of its key
                     directors, in addition to its low level of fiduciary risk, the operation requires standard
                     supervision, to be carried out through online and/or in-person work meetings, as
                     well as on specific issues for which Bank support is needed, and through the review
                     of the audited financial statements.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/24



 Ecuador. Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) “Financing the Housing and
                   Microbusiness Needs of the Population of the Popular
                             and Solidarity Economy” (EC-O0014)



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

       1.      To authorize the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall
designate, to enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with Corporación
Nacional de Finanzas Populares y Solidarias (CONAFIPS) to establish the Conditional Credit Line
for Investment Projects (CCLIP) “Financing the Housing and Microbusiness Needs of the
Population of the Popular and Solidarity Economy” (EC-O0014) (the “Line”), for the amount of up
to US$300,000,000 chargeable to the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital.

        2.     To establish that the resources allocated to the Line shall be used to finance
individual operations under the Line, in accordance with: (a) the objectives and regulations of the
Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects approved by Resolution DE-58/03, as amended
by Resolutions DE-10/07, DE-164/07, DE-86/16, and DE-98/19; (b) the provisions set forth in
documents GN-2564-3 and GN-2246-13; and (c) the terms and conditions included in the
proposal for the corresponding individual operation.



                               (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CAN/EZIDB0000366-263631146-21061
EC-O0014
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/24



   Ecuador. Loan ____/OC-EC to Corporación Nacional de Finanzas Populares y Solidarias
          (CONAFIPS). Financing Housing Solutions for the Popular and Solidarity
            Economy. First Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit Line
                        for Investment Projects (CCLIP) EC-O0014



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with Corporación Nacional de Finanzas Populares y Solidarias (CONAFIPS), as
borrower, and with the Republic of Ecuador, as guarantor, for the purpose of granting the former
a financing aimed at cooperating in the execution of the project “Financing Housing Solutions for
the Popular and Solidarity Economy”, which constitutes the first individual operation under the
Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) EC-O0014, approved by Resolution
DE-__/24 on ___ ___________ 2024. Such financing will be for the amount of up to
US$70.000,000 from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the
Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary
of the Loan Proposal.



                               (Adopted on ___ ___________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CAN/EZIDB0000366-263631146-20801
EC-L1290
