                                                                       Resolution DE-126/24




                                 LOAN CONTRACT No. 5928/OC-SU



                                                between the



                                           REPUBLIC OF SURINAME



                                                  and the



                             INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




            Strengthening Spatial Planning and Environmental Management in Suriname




LEG/SGO/CCB/EZIDB0000366-171363792-606 l
SU-LI067
                                     LOAN CONTRACT

                                   SPECIAL CONDITIONS

        This loan contract, hereinafter the "Contract," is entered into between the REPUBLIC OF
SURINAME, hereinafter referred to as the "Borrower," and the INTER-AMERICAN
DEVELOPMENT BANK, hereinafter referred to as the "Bank" and together with the Borrower,
as the "Parties," on De,cvn ~,r- fu_, 20~


                                     CHAPTER I
         Purpose and Constituent Elements of the Contract, and Special Definitions

SECTION 1.01.        Purpose of the Contract. The purpose of this Contract is to establish the
terms and conditions under which the Bank grants a loan to the Borrower to contribute to the
financing and execution of the program " Strengthening Spatial Planning and Environmental
Management in Suriname", hereinafter the "Program", the main aspects of which are set forth in
the Annex.

SECTION 1.02.         Constituent Elements of the Contract. This Contract is composed of these
Special Conditions, the General Conditions, and the Annex.

SECTION 1.03          Special Definitions. In addition to the terms defined in the General
Conditions, whenever the following terms are capitalized in this Contract, they shall have the
meaning assigned to them below. Any reference to the singular includes the plural and vice versa.

       (a)    "Associated facilities": new or additional works and/or infrastructure, irrespective
              of the source of financing, essential for a Bank-financed program to function, such
              as: new new/additional access roads, railways, power lines, pipelines required to be
              built for the Program; new/additional construction camps or permanent housing for
              Program workers; new/ additional power plants required for the Program;
              new/additional Program effluent treatment facilities; and new/additional
              warehouses and marine terminals built to handle Program goods.

       (b)    "Code of Conduct": Formal declaration of principles that establish the standards of
              behaviour for workers in relation to measures for the prevention and management
              of environmental, labor and social risks of the Program, including occupational
              health and safety risks, sexual and gender-based violence, discrimination, and
              abuse and sexual exploitation of children and other vulnerable people or groups,
              insofar as this is applicable to the works, other consulting services, consultancies,
              and goods.

       ( c)   "Environmental and Social Action Plan" or "ESAP" means the environmental and
              social action plan of the Program, agreed on August 21, 2024, which set out the
              necessary actions, within a specific timeframe, for the Program to comply with the
              Environmental and Social Performance Standards.


                                          5928/OC-SU
                                                -2-



        ( d)   "Environmental and Social Perform ance Standards" or "ESPSs "refer to the 1 O
               Performance Standards that are part of the Environmental and Social Policy
               Framework (GN-2965-23).


                                           CHAPTER II
                                            The Loan

SECTION 2.01.          Amount and Approval Currency of the Loan. In accordance with this
Contract, the Bank agrees to lend to the Borrower, and the Borrower accepts, a loan of up to the
amount of thirty million Dollars (US$30,000,000), hereinafter the "Loan."

SECTION 2.02.        Disbursement Requests and Disbursement Currency. (a) The Borrower
may request Loan disbursements from the Bank pursuant to Chapter IV of the General Conditions.

        (b)     All disbursements shall be denominated and made in Dollars, unless the Borrower
requests that a disbursement be denominated in a currency other than the Dollar, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter V of the General Conditions.

SECTION 2.03.         Currency Availability. If the Bank is unable to obtain access to the
currency requested by the Borrower, the Bank, in consultation with the Borrower, may disburse
the Loan in another currency of its choice.

SECTION 2.04.           Disbursement Period. The Original Disbursement Period will be seven (7)
years from the effective date of this Contract. Any extension of the Original Disbursement Period
shall be subject to the provisions of Article 3.02(g) of the General Conditions.

SECTION 2.05.           Amortization Schedule. (a) The Final Amortization Date shall be
twenty-two point five (22.5) years from the date of signature of this Contract. The Original WAL
of the Loan is fifteen point twenty-five (15.25) years.

        (b)     The Loan shall be repaid by the Borrower in semiannual, consecutive, and insofar
as possible, equal installments. The first installment shall be due from the Borrower on the
expiration date of the ninety-six (96) month period following the effective date of this Contract,
and the last installment shall be paid no later than the Final Amortization Date. If the expiration
date of the period for the payment of the first amortization installment does not fall on an interest
payment date, the payment of the first amortization installment shall be made on the interest
payment date immediately preceding the expiration date of such period. If the Final Amortization
Date does not fall on an interest payment date, the payment of the last amortization installment
shall be made on the interest payment date immediately preceding the Final Amortization Date.

        (c)     The Parties may agree to modify the Amortization Schedule of the Loan as set forth
in Article 3.02 of the General Conditions.




                                           5928/OC-SU
                                                     -3 -


           ( d)    The Borrower may request to the Bank the activation of the Principal Payment
    Option as set forth in Articles 3.03 to 3.06 of the General Conditions.

    SECTION 2.06.           Interest. (a) The Borrower shall pay interest on the daily Outstanding Loan
    Balances at a rate determined pursuant to the provisions of Article 3.07 of the General Conditions.

             (b)     Interest shall be payable by the Borrower to the Bank semiannually. The first
    interest payment shall be due on the expiration date of the six-month (6-month) period following
    the effective date of this Contract. If the expiration date of the period for the first interest payment
    does not fall on the fifteenth (15th) day of the month, the first interest payment shall be made on
    the fifteenth ( 15th) day of the month immediately preceding the expiration date of such period.

           ( c)   Interest payments may be financed with resources of the Loan during the
    disbursement period.
)
    SECTION 2.07.          Credit Fee. The Borrower shall pay a credit fee on the dates set forth in
    Section 2.06(b) for the payment of interest, pursuant to Articles 3.01, 3.08, 3.09, and 3.11 of the
    General Conditions.

    SECTION 2.08.          Resources for Inspection and Supervision. The Borrower shall not be
    required to cover the Bank's expenses for general inspection and supervision, unless the Bank
    establishes otherwise pursuant to Article 3.10 of the General Conditions.

    SECTION 2.09.       Conversion. The Borrower may request Currency Conversions, Interest
    Rate Conversions, Commodity Conversions, and/or Catastrophe Protection Conversions from the
    Bank at any time during the term of the Contract, as set forth in Chapter V of the General
    Conditions.

            (a)    Currency Conversion. The Borrower may request that a disbursement of all or
    part of the Outstanding Loan Balance be converted to a Principal Currency or a Local Currency,
    which the Bank can efficiently obtain, subject to the Bank's operational and risk management
    considerations. It is understood that any disbursement denominated in Local Currency shall
    constitute a Currency Conversion, even when the Approval Currency is the same Local Currency.

            (b)      Interest Rate Conversion. The Borrower may request, with respect to all or part
    of the Outstanding Loan Balance, that the SOFR-Based Interest Rate be converted to a fixed
    interest rate or any other Interest Rate Conversion option requested by the Borrower and accepted
    by the Bank.

           ( c)   Commodity Conversion. The Borrower may request the entering into Commodity
    Put Options and Commodity Call Options.

            (d)     Catastrophe Protection Conversion. The Borrower may request the entering into
    a Catastrophe Protection Conversion that will be agreed and structured on a case-by-case basis
    subject to the Bank's operational and risk management considerations and in accordance with the
    terms and conditions established in the corresponding Catastrophe Protection Engagement Letter.



                                               . 5928/OC-SU
                                                  -4-



                                      CHAPTER III
                  Disbursements and Utilization of the Resources of the Loan

SECTION 3.01.         Special Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement. (a) In addition to
the conditions precedent stipulated in Article 4.01 of the General Conditions, the first disbursement
of the Loan shall be subject to the fulfillment, to the satisfaction of the Bank, of the following
requirements:

        (a)     The Borrower, through the Executing Agency, shall provide evidence of the
                establishment of the transitional Program Implementation Unit within the Ministry
                of Spatial Planning and Environment and the selection of its program coordinator.

        (b)     The Borrower, through the Executing Agency, shall provide evidence of the
                approval and entry into effect of the Project Operations Manual (POM), in the terms
                previously agreed to with the Bank, which must include, among other elements, the
                environmental and social requirements and include as Annexes the Environmental
                and Social Management System (ESMS), the Strategic Environmental and Social
                Assessment (SESA), the Strategic Environmental and Social Management Plan
                (SESMP), the Environmental and Social Assessment (ESIA), and the
                Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP).

        (c)     The Borrower, through the Executing Agency, shall provide evidence, to the
                satisfaction of the Bank, of the approval by the Council of Ministers of the Green
                Development Vision Statement.

SECTION 3.02.            Utilization of the Resources of the Loan. (a) The resources of the Loan
may only be used to pay expenses that: (i) are necessary for the Program and are in accordance
with its objectives; (ii) are carried out in accordance with the provisions of this Contract and Bank
policies; (iii) are adequately recorded and documented in the Borrower's or Executing Agency's
system; and (iv) are incurred after October 4, 2024 and before the expiration of the Original
Disbursement Period or any extensions thereof. Such expenses are hereinafter referred to as
"Eligible Expenditures."

SECTION 3.03.            Applicable Exchange Rate for Expenditures Incurred in Local
Currency of the Borrower's Country. For purposes of Article 4.1 O of the General Conditions,
the Parties agree that the applicable exchange rate shall be that indicated in paragraph (b )(i) of said
Article. For purposes of determining the equivalency of expenditures incurred in Local Currency
chargeable to the Additional Resources or of the reimbursement of expenditures chargeable to the
Loan, the agreed exchange rate shall be the exchange rate on the effective date on which the
Borrower, the Executing Agency, or any other person or legal entity in whom the power to incur
expenditures has been vested makes the related payments to the contractor, supplier, or
beneficiary.




                                            5928/OC-SU
                                                   - 5 -



                                            CHAPTER IV
                                       Execution of the Program

    SECTION 4.01.       Executing Agency. The Borrower, acting through the Ministry of Spatial
    Planning and Environment, shall be the Executing Agency of the Program.

    SECTION 4.02.          Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services. (a) For
    purposes of Article 2.01(93) of the General Conditions, the Parties agree that the Procurement
    Policies are those dated May 2019, which are contained in document GN-2349-15, approved by
    the Bank on July 2, 2019. If the Procurement Policies are amended by the Bank, the procurement
    of works, non-consulting services, and goods shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions
    of the modified Procurement Policies, once they are made known to the Borrower and the
    Borrower agrees in writing to their application.
)
            (b)     For the procurement of works, goods, and non-consulting services, any of the
    methods described in the Procurement Policies may be used, provided that such method has been
    identified for the respective procurement in the Procurement Plan approved by the Bank. The
    application of the procurement rules, procedures and systems of the Borrower or an entity of the
    Borrower will be subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 .2 of the Procurement Policies and the
    provisions of Article 6.04(b) of the General Conditions.

            ( c)    The threshold for determining the use of international competitive bidding will be
    made available to the Borrower or the Executing · Agency, as the case may be, at
    https://projectprocurement.iadb.org/en. Below that threshold, the selection method shall be
    determined according to the complexity and characteristics of the procurement, which should be
    reflected in the Procurement Plan approved by the Bank.

           ( d)   Regarding the use of the International Competitive Bidding method, the Bank and
    Borrower agree that the provisions of Appendix 2 of the Procurement Policies, regarding domestic
    margin of preference when comparing bids for the procurement of goods, may apply to goods
)   manufactured in the country of the Borrower, as specified in the respective bidding document.

            (e)    Regarding the use of the national competitive bidding method, the respective
    national competitive bidding procedures may be used provided that, in the opinion of the Bank,
    these procedures are consistent with the Core Procurement Principles and generally compatible
    with Section I of the Procurement Policies, taking into account the provisions of paragraph 3.4 of
    the Procurement Policy, among others.

           (f)    Regarding the use of the national competitive bidding method, this may be used
    provided that the contracting or procurement is carried out in accordance with the bidding
    document or documents agreed to between Borrower and the Bank.

           (g)    The Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, agrees to obtain prior
    to awarding the contract for each of the works of the Program, if any, legal possession of the



                                             ,. ~928/0C-SU
                                                -6-


property where the construction of the respective work is to take place, easements or other rights
required for its construction and use, as well as water rights required for the work in question.

SECTION 4.03.               Selection and Contracting of Consulting Services. (a) For purposes
of Article 2.01 (30) of the General Conditions, the Parties agree that the Consultant Policies are
those dated May 2019, which are contained in document GN-2350-15, approved by the Bank on
July 2, 2019. If the Consultant Policies are amended by the Bank, the selection and contracting of
consulting services shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the modified
Consultant Policies, once they are made known to the Borrower and the Borrower agrees in writing
to their application.

        (b)     For the selection and contracting of consulting services, any of the methods
described in the Consultant Policies may be used, provided that such method for the respective
procurement has been identified in the Procurement Plan approved by the Bank. The application
of the procurement rules, procedures and systems of the Borrower or an entity of the Borrower
will be subject to the provisions of paragraph 3.2 of the Consultant Policies and the provisions of
Article 6.04(b) of the General Conditions.

        ( c)    The threshold for determining the shortlist of international consultants will be made
available to the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, at
https://projectprocurement. iadb.org/en. Below that threshold, the shortlist may be composed
entirely of national consultants of the Borrower's country.

SECTION 4.04.         Procurement Plan Update. In order to update the Procurement Plan in
accordance with the provisions of Article 6.04(c) of the General Conditions, the Borrower or the
Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall use the procurement plan execution and monitoring
system determined by the Bank.

SECTION 4.05.         Other Documents Governing Program Execution. The Parties agree that
the execution of the Program shall be governed by the provisions of this Contract and those
established in the POM and ESAP. If any provision of this Contract should present any
inconsistency or contradiction with the POM or ESAP, the relevant provisions of this Contract
shall prevail. Moreover, the Parties agree that it shall be necessary to obtain the Bank's written
consent prior to making any changes to the POM or ESAP.

SECTION 4.06.         Environmental and Social Management. For purposes of Articles 6.06
and 7.02 of the General Conditions, the Parties agree that Program execution shall be governed by
the following provisions, which have been identified as necessary for compliance with the
environmental and social obligations of the Program:

       (a)     The Borrower agrees to design, build, operate, maintain, and monitor the Program
               and manage the Environmental, Social and Occupational Health and Safety (ESHS)
               risks of the Program's Associated Facilities, if any, directly or through the
               Executing Agency or through every other contractor, operator or any other person
               performing Program related activities in accordance with the ESMS, the ESIA, the
               Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), the SESA, the SESMP, the



                                           5928/OC-SU
                                                   - 7 -


                   Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), the Disaster Risk Assessment (ORA), the
                   Disaster and Climate Change Risk Management Plan (DCCRMP), the ESAP, and
                   other environmental, social and occupational health and safety plans that may be
                   developed during execution, and the requirements included in the Corrective
                   Action Plan.

           (b)     The Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, must ensure that the
                   Program is implemented in accordance with the ESAP dated August 21, 2024, in a
                   manner acceptable to the Bank. For this purpose, the Borrower must ensure that its
                   costs are covered and have the personnel required for its implementation. The
                   ESAP can be modified with the prior written consent of the Bank, as indicated
                   therein.

           (c)     The Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, will: (i) implement
)                  participation processes with the affected communities and interested parties for the
                   activities planned in the Program; (ii) disclose all environmental and/or social
                   documentation of the ESMS; (iii) establish, publicize, maintain and operate an
                   accessible, effective and efficient grievance mechanism to facilitate support or
                   resolve concerns that may arise from the implementation of the activities of the
                   Program, in a manner acceptable to the Bank.

           ( d)    The Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, will ensure that all
                   bidding documents and contracts to be financed with Loan proceeds include
                   provisions that require applicants, bidders, proponents, contractors, consultants,
                   representatives, staff members, subconsultants, subcontractors, and suppliers of
                   goods and services, their representatives, and supervisory entities, among other
                   aspects, to: (i) comply with the environmental and social instruments of the ESMS
                   (ESIA/ESMP, SESA/SESMP, RAP, ORA/Disaster Risk Management and
                   Emergency Response Plan (DRMP)), including provisions and procedures to
                   prevent child labour and forced labour; and (ii) adopt and enforce the Program Code
                   of Conduct, which must be provided and properly communicated to all its workers.

    SECTION 4.07.           Maintenance. The Borrower and the Executing Agency undertake to
    ensure that the works and equipment included in the Program shall be adequately maintained,
    according to generally accepted technical standards, with the support of the Ministry of Public
    Works responsible for government property maintenance and upkeep. The Borrower, directly or
    through the Executing Agency, shall: (a) prepare an annual maintenance plan; and (b) present to
    the Bank a report on the status of said works and equipment and an annual maintenance plan for
    that year, during the seven (7) years following the completion of the first works of the Program
    and within the first quarter of each calendar year. If, from the inspections conducted by the Bank
    of from the reports it receives, it is determined that maintenance does not meet the levels agreed
    upon, the Borrower and the Executing Agency shall undertake the necessary measures to fully
    correct these shortcomings.

    SECTION 4.08.         Other Execution-related Special Obligations. Prior to the bidding for the
    construction of the two (2) bioclimatic buildings included in Component 1.c, the Borrower,



                                              5928/OC-SU
                                               - 8 -


through the Executing Agency, shall have presented evidence that all designs for such buildings
meet the Excellence in the Design for Greater Efficiencies (EDGE) standards.

                                       CHAPTER V
                         Supervision and Evaluation of the Program

SECTION 5.01.          Supervision of Program Execution. (a) For purposes of Article 7.02 of the
General Conditions, the documents that, as of the date of signature of this Contract, have been
identified as necessary to supervise progress in the execution of the Program are:

       (i)     The Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP); which shall include comprehensive
               planning of the Program pursuant to the structure of the expected outputs set out in
               the Program Results Matrix, and the critical path of milestones or actions that must
               be taken to ensure that the Loan is disbursed within the period indicated in Section
               2.04 of these Special Conditions. The PEP shall be updated as necessary, but
               especially whenever significant changes are made that delay, or may delay, the
               execution of the Program or changes are made to output targets for intermediate
               periods.

       (ii)    The Annual Operational Plans (AOP) that shall be prepared on the basis of the PEP
               and shall contain detailed work plans for each year.

       (iii)   The semi-annual progress reports, which shall be submitted by the Executing
               Agency to the Bank within sixty ( 60) days after the end of each Semester and should
               detail the progress in the implementation of the Program and will include:
               (1) physical and financial progress of the outputs; (2) progress of the activities
               contemplated in the Annual Operational Plan; (3) status of procurement and
               contracting processes; (4) compliance with environmental and social safeguards;
               (5) risk assessment; and (6) updating of planning and monitoring tools, including
               the Results Matrix.

    (b)   In order to comply with the environmental and social supervision and evaluation
requirements for the Program, the Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, shall:

       (i)     Prepare and submit, to the Bank's satisfaction, an Environmental and Social
               Compliance report, in form and content agreed with the Bank, on the
               implementation of ESMS and compliance with the ESAP, if any, as part of the
               semi-annual progress report and up to two (2) years after the last disbursement of
               the Loan resources.

       (ii)    Adopt all necessary measures to collect, compile, and provide the Bank with regular
               reports, with the frequency agreed between the Bank and the Executing Agency, or
               when required by the Bank, including: (1) the information on the status of
               implementation of the ESMS and compliance with the ESAP, if applicable; (2) the
               conditions, if any, that interfere or could interfere with the implementation of the
               ESMS and/or compliance with the ESAP, if applicable; and (3) the corrective and


                                          5928/OC-SU
                                                 -9-


                preventive measures that have been taken or that must be taken to address the
                conditions indicated in the previous literal (i).

        (iii)   With respect to the Program, the Borrower, directly or through the Executing
                Agency, will notify the Bank in writing within ten (10) days of becoming aware of
                any: (1) material non-compliance with environmental and social requirements;
                (2) incident or serious accident related to the works of the Program that has resulted
                in fatalities or injuries with permanent disability of workers or third parties, as well
                as cases of sexual violence associated with a worker contracted by the Program and
                any other that, at the discretion of the executing agency, may generate a significant
                impact on the environment, the community or workers; (3) regulatory action of an
                environmental, social and/or occupational health and safety nature that initiates a
                disciplinary process for serious misconduct; or (4) any newly identified
                environmental and social risks and impacts that may affect the environmental and
                social aspects of the Program and its associated facilities. In each case, such
                notification will include actions taken or proposed with respect to such events.

SECTION 5.02.          Supervision of the Financial Management of the Proeram. (a) For
purposes of Article 7.03 of the General Conditions, as of the date of signature of this Contract, the
following external audit financial reports and other reports have been identified as necessary to
supervise the financial management of the Program:

                (i)    Annual audited financial statements of the Program and internal controls
                       report, which shall be submitted within one hundred twenty (120) days after
                       the closing of each fiscal year. The audits will be conducted by a
                       Bank-eligible independent audit firm; and

                (ii)   A final audited financial statement of the Program, which shall be submitted
                       within one hundred twenty (120) days after the Original Disbursement
                       Period or any extension thereof. The audit will be conducted by a
                       Bank-eligible independent audit firm.

       (b)     For purposes of Article 7.03(a) of the General Conditions, the fiscal year of the
Program is the period between January 1 and December 31 of each year.

SECTION 5.03.          Evaluation of Results. In order to determine the degree of compliance with
the Program's objective and its results, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may
be, shall provide the Bank with the following information:

       (a)      A midterm evaluation report shall be submitted to the Bank once half of the
                Original Disbursement Period or its extensions have ended, or fifty percent (50%)
                of the Loan resources have been disbursed, whichever happens first; and

       (b)      A final evaluation report shall be submitted to the Bank once the Original
                Disbursement Period or its extensions have ended, or ninety percent (90%) of the
                Loan resources have been disbursed, whichever happens first.



                                            5928/OC-SU
                                               - 10 -



                                        CHAPTER VI
                                    Miscellaneous Provisions

SECTION 6.01.          Entry into Effect of the Contract. This Contract shall enter into effect on
the signature date.

SECTION 6.02.          Communications and Notices. (a) Any notice, request, communication, or
report from one Party to another by virtue of this Contract related to the execution of the Program,
with the exception of the notices indicated in paragraph (b) hereof, shall be made in writing and
shall be considered to have been made when the relevant document is delivered to the addressee
at the respective address given below, or by electronic means under such terms and conditions as
the Bank establishes and communicates to the Borrower, unless the Parties agree otherwise.

For the Borrower:

       Mailing address:

                Ministry of Finance and Planning
                S. M. Jamaludinstraat 26
                Paramaribo, Suriname

       Email address: secmin@finance.gov.sr

For the Executing Agency:

       Mailing address:

                Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment
                Prins Hendrikstraat 22
                Paramaribo, Suriname

       Email address: secmin@rom.gov.sr

For the Bank:

       Mailing address:

                Inter-American Development Bank
                Country Office in Suriname
                Peter Bruneslaan 2-4
                Paramaribo, Suriname

       Email address: csumail@iadb.org




                                           5928/OC-SU
                                                        - 11 -


                 (b)     Any notice from one Party to another by virtue of this Contract regarding matters
         other than those related to the execution of the Program, including disbursement requests, shall be
         made in writing and sent by certified mail, or electronic mail, addressed to its addressee at any of
         the respective addresses given below and shall be considered to have been made when the relevant
         document is delivered to the addressee at the respective address given below, or by electronic
         means under such terms and conditions as the Bank establishes and comm unicates to the Borrower,
         unless the Parties agree otherwise.

         For the Borrower:

                    Mailing address:

                           Ministry of Finance and Planning
                           S. M. Jamaludinstraat 26
                           Paramaribo, Suriname
)
                    Email address: secmin@finance.gov.sr

         For the Bank:

                    Mailing address:

                           Inter-American Development Bank
                           1300 New York Avenue, N.W.
                           Washington, D.C. 20577
                           U.S.A.

                    Facsimile: (202) 623-3096

         SECTION 6.03.          Commitment to Arbitrate. For the resolution of any conflict arising out of
         or connected with this Contract and which is not resolved by agreement between the Parties, they
         unconditionally and irrevocably submit themselves to the procedure and ruling of the Arbitration
         Tribunal referred to in Chapter XII of the General Conditions.
)
                IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Borrower and the Bank, each acting through its authorized
         representative, have signed this Contract in two (2) equally authentic copies in Paramaribo,
         Suriname, on the date indicated above.

    ZG)       Al
    o   (1)   m
    ~ ro ;;ii;:        REPUBLIC OF S       !NAME                 INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT
    ~~-~
    w~:,:;::                                                                BANK
        (1)   )>
        ~o.. :s:
             m
        ~ Al
        o..<
        N )>
        wz
        ru·    en
         ::::, e:
        e     Al
        :::,.z
        ti)  -

        N )>
        o :s:        H.E. Kermechend Raghoebarsing                         Adri na La.Valley
        ~m           Minister of Finance and Planning            Representative of the Bank in Suriname


                                                     5928/OC-SU
                                                                         LEG/SGO/CCB/EZIDB0000366-171363792-6062


                                             LOAN CONTRACT
                                           GENERAL CONDITIONS
                                              September 2023

                                                  CHAPTER I
                                         Application and Interpretation

        ARTICLE 1.01.         Application of the General Conditions. These General Conditions are
        uniformly applicable to loan contracts for the financing of investment projects using the ordinary
        capital resources of the Bank, which the Bank enters into with its member countries or with other
        borrowers that, for purposes of the respective loan contract, have the guarantee of a Bank member
        country.
r   \
        ARTICLE 1.02.        Interpretation. (a) Inconsistency. In the event of contradiction or
        inconsistency between the provisions of the Special Conditions, any annex of the Contract, and
        the Guarantee Contract or Contracts, if any, and these General Conditions, those provisions shall
        prevail over the provisions of these General Conditions. In the event of contradiction or
        inconsistency between provisions of a single element of this Contract, or between the provisions
        of the Special Conditions, any annex of the Contract, and the Guarantee Contract or Contracts, if
        any, the specific provision shall prevail over the general.

                (b)     Headings and Subheadings. Any heading or subheading of the chapters, articles,
        clauses, or other sections of this Contract are included solely for reference and should not be taken
        into account in the interpretation of this Contract.

              (c)     Periods. Unless this Contract provides otherwise, periods expressed m days,
        months, or years shall be understood as calendar days, months, or years.


                                                   CHAPTER II
                                                    Definitions

        ARTICLE 2.01.        Definitions. Whenever the following terms are capitalized in this Contract or
        in the Guarantee Contract( s ), if any, they shall have the meaning set forth below. Any reference to
        the singular includes the plural and vice versa.

                1.     "Additional Resources" means resources that are additional to those financed by
                       the Bank, which are necessary for the complete and uninterrupted execution of the
                       Project.

               2.      "Advance of Funds" means the amount of resources advanced by the Bank to the
                       Borrower, chargeable to the Loan, to cover eligible expenditures of the Project, as
                       provided in Article 4.07 of these General Conditions.



                                                   5928/OC-SU
                                       -2-


3.     "Amortization Schedule" means the original schedule set forth in the Special
       Conditions for the payment of amortization installments of the Loan or any
       modified schedule agreed upon between the Parties pursuant to the provisions of
       Article 3.02 and/or Article 3.06, as applicable, of these General Conditions.

4.     "Amortization Schedule Modification Notification Letter" means a communication
       by means of which the Bank responds to an Amortization Schedule Modification
       Request Letter.

5.     "Amortization Schedule Modification Request Letter" means the irrevocable
       communication from the Borrower to the Bank requesting a modification to the
       Amortization Schedule.

6.     "Approval Currency" means the currency in which the Bank approves the Loan,
       which may be Dollars or any Local Currency.

7.     "Bank" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Special Conditions.

8.     "Bank's Cost of Funding" means a cost margin relative to SOFR or other Base
       Interest Rate applicable to the Loan, to be determined periodically by the Bank
       based on the average cost of its funding corresponding to sovereign guaranteed
       loans, and expressed in terms of an annual percentage.

9.     "Base Interest Rate" means the rate determined by the Bank at the time of a
       Conversion execution ( other than a Commodity Conversion or a Catastrophe
       Protection Conversion), based on: (i) the currency requested by the Borrower;
       (ii) the type of interest rate requested by the Borrower; (iii) the Amortization
       Schedule; (iv) the existing market conditions; and (v) one of the following, among
       others: (l) SOFR or other base interest rate applicable to the Loan plus a margin
       reflecting the Bank's estimated cost of funding in Dollars at the time of
       disbursement or Conversion; (2) the Bank's actual cost of funding used as a basis
       for the Conversion; (3) the relevant interest rate index plus a margin reflecting the
       Bank's estimated cost of funding in the requested currency at the time of
       disbursement or Conversion; or (4) with respect to Outstanding Loan Balances that
       have been subject to a previous Conversion (other than a Commodity Conversion
       or a Catastrophe Protection Conversion), the interest rate in effect for such
       Outstanding Loan Balances.

I O.   "Board" means the Board of Executive Directors of the Bank.

11.    "Borrower" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the recitals of the Special
       Conditions.

12.    "Business Day" means a day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange
       markets settle payments and are open for general business (including dealings in




                                  5928/OC-SU
                                             -3 -


          foreign exchange and foreign currency deposits) in New York City or, in the case
          of a Conversion, in the cities listed in the Conversion Notification Letter.

    13.   "Calculation Agent" means the Bank , unless otherwise specified in writing by the
          Bank. Any determination made by the Calculation Agent shall be final, conclusive,
          and binding on the Parties (except in the case of manifest error), and, if made by
          the Bank as Calculation Agent, shall be duly documented and made in good faith
          and in a comm ercially reasonable manner.

    14.   "Cash Settlement Amount", (i) with respect to Commodity Conversions, has the
          meaning assigned to it in Articles 5. l 2(b ), ( c ), and ( d) of these General Conditions;
          and (ii) with respect to Catastrophe Protection Conversions, means an amount in
          Dollars owed by the Bank to the Borrower upon the determination of the occurrence
          of a Cash Settlement Event, to be calculated by the Event Calculation Agent in
)         accordance with the Cash Settlement Event Determination Instructions.

    15.   "Cash Settlement Event" means an Event that, upon occurrence, causes a Cash
          Settlement Amount to be due by the Bank to the Borrower under a Catastrophe
          Protection Conversion, as determined by the Event Calculation Agent m
          accordance with the Cash Settlement Event Determination Instructions.

    16.   "Cash Settlement Event Determination Instructions" means a detailed,
          reproducible, and transparent set of conditions and instructions included in a
          Catastrophe Conversion Notification Letter that: (i) specifies how the Event
          Calculation Agent will determine whether the occurrence of an Event constitutes a
          Cash Settlement Event and, in that case, how the Cash Settlement Amount will be
          calculated; (ii) provides the Bank with the necessary parameters to secure the
          protection in the market via a transaction in the financial markets (such as the
          probability of attachment, expected loss, and exhaustion probability); and
          (iii) specifies other information in relation to the procedures and roles of each of
          the parties in the determination of the occurrence of a Cash Settlement Event and
          the calculation of a Cash Settlement Amount, if any.

    17.   "Catastrophe" means a serious disruption of the functioning of a society, a
          community, or a project that occurs as a result of a hazard and causes widespread
          or serious human, material, economic or environmental losses.

    18.   "Catastrophe Conversion Notification Letter" means a communication by which
          the Bank informs the Borrower of the terms and conditions of the Catastrophe
          Protection Conversion, including, among others, the identification of one or more
          Events protected against and the Cash Settlement Event Determination Instructions.

    19.   "Catastrophe Protection Conversion" means any agreement entered into between
          the Bank and the Borrower, formalized on the Catastrophe Protection Conversion
          Date by means of a Catastrophe Conversion Notification Letter, where the Bank
          undertakes to pay to the Borrower a Cash Settlement Amount upon the occurrence



                                        5928/0C-SU
                                      -4 -


      of a Cash Settlement Event, subject to the fulfillment of the conditions specified in
      the Catastrophe Conversion Notification Letter and the Cash Settlement Event
      Determination Instructions.

20.   "Catastrophe Protection Conversion Date" means the effective date of a
      Catastrophe Protection Conversion set forth in the applicable Catastrophe
      Conversion Notification Letter.

21.   "Catastrophe Protection Engagement Letter" means an agreement entered into
      between the Borrower and the Bank, with the consent of the Guarantor, if any, in
      the initial stages of the structuring of a Catastrophe Protection Conversion whereby,
      the parties agree, among others to: (i) the main terms and conditions of the
      structuring of a potential Catastrophe Protection Conversion; and (ii) the
      pass-through to the Borrower of all costs incurred by the Bank (including fees
      charged by any third party, such as the Modeling Agent, external legal counsel, and
      distributors, among others) in relation to such potential Catastrophe Protection
      Conversion and its corresponding transaction in the financial markets.

22.   "Closing Period" means a period ofup to ninety (90) days from the expiration date
      of the Original Disbursement Period, or any extension thereof.

23.   "Commodity Call Option" means, with respect to all or part of a Required
      Outstanding Loan Balance, a cash-settled call option exercisable by the Borrower
      as contemplated in Article 5 .12 of these General Conditions.

24.   "Commodity Conversion" means, with respect to all or part of a Required
      Outstanding Loan Balance, the entry into a Commodity Put Option or a Commodity
      Call Option pursuant to Article 5.01 of these General Conditions.

25.   "Commodity Conversion Date" means the date of entry into a Commodity
      Conversion. This date shall be set forth in the Conversion Notification Letter.

26.   "Commodity Conversion Maturity Date" means the Business Day on which the
      Commodity Option matures. This date shall be set forth in the Conversion
      Notification Letter.

27.   "Commodity Conversion Settlement Date" means, with respect to a Commodity
      Conversion, the date on which the Cash Settlement Amount thereof is required to
      be paid, which shall be that date occurring five (5) Business Days following a
      Commodity Conversion Maturity Date unless otherwise agreed to by the Parties
      and specified in the Conversion Notification Letter.

28.   "Commodity Option" shall have the meaning assigned to it in Article 5.12(a) of
      these General Conditions.




                                 5928/OC-SU
                                       -5 -


29.   "Comm odity Put Option" means, with respect to all or part of a Required
      Outstanding Loan Balance, a cash-settled put option exercisable by the Borrower
      as contemplated in Art icle 5.12 of these General Conditions.

30.   "Consultant Policies" mean the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of
      Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank in force at the time
      of the approval of the Loan by the Bank.

31.   "Contingent Credit Facility" means the Contingent Credit Facility for Natural
      Disaster Emergencies or the Contingent Credit Facility for Natural Disaster and
      Public Health Emergencies, as the case may be, approved by the Bank, and as may
      be amended from time to time.

32.   "Contract" means this loan contract.


33.   "Contracting Agency" means the entity with legal capacity to enter into a contract
      for the procurement of goods, works, consulting services, and non-consulting
      services with a contractor, supplier, consulting firm, or individual consultant, as the
      case may be.

34.   "Conversion" means a modification of the terms of all or any portion of the Loan
      as requested by the Borrower and accepted by the Bank, under the terms of this
      Contract, which may be: (i) a Currency Conversion; (ii) an Interest Rate
      Conversion; (iii) a Comm odity Conversion; or (iv) a Catastrophe Protection
      Conversion.

35.   "Conversion Date" means the Currency Conversion Date, the Interest Rate
      Conversion Date, the Comm odity Conversion Date, or the Catastrophe Protection
      Conversion Date, as the case may be.

36.   "Conversion Notification Letter" means the comm unication by which the Bank
      informs the Borrower of the financial terms and conditions upon which a
      Conversion has been effected, in accordance with the Conversion Request Letter
      sent by the Borrower; provided that, for a Catastrophe Protection Conversion,
      "Conversion Notification Letter" means a Catastrophe Conversion Notification
      Letter.

37.   "Conversion Period" means, (i) with respect to any Conversion (other than a
      Comm odity Conversion or Catastrophe Protection Conversion), the period between
      the Conversion Date and the last day of the interest period in which the Conversion
      ends, pursuant to its terms. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of the last
      payment of principal and interest, the Conversion Period shall end on the day on
      which interest corresponding to such interest period is paid; and (ii) with respect to
      any Comm odity Conversion or Catastrophe Protection Conversion, the period from
      the date on which a Conversion enters into effect through the date set forth in the



                                 ,, ~928/OC-SU
                                      -6-


      applicable Conversion Notification Letter or the Catastrophe Conversion
      Notification Letter.

38.   "Conversion Request Letter" means the irrevocable communication of the
      Borrower to the Bank requesting a Conversion, pursuant to Article 5 .O 1 of these
      General Conditions.

39.   "Converted Currency" means any Local Currency or Principal Currency in which
      all or part of the Loan is denominated after a Currency Conversion has been
      effected.

40.   "Core Procurement Principles" means the principles that guide the procurement
      activities and the selection processes pursuant to the Procurement Policies and the
      Consultant Policies, being the following: value for money, economy, efficiency,
      equality, transparency, and integrity.

41.   "Currency Conversion" means, with respect to a disbursement or with respect to all
      or part of an Outstanding Loan Balance, a change in the currency of denomination
      to a Local Currency or a Principal Currency.

42.   "Currency Conversion Date" means, in relation to Currency Conversions for new
      disbursements, the effective date on which the Bank makes the disbursement and,
      in the case of Currency Conversions of Outstanding Loan Balances, the date on
      which the debt is redenominated. These dates shall be set forth in the Conversion
      Notification Letter.

43.   "Derivative Contract" means any contract entered into between the Bank and the
      Borrower or the Bank and the Guarantor, if any, to document and/or confirm one
      or more derivative transactions agreed to between the Bank and the Borrower, or
      the Bank and the Guarantor, if any, including any subsequent amendments thereto.
      All attachments and other supplemental agreements to a Derivative Contract shall
      form an integral part thereof.

44.   "Dollar" means the legal tender of the United States of America.

45.   "Eligible Expenditure" shall have the meaning assigned to it m the Special
      Conditions.

46.   "Eligible Natural Disaster" means (i) an earthquake; (ii) a tropical cyclone; and/or
      (iii) another natural disaster for which the Bank can offer the Principal Payment
      Option, subject to the Bank's operational and risk management considerations, in
      either of the three cases of catastrophic proportions, that meets the parametric and
      non-parametric conditions established by the Bank in the Principal Payment Option
      Parametric and Non-Parametric Terms and Conditions.




                                 5928/OC-SU
                                        - 7 -


4 7.   "Environmental and Social Policy Framework" means the Environmental and
       Social Policy Framework approved by the Bank and into effect at the time of the
       Project's approval.                                                ·

48.    "Environmental and Social Performance Standards" means the ten ( l O)
       Performance Standards that are part of the Environmental and Social Policy
       Framework.

49.    "Event" means a phenomenon or occurrence identified in the Catastrophe
       Conversion Notification Letter that has the potential to cause a Catastrophe, the risk
       of which the Borrower is requesting the protection against, and for which the Bank
       can execute a Catastrophe Protection Conversion subject to market availability and
       to the Bank's operational and risk management considerations.

50.    "Event Calculation Agent" means a third party engaged by the Bank who, based on
       the Reporting Agent's data concerning an Event, and in accordance with the Cash
       Settlement Event Determination Instructions, determines whether the occurrence
       of an Event constitutes a Cash Settlement Event and, in that case, calculates the
       related Cash Settlement Amount.

51.    "Event Calculation Notice" means a communication submitted by the Borrower to
       the Event Calculation Agent, with a copy to the Bank, requesting (i) the
       determination of whether a Cash Settlement Event has occurred; and (ii) if a Cash
       Settlement Event is determined to have occurred, the calculation of the
       corresponding Cash Settlement Amount.

52.    "Event Report" means a report released by the Event Calculation Agent after
       receipt of an Event Calculation Notice, determining whether the occurrence of an
       Event constitutes a Cash Settlement Event and specifying the corresponding Cash
       Settlement Amount due, if any.

53.    "Executing Agency" means the entity with legal capacity responsible for executing
       the Project and for using the proceeds of the Loan. Whenever there is more than
       one Executing Agency, these will be co-executing agencies and shall be referred to
       indistinctly as "Executing Agencies" or "Co-executing Agencies."

54.    "Execution Period" means the period during which the Bank may effect a
       Conversion as determined by the Borrower in the Conversion Request Letter. The
       Execution Period starts on the day the Bank receives the Conversion Request Letter.

55.    "Final Amortization Date" means the last date of amortization of the Loan, in
       accordance with the Special Conditions.

56.    "Financial Plan" means a tool for planning and monitoring the cash flows of the
       Project, which is used in coordination with other project planning tools, including
       the Procurement Plan.



                                   5928/OC-SU
                                       -8 -



57.   "Flexible Financing Facility" means the financial platform the Bank uses to provide
      sovereign-guaranteed loans chargeable to the resources of the Bank's ordinary
      capital.

58.   "Full-Term Catastrophe Protection Conversion" means a Catastrophe Protection
      Conversion for which the Conversion Period ends on the Final Am ortization Date.

59.   "Full-Term Comm odity Conversion" means a Comm odity Conversion whose
      Commodity Conversion Maturity Date coincides with the Final Amortization Date.

60.   "Full-Term Currency Conversion" means a Currency Conversion for a Conversion
      Period equal to the period set forth in the Amortization Schedule requested for such
      Currency Conversion, pursuant to Art icle 5.03 of these General Conditions.

61.   "Full-Term Interest Rate Conversion" means an Interest Rate Conversion for a
      Conversion Period equal to the period set forth in the Amortization Schedule
      requested for such Interest Rate Conversion, pursuant to Article 5.04 of these
      General Conditions.

62.   "General Conditions" mean the entirety of articles which comprise the second part
      of this Contract.

63.   "Guarantee Contract," means the contract, if any, that guarantees the fulfillment of
      all or part of the obligations contracted by the Borrower under this Contract and
      under which the Guarantor assumes other obligations for which it is liable.

64.   "Guarantor" means the member country of the Bank or subnational entity thereof,
      as the case may be, that enters into the Guarantee Contract with the Bank.

65.   "Interest Rate Calculation Convention" means the convention regarding the
      number of days used to calculate interest payments, as set forth in the Conversion
      Notification Letter.

66.   "Interest Rate Cap" means the establishm ent of an upper limit for a variable interest
      rate.

67.   "Interest Rate Collar" means the establishm ent of an upper and a lower limit for a
      variable interest rate.

68.   "Interest Rate Conversion" means: (i) a change of interest rate type with respect to
      all or part of the Outstanding Loan Balance; (ii) the establishment of an Interest
      Rate Cap or an Interest Rate Collar with respect to all or part of the Outstanding
      Loan Balance; or (iii) any other hedging option that affects the interest rate
      applicable to all or part of the Outstanding Loan Balance.




                                  5928/OC-SU
                                      -9 -


69.   "Interest Rate Conversion Date" means the effective date of the Interest Rate
      Conversion upon which the new interest rate applies. This date shall be set forth in
      the Conversion Notification Letter.

70.   "Loan" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Special Conditions.

71.   "Local Currency" means any currency other than the Dollar that is legal tender in
      the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.

72.   "Modeling Agent" means an independent third party engaged by the Bank to
      calculate the relevant pricing metrics in a Catastrophe Protection Conversion,
      including but not limited to the probability of attachment, expected loss, and
      exhaustion probability as defined in the Cash Settlement Event Determination
      Instructions.

73.   "Notional Quantity" means, with respect to a Commodity Conversion, the number
      of units of the underlying commodity.

74.   "Option Type" means the type of Commodity Option for which the Bank could,
      subject to market availability and to the Bank's operational and risk management
      considerations, execute a Commodity Conversion, including but not limited to,
      European, fixed-strike arithmetic Asian and binary options.

75.   "Original Disbursement Period" means the original period for disbursements of the
      Loan, which is set forth in the Special Conditions.

76.   "Original WAL" means the WAL of the Loan in effect as of the date of signature
      of this Contract and set forth in the Special Conditions.

77.   "Outstanding Loan Balance" means the amount that the Borrower owes the Bank
      for the portion of the Loan that has been disbursed.

78.   "Partial-Term Catastrophe Protection Conversion" means a Catastrophe Protection
      Conversion for which the Conversion Period ends prior to the Final Amortization
      Date.

79.   "Partial-Term Commodity Conversion" means a Commodity Conversion whose
      Commodity Conversion Maturity Date occurs prior to the Final Amortization Date.

80.   "Partial-Term Currency Conversion" means a Currency Conversion for a shorter
      Conversion Period than the period set forth in the Amortization Schedule requested
      for such Currency Conversion, pursuant to Article 5.03 of these General
      Conditions.

81.   "Partial-Term Interest Rate Conversion" means an Interest Rate Conversion for a
      shorter Conversion Period than the period set forth in the Amortization Schedule



                                 5928/OC-SU
                                      - 10 -


      requested for such Interest Rate Conversion, pursuant to Art icle 5.04 of these
      General Conditions.

82.   "Parties" shall have the meaning assign ed to it in the introduction to the Special
      Conditions.

83.   "Payment Valuation Date" means a date that is determ ined based on a number of
      Business Days prior to any amortization or interest paym ent date, as specified in a
      Conversion Notification Letter.

84.   "Principal Currency" means any currency other than the Dollar or Local Currency
      that is legal tender in the member countries of the Bank .

85.   "Principal Payment Option" means the one-time principal paym ent option with
      respect to the Am ortization Schedule, which may be offered to a Borrower which
      is a member country of the Bank pursuant to Art icles 3.03 to 3.06 of these General
      Conditions.

86.   "Principal Payment Option Activation Notification Letter" means the
      comm unication by which the Bank responds to a Principal Payment Option
      Activation Request Letter.

87.   "Principal Payment Option Activation Request Letter" means the comm unication
      from the Borrower to the Bank requesting that the Loan be eligible for the Principal
      Payment Option subject to the term s and conditions set forth in this Contract.

88.   "Principal Payment Option Exercise Notification Letter" means the comm un ication
      by which the Bank responds to a Principal Payment Option Exercise Request Letter
      and inform s the Borrower of the adjusted Am ortization Schedule resulting from the
      exercise of the Principal Paym ent Option.

89.   "Principal Payment Option Exercise Request Letter" means the comm un ication
      from the Borrower to the Bank requesting a modification to the Am ortization
      Schedule under the Principal Payment Option pursuant to Article 3.06 of these
      General Conditions.

90.   "Principal Payment Option Parametric and Non-Parametric Term s and Conditions"
      means the term s and conditions of the parametric and non-parametric conditions
      established by the Bank and applicable for the verification of the occurrence of an
      Eligible Natur al Disaster.

91.   "Procurement Agent" means the entity specialized in managing procurement
      which, upon agreement with the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case
      may be, may be employed to carry out, partially or in full, the procurement of goods
      or works, consulting services or non-consulting services for the Project.




                                 5928/0C-SU
                                             - 11 -


      92.    "Procurement Plan" means a tool for programming and monitoring the procurement
             related to the Project, in the terms described in the Special Conditions, Procurement
             Policies, and Consultant Policies.

      93.    "Procurement Policies" mean the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods
             Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank in force at the time of the
             approval of the Loan by the Bank.

      94.    "Prohibited Practices" mean the practices prohibited by the Bank in connection
             with the activities it finances, as defined by the Board or that are defined in the
             future and communicated to the Borrower, including among others: corrupt
             practice, fraudulent practice, coercive practice, collusive practice, obstructive
             practice, and misappropriation.

. )   95.    "Project" or "Program" means the project or program identified in the Special
             Conditions comprising a set of activities with a development objective that are
             financed by proceeds of the Loan.

      96.    "Protection Amount" means the maximum amount of the aggregate Cash
             Settlement Amounts under a Catastrophe Protection Conversion, in Dollars, that
             would be due by the Bank upon the determination of the occurrence of one or more
             Cash Settlement Events.

      97.    "Quarter" means each of the following three-month (3-month) periods of the
             calendar year: the period beginning on January 1 and ending on March 31; the
             period beginning on April 1 and ending on June 30; the period beginning on July 1
             and ending on September 30; and the period beginning on October 1 and ending on
             December 31.

      98.    "Reporting Agent" means an independent third-party that provides the relevant data
             and information for a Cash Settlement Event calculation under a Catastrophe
             Protection Conversion in accordance with the Cash Settlement Event
  )
             Determination Instructions.

      99.    "Required Outstanding Loan Balance" has the meanmg assigned to it m
             Article 5.02(f) of these General Conditions.

      100.   "Semester" means the first six (6) months or last six (6) months of the calendar
             year.

      101.   "Settlement Currency" means the currency used to settle the Loan's principal and
             interest payments. For fully deliverable currencies, the Settlement Currency shall
             be the Converted Currency. For non-deliverable currencies, the Settlement
             Currency shall be the Dollar.




                                         5928/OC-SU
                                     - 12 -


102.   "SOFR" means with respect to any day the secured overnight financing rate
       published for such day by the SOFR Administrator on the SOFR Administrator's
       website, currently at http://www.newy orkfed.org. or any successor source.

103.   "SOFR Administrator" means the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as
       adm inistrator of SOFR, or any successor administrator of SOFR.

104.   "SOFR-Based Interest Rate" means the sum of the SOFR Interest Rate and the
       Bank's Cost of Funding.

105.   "SOFR Interest Rate" means, for any calculation period, the daily compounded
       SOFR determined by the Calculation Agent in accordance with the following
       formula):


                    [(
                          SOFR Index End )
                                           -
                                               l]   X 360/dc
                         SOFR Index start

       Where:

         i)     "d," means the number of days in the relevant calculation period.

         ii)    "SOFR Indexss.," means the SOFR Index value on the first date of the
                relevant calculation period.

         iii)   "SOFR Indexs-a" means the SOFR Index value on the day after the end
                of the relevant calculation period.

         iv)    "SOFR Index" means, with respect to (1) any U.S. Government
                Securities Business Day, the value published by the SOFR Administrator
                on its website on or about 3:00 p.m. (New York Time) on such U.S.
                Government Securities Business Day, or any corrected value published
                by the SOFR Administrator on its website on the same U.S Government
                Securities Business Day and (2) any non-U.S. Government Securities
                Business Day, the Projected SOFR Index.

                If a SOFR Index value is not publicly available by 5 :00 p.m. (New York
                Time) on such U.S. Government Securities Business Day, then the
                Calculation Agent will use the Projected SOFR Index or if such value is
                not publicly available for two or more consecutive U.S. Government
                Securities Business Days, such other value determined by the Bank in
                accordance with Article 3.07(e) of these General Conditions.

         v)     "Projected SOFR Index" means, with respect to any non-U.S.
                Government Securities Business Day, the SOFR Index calculated by the
                Bank using a methodology substantially similar to the SOFR




                                 5928/OC-SU
                                               - 13 -


                          Administrator based on the last published SOFR Index and the last
                          published SOFR rate.

              vi)         "U.S. Government Securities Business Day" means any day except for a
                          Saturday, a Sunday or a day on which the Securities Industry and
                          Financial Markets Association recommends that the fixed income
                          departments of its members be closed for the entire day of trading in U.S.
                          government securities.

    106.   "Special Conditions" mean the entirety of provisions which comprise the first part
           of this Contract.

    107.   "Specified Price" means the price of the underlying commodity according to the
           Underlying Commodity Index on the Commodity Conversion Maturity Date except
)          that, for certain Option Types, such price will be calculated on the basis of a formula
           to be determined in the Conversion Notification Letter.

    108.   "Strike Price" means, with respect to a Commodity Conversion, the fixed price at
           which (i) the owner of a Commodity Call Option is entitled to purchase; or (ii) the
           owner of a Commodity Put Option is entitled to sell, the underlying commodity ( on
           a cash-settled basis).

    109.   "Underlying Commodity Index" means a published index that is a measure of the
           price of the underlying commodity that is the subject of a Commodity Option. The
           source and calculation of the Underlying Commodity Index will be set forth in the
           Conversion Notification Letter. If the Underlying Commodity Index relating to a
           commodity is (i) not calculated and announced by the sponsor thereof in effect on
           the Commodity Conversion Date but is calculated and announced by a successor
           sponsor acceptable to the Calculation Agent; or (ii) replaced by a successor index
           using, in the determination of the Calculation Agent, the same or a substantially
           similar formula for and method of calculation as used in the calculation of the
           Underlying Commodity Index, then in each case that index will be the Underlying
           Commodity Index.

    110.   "Valuation Exchange Rate" is equal to the number of units of the Converted
           Currency per Dollar, applicable on each Payment Valuation Date, pursuant to the
           source established in the Conversion Notification Letter.

    111.   "WAL" means the weighted average life, whether the Original WAL or the
           weighted average life resulting from a modification of the Amortization Schedule,
           as a result of a Conversion or otherwise. The WAL is calculated in years (to two
           decimal places), based on the Amortization Schedule of all tranches of the Loan
           and is defined as the division of (i) by (ii) below, where:

                    (i)       is the sum of the products of (A) and (B), defined as:




                                           5928/OC-SU
                                              - 14 -


                             (A)    the amount of each amortization paym ent;

                             (B)    the difference in the number of days between the
                                    amortization paym ent date and the execution date of this
                                    Contract, divided by 365 days;
                    and

                    (ii)     the sum of amortization payments.

                             The applicable formula is the following:


                                    f f.Ai,jx(PDi,365ED]
                                    j=l i=l
                                                            1-


                       WAL
                                                       TA
                    where:

                             WAL is the weighted average life of all tranches of the Loan,
                             expressed in years.

                             m      is the total number of tranches of the Loan.

                             n      is the total number of amortization payments for each
                                    tranche of the Loan.

                             A;,¡   is the amortization amount referring to payment i of tranche
                                    j, calculated in Dollars, or in the case of a Conversion, in
                                    Dollar equivalent, at the exchange rate determined by the
                                    Calculation Agent, for the date of modification of the
                                    Amortization Schedule.

                             PD;J   is the payment date referring to payment i of tranche}.

                             ED     is the date of signature of this Contract.

                             TA     is the sum of all Aij, calculated in Dollars, or in the case of a
                                    Conversion, in Dollar equivalent, as of the date of the
                                    calculation at the exchange rate determined by the
                                    Calculation Agent.


                                     CHAPTER III
    Amortization, Interest, Credit Fee, Inspection and Supervision, and Prepayments

ARTICLE 3.01.    Dates of Payment of Amortization, Interest, Credit Fee, and Other Costs.
The Loan will be amortized in accordance with the Amortization Schedule. Interest and


                                         5928/0C-SU
                                                    - 15 -


    amortization installments will be paid on the fifteenth ( 15th) day of the month, as set forth in the
    Special Conditions, in an Amortization Schedule Modification Notification Letter, in a Conversion
    Notification Letter, or in a Principal Payment Option Exercise Notification Letter, as the case may
    be. The dates for payment of an amortization payment, credit fee, and other costs shall always
    coincide with an interest payment date.

    ARTICLE 3.02.        Modification of the Amortization Schedule. (a) The Borrower, with the
    prior consent of the Guarantor, if any, may request the modification of the Amortization Schedule
    at anytime from the entry into effect of the Contract and up to sixty (60) days prior to the expiration
    of the Original Disbursement Period as set forth in this Article. The Borrower may also request
    the modification of the Amortization Schedule in the case of a Principal Payment Option, a
    Currency Conversion, or an Interest Rate Conversion, as set forth respectively in Articles 3.06,
    5.03, and 5.04 of these General Conditions.

)            (b)     For any modifications to the Amortization Schedule, except pursuant to the
    Principal Payment Option, a Currency Conversion, or an Interest Rate Conversion, the Borrower
    shall deliver to the Bank an Amortization Schedule Modification Request Letter, which shall:
    (i) state whether the proposed modification to the Amortization Schedule is applicable to all or
    part of the Loan; and (ii) indicate the new amortization schedule, including the first and last
    amortization dates, the frequency of payments, and the percentage that these payments represent
    of the total of the Loan or the Loan tranche for which the modification is requested.

            (c)     The Bank's acceptance of any requested modifications to the Amortization
    Schedule will be subject to the Bank's operational and risk management considerations and the
    satisfaction of the following conditions:

                   (i)     the last amortization date and the cumulative WAL of all the Amortization
                           Schedules do not exceed the Final Amortization Date or the Original WAL,
                           as the case may be;

                   (ii)    the Loan tranche subject to a new Amortization Schedule is not less than
                           the equivalent of three million Dollars (US$3,000,000); and

                   (iii)   the Loan tranche subject to the modification of the Amortization Schedule
                           has not been subject to a prior modification, unless the new Amortization
                           Schedule modification is the result of the exercise of the Principal Payment
                           Option, a Currency Conversion, or an Interest Rate Conversion.

           (d)    The Bank will notify the Borrower of its decision in an Amortization Schedule
    Modification Notification Letter. If the Bank accepts the Borrower's request, the Amortization
    Schedule Modification Notification Letter will include: (i) the new Amortization Schedule for the
    Loan or Loan tranche; (ii) the cumulative WAL of the Loan; and (iii) the effective date of the new
    Amortization Schedule.

           (e)     The Loan may not have more than four (4) Loan tranches denominated in a
    Principal Currency with different Amortization Schedules. The number of Loan tranches in Local



                                                5928/OC-SU
                                                - 16 -


Currency may exceed this amount, subject to the Bank's operational and risk management
considerations.

        (f)      To ensure that the WAL continues to be equal to or less than the Original WAL of
the Loan at all times, whenever the WAL of the Loan exceeds the Original WAL, the Amortization
Schedule shall be modified. Accordingly, the Bank shall notify the Borrower of any such event,
and request that it establish a new amortization schedule, pursuant to the provisions of this Art icle.
Unless the Borrower expressly requests otherw ise, such modification will consist of moving
forw ard the Final Am ortization Date, with a corresponding adjustment to the amortization
installments.

         (g)     Notw ithstanding paragraph (f) above, the Am ortization Schedule shall be modified
in such cases in which an extension to the Original Disbursement Period is granted, which:
(i) results in an extension of such period beyond a date that is sixty (60) days prior to the due date
for the first amortization installment of the Loan or the Loan tranche, as the case may be; and
(ii) when disbursements occur duri ng such extension period. Such modification will consist of
(i) moving forw ard the Final Amortization Date or, if the Loan has different tranches, moving
forw ard the Final Amortization Date of the Loan tranche or tranches from which funds are
disbursed during the extension period of the Original Disbursement Period, unless the Borrower
expressly requests, in lieu of the foregoing, (ii) an increase in the amount of the amortization
installment following each disbursement of the Loan or the Loan tranche, as the case may be, that
results in a longer WAL than the Original WAL. With respect to this second option, the Bank will
determi ne the corresponding amoun t for each amortization installment.

ARTICLE 3.03.         Principal Payment Option. (a) The Principal Payment Option may only be
offered by the Bank to a borrower which is a member country of the Bank. For the purposes of the
Principal Payment Option described in this Contract, the term "Borrower" should be understood
as the member country of the Bank. The Borrower may request to the Bank, and the Bank may
accept, that this Loan be eligible for the Principal Payment Option in accordance with the
provisions set forth in this Contract. Upon acceptance by the Bank of the Borrower's request, the
Borrower may be allowed to exercise the Principal Payment Option during the accrual period of
the transaction fee applicable to the Principal Payment Option set forth in Article 3.05 of these
General Conditions by requesting the modification of the Amortization Schedule following the
occurrence of an Eligible Natural Disaster in accordance with Article 3.06 of these General
Conditions.

        (b)     Principal Payment Option Activation Request after the entry into effect of this
Contract. The Borrower may request to the Bank, and the Bank may accept, that this Loan be
eligible for the Principal Payment Option after it has entered into effect and up to sixty (60) days
prior to the expiration of the Original Disbursement Period. To this end, the Borrower shall deliver
to the Bank a Principal Payment Option Activation Request Letter in form and substance
satisfactory to the Bank, signed by a duly authorized representative of the Borrower. Once the
Bank has received a Principal Payment Option Activation Request Letter, the Bank may accept
the request by delivering to the Borrower a Principal Payment Option Activation Notification
Letter.




                                            5928/OC-SU
                                                    - 17 -


             (c)    Condition to Request the Activation of the Principal Payment Option. A
    request from the Borrower to activate the Principal Payment Option will be eligible provided that,
    at the time of the request, there is a Contingent Credit Facility entered into between the Borrower
    and the Bank with a corresponding active natural disaster coverage for at least one Eligible Natural
    Disaster.

             (d)    Expansion of Contingent Credit Facility Natural Disaster Coverage. If the
    Borrower expands the natural disaster coverage of its Contingent Credit Facility with the Bank to
    include one or more natural disasters that said Contingent Credit Facility did not provide coverage
    for at the time of activation of the Principal Payment Option as set forth in paragraph (c) above,
    the Borrower may request that the Bank update the Principal Payment Option Parametric and
    Non-Parametric Terms and Conditions accordingly. If the Bank approves said request, the
    parametric and non-parametric terms and conditions applicable for the verification of the
    respective natural disaster will be established by the Bank, at its own discretion, in the updated
)   Principal Payment Option Parametric and Non-Parametric Terms and Conditions, which shall be
    communicated by the Bank to the Borrower. Once the Bank has communicated the updated
    Principal Payment Option Parametric and Non-Parametric Terms and Conditions as set forth in
    this paragraph, the natural disaster will be considered an Eligible Natural Disaster for the purposes
    of the Principal Payment Option.

            (e)     Cancellation. The Principal Payment Option may be cancelled upon written
    request by the Borrower to the Bank, in which case the Principal Payment Option transaction fee
    shall continue to accrue until thirty (30) days after the receipt by the Bank of the Borrower's
    request for cancellation. The Parties agree that any amount paid by the Borrower in connection
    with the transaction fee of the Principal Payment Option between the date of receipt of the notice
    of cancellation by the Bank and the effective date of the cancellation will not be reimbursed by the
    Bank to the Borrower.

             (f)      Ineligibility. This Loan will not be eligible for the Principal Payment Option if the
    Amortization Schedule of the Loan contemplates either a bullet payment or principal payments in
    the last five ( 5) years of the amortization period of the Loan.

    ARTICLE 3.04.          Principal Payment Option Parametric and Non-Parametric Terms and
    Conditions. (a) The parametric and non-parametric conditions applicable for the verification of
    the Eligible Natural Disaster will be established by the Bank, at its own discretion, in the Principal
    Payment Option Parametric and Non-Parametric Terms and Conditions, which shall be
    communicated by the Bank to the Borrower following the activation of the Principal Payment
    Option as set forth in Article 3.03 of these General Conditions. The Principal Payment Option
    Parametric and Non-Parametric Terms and Conditions shall be binding on the Borrower and may
    be amended by the Bank by written notification to the Borrower.

            (b)   The fulfillment of the parametric conditions established for the verification of an
    Eligible Natural Disaster as set forth in the Principal Payment Option Parametric and
    Non-Parametric Terms and Conditions will be verified by the Bank using data provided by
    independent third-party entities determined by the Bank.




                                                5928/OC-SU
                                                 - 18 -


        ( c)    The fulfillment of the non-parametric conditions established for the verification of
an Eligible Natural Disaster as set forth in the Principal Payment Option Parametric and
Non-Parametric Terms and Conditions will be verified by the Bank and, to that end, the Bank may,
at its own discretion, consult with any third parties.

ARTICLE 3.05.           Transaction Fee Applicable to the Principal Payment Option. (a) A
transaction fee applicable to the Principal Payment Option, which will be determined by the Bank
periodically, shall be paid by the Borrower on the Outstanding Loan Balance. The Bank will notify
the Borrower of the transaction fee to be paid for the Principal Payment Option. Such fee shall
remain in effect until it ceases to accrue as established in paragraph ( c) of this Article.

        (b)     The transaction fee applicable to the Principal Payment Option: (i) shall be
expressed in the form of basis points per annum; (ii) shall begin to accrue twelve (12) months prior
to the date on which the first amortization installment of the Loan is due or sixty (60) days prior
to the expiration date of the Original Disbursement Period, whichever occurs later; and (iii) shall
be paid on each interest payment date as provided for in Article 3.01. of these General Conditions.

        ( c)    The transaction fee applicable to the Principal Payment Option shall cease to
accrue: (i) on the date the Borrower exercises the Principal Payment Option pursuant to
Article 3.06 of these General Conditions; or (ii) five (5) years prior to the last amortization date as
provided in the Amortization Schedule as set forth in paragraph (g) of Article 3.06 of these General
Conditions, whichever occurs first.

ARTICLE 3.06.          Exercise of the Principal Payment Option. (a) Following the occurrence
of an Eligible Natural Disaster during the accrual period of the transaction fee applicable to the
Principal Payment Option set forth in Article 3.05 of these General Conditions, the Borrower may
request to exercise the Principal Payment Option by delivering to the Bank a Principal Payment
Option Exercise Request Letter, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, by which the
Borrower shall:

               (i)     notify the Bank of the occurrence of an Eligible Natural Disaster;

               (ii)    submit to the Bank the supporting documentation related to the fulfillment
                       of the parametric and non-parametric conditions applicable to the Eligible
                       Natural Disaster;

               (iii)   indicate the Loan number; and

               (iv)    include the new amortization schedule, which shall reflect the redistribution
                       of Loan amortization payments that would be due during the two-year
                       period following the occurrence of an Eligible Natural Disaster m
                       accordance with the provisions of paragraphs (b) and ( d) of this Article.

       (b)    The Bank may accept the request referred to in paragraph (a) of this Article subject
to the Bank's operational and risk management considerations and to the satisfaction of the
following requirements:



                                            5928/OC-SU
                                                    - 19 -



                   (i)     the new amortization schedule of the Loan corresponds to an amortization
                           schedule with semiann ual principal paym ents;

                   (ii)    the last amortization date and the cumulative WAL of the modified
                           Am ortization Schedule does not exceed the Final Amortization Date nor the
                           Original WAL ; and

                   (iii)   there has been no delay in the paym ent of any sum s owed by the Borrower
                           to the Bank for principal, fees, interest, return of resources of the Loan used
                           for ineligible expenditures, or for any other reason, under this Contract or
                           any other contract entered into between the Bank and the Borrower,
                           including any loan contract or Derivative Contract.

)          ( c)    The Bank will notify the Borrower of its decision in a Principal Payment Option
    Exercise Notification Letter. If the Bank accepts the Borrower's request, the Principal Payment
    Option Exercise Notification Letter will include: (i) the new Amortization Schedule for the Loan;
    and (ii) the effective date of the new Amortization Schedule.

           (d)      If the Principal Payment Option is exercised less than sixty (60) days in advance of
    the next principal payment due to the Bank as set forth in the Amortization Schedule, the modified
    Amortization Schedule shall not affect such next principal payment and, therefore, the two-year
    period of the Principal Payment Option would commence immediately after said principal
    payment.

           (e)    All interest, fees, premiums, and any other Loan charge, as well as any other
    payment for expenses or costs that may be imputed to this Contract, will continue to be due by the
    Borrower during the two-year period following the occurrence of an Eligible Natural Disaster in
    accordance with the provisions of this Contract.

            (t)       The Principal Payment Option may only be exercised by the Borrower regarding
    an Eligible Natural Disaster for which the Borrower had, at the time of activation of the Principal
    Payment Option, a corresponding active natural disaster coverage under a Contingent Credit
    Facility. If, following the activation of the Principal Payment Option, the Bank approves that the
    Borrower be eligible to exercise the Principal Payment Option for additional natural disasters
    pursuant to paragraph (d) of Article 3.03 of these General Conditions, the Borrower may also
    exercise the Principal Payment Option regarding said Eligible Natural Disaster.

            (g)     The Principal Payment Option may be exercised by the Borrower, subject to the
    Bank's operational and risk management considerations, up to five (5) years prior to the date of
    the last scheduled amortization payment to the Bank, as set forth in the Amortization Schedule. If
    the Principal Payment Option is not exercised within such period, it shall be deemed automatically
    cancelled, and the respective transaction fee shall cease to accrue upon the expiration of the said
    period.




                                               5928/OC-SU
                                               -20 -


      (h)     Once the Principal Payment Option has been exercised pursuant to this Article, the
Borrower shall not be eligible to exercise such option again with respect to the Loan.

ARTICLE 3.07.         Interest. (a) Interest on Outstanding Loan Balances that have not been
subject to Conversion. To the extent that the Loan has not been subject to any Conversion, interest
on the Loan shall accrue on daily Outstanding Loan Balances at the applicable SOFR-Based
Interest Rate plus the applicable lending spread for the Bank's ordinary capital loans. For each
interest period, the Borrower shall pay an estimated interest amount calculated based on a formula
determined by the Bank, which formula, unless otherwise specified by the Bank, will incorporate
the published SOFR Index for some portion of the relevant interest period and the last published
SOFR rate as a proxy for the remainder of the relevant interest period. A corresponding adjustment
to the interest amount payable by the Borrower shall be made for the subsequent interest period in
a manner determined by the Bank, or in the case of the last interest period the corresponding
adjustment shall be made immediately thereafter.

        (b)     Interest on Outstanding Loan Balances that have been Subject to Conversion.
If the Outstanding Loan Balances have been subject to a Conversion, the Borrower shall pay
interest on the Outstanding Loan Balances converted under such Conversion at: (i) the Base
Interest Rate determined by the Bank using the methodology and conventions determined by the
Bank, including any necessary conforming changes in interest period, interest rate determination
date or other technical, administrative or operational changes that the Bank decides are appropriate
to effectuate such Conversion; plus (ii) the applicable lending spread for the Bank's ordinary
capital loans.

        (c)   Interest on Outstanding Loan Balances subject to an Interest Rate Cap. If an
Interest Rate Conversion has been effected to establish an Interest Rate Cap, and the interest rate
payable by the Borrower pursuant to this Article exceeds the Interest Rate Cap at any time during
the Conversion Period, the maximum interest rate applicable during such Conversion Period shall
be equal to the Interest Rate Cap.

        (d)     Interest on Outstanding Loan Balances Subject to an Interest Rate Collar. If
an Interest Rate Conversion has been effected to establish an Interest Rate Collar, and the interest
rate payable by the Borrower pursuant to this Article exceeds the upper limit or falls below the
lower limit of the Interest Rate Collar at any time during the Conversion Period, the maximum
interest rate applicable during such Conversion Period shall be equal to the upper limit of the
Interest Rate Collar, and the minimum interest rate applicable during such Conversion Period shall
be equal to the lower limit of the Interest Rate Collar.

        (e)       Changes to the Interest Rate Calculation Basis. The Parties agree that the
Borrower's payments shall remain linked to the Bank's funding, notwithstanding any change in
market practice that may, at any moment, affect the determination of the SOFR Interest Rate or
any other applicable Base Interest Rate, and including if the Bank determines that it is no longer
able, or it is no longer commercially acceptable for the Bank, to continue to use the SOFR Interest
Rate or any other applicable Base Interest Rate, for purposes of its asset and liability management.
For purposes of obtaining and maintaining such link under such circumstances, the Parties
expressly agree that the Calculation Agent, seeking to reflect the Bank's corresponding funding,



                                           5928/OC-SU
                                                    - 21 -


    shall determine: (i) the occurr ence of such changes; and (ii) the alternate base rate applicable to
    determine the appropriate amount to be paid by the Borrower using the methodology and
    conventions determined by the Bank, including any applicable spread adjustments and any
    necessary conforming changes in interest period, interest rate determination date or other technical,
    administrative or operational changes that the Bank considers are appropriate. The Calculation
    Agent shall notify the Borrower and the Guarantor, if any, of the applicable alternate base interest
    rate, with any necessary conforming changes with no less than sixty (60) days prior notice. The
    alternate base rate and conforming changes shall become effective on the expiration of such notice
    period.

    ARTICLE 3.08.       Credit Fee. (a) The Borrower shall pay a credit fee on the undisbursed
    balance of the Loan, at a percentage set by the Bank periodically during its review of financial
    charges on ordinary capital loans. The credit fee shall not exceed 0.75% per annum.

)          (b)     The credit fee will begin to accrue sixty (60) days from the date of signature of the
    Contract.

             ( c)    The credit fee shall cease to accrue: (i) when all disbursements have been made;
    and (ii) in full or in part, as the case may be, when the Loan has been totally or partially cancelled
    pursuant to Articles 4.02, 4.12, 4.13 or 8.02 of these General Conditions.

    ARTICLE 3.09.        Computation of Interest and Credit Fee. The interest and credit fee shall
    accrue daily for each interest Period from the first day to the last day of such interest period,
    calculated on the basis of the actual number of days elapsed in the respective interest period and a
    360-day year, unless the Bank adopts another convention to follow for this purpose, in which case
    the Bank will inform the Borrower in writing.

    ARTICLE 3.10.          Resources for Inspection and Supervision. The Borrower shall not be
    required to cover the Bank's expenses for general inspection and supervision, unless the Bank
    establishes otherwise during the Original Disbursement Period as a consequence of its periodic
    review of financial charges for ordinary capital loans, and notifies the Borrower accordingly. In
    this case, the Borrower shall indicate whether it will pay the corresponding amount directly to the
    Bank or whether such amount should be withdrawn and withheld by the Bank from the resources
    of the Loan. In no case may the Bank charge for a specific semester more than the result of applying
    one percent ( 1 % ) of the Loan amount divided by the number of semesters comprising the Original
    Disbursement Period.

    ARTICLE 3.11.        Currency of Payment for Amortization, Interest, Credit Fee, and
    Inspection and Supervision Expenses. Interest and principal payments shall be made in Dollars,
    unless a Currency Conversion has been effected, in which case the provisions of Article 5.05 of
    these General Conditions shall apply. The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee shall
    always be paid in the Approval Currency.

    ARTICLE 3.12.       Prepayments. (a) Prepayment of Outstanding Loan Balances
    denominated in Dollars with SO FR-Based Interest Rate. The Borrower may prepay all or part
    of any Outstanding Loan Balance denominated in Dollars subject to a SO FR-Based Interest Rate



                                               ,5928/OC-SU
                                                -22 -


on any interest payment date, provided that it delivers to the Bank a written irrevocable notice,
with the consent of the Guarantor, if any, at least thirty (30) days in advance. Any such prepayment
shall be applied as set forth in Art icle 3.13 of these General Conditions. In the event that the
prepayment does not cover the entire Outstanding Loan Balance, the prepayment shall be applied
proportionately to the remaining amortization installments. If the Loan has Loan tranches with
different Amortization Schedules, the Borrower shall prepay individual tranches in their entirety,
unless the Bank agrees otherwise.

         (b)     Prepayments of Amounts that have been Subject to Conversion. Except for the
case of Catastrophe Protection Conversions as set forth in paragraph ( c) of this Article, and
provided that the Bank is able to unwind or reallocate its corresponding funding ( or any related
hedge), the Borrower, with the consent of the Guarantor, if any, may prepay on any interest
payment date set forth in the Amortization Schedule attached to the Conversion Notification
Letter: (i) all or part of the amount that has been subject to a Currency Conversion; (ii) all or part
of the amount that has been subject to an Interest Rate Conversion; and/or (iii) all or part of an
amount equivalent to the Required Outstanding Balance under a Commodity Conversion. For this
purpose, the Borrower shall deliver an irrevocable written notice to the Bank at least thirty (30)
days in advance. Said notice shall specify the amount the Borrower intends to prepay and the
Conversions to which such prepayment relates. In the event that the prepayment does not cover
the full amount of the Outstanding Loan Balance related to such Conversion, the prepayment shall
be applied proportionately to the remaining amortization installments of such Conversion. The
Borrower may not prepay converted amounts in an amount less than the equivalent of three million
Dollars (US$3,000,000), unless the remaining Outstanding Loan Balance related to the respective
Conversion is less than such amount and is paid in full.

       (c)      Prepayments of Amounts that have been Subject to Catastrophe Protection
Conversion. The prepayment of any amount subject to a Catastrophe Protection Conversion will
be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, subject to the Bank's operational and risk management
considerations.

        (d)    For purposes of paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) above, the following payments shall be
considered as prepayments: (i) the return of unjustified Advances of Funds; and (ii) payments
resulting from all or a part of the Loan being declared immediately due and payable, pursuant to
Article 8.02 of these General Conditions.

         (e)    Notwithstanding paragraph (b) above, in the event of a prepayment, the Borrower
shall receive from the Bank, or alternatively, shall pay the Bank, as applicable, any gain or cost
incurred by the Bank as a result of unwinding or reallocating its corresponding funding ( or any
related hedge), as determined by the Calculation Agent. In the case of a gain, it will be credited
first to any amounts due and payable by the Borrower. In the case of a cost, the Borrower shall pay
the corresponding amount concurrently on the prepayment date.

ARTICLE 3.13.       Application of Payments. All payments shall be applied first to any return
of unjustified Advances of Funds after the expiration of the Closing Period, then to fees and interest
due on the payment date, and if a balance exists, to the amortization of installments of principal
due.



                                            5928/OC-SU
                                               -23 -



ARTICLE 3.14.        Transactions Falling Due on Non-Business Days. Any payment or other
transaction which, pursuant to this Contract, should be effected on a day other than a Business
Day, shall be considered validly effected if made on the first Business Day immediately thereafter,
and in such case no penalty whatsoever shall apply, unless the Bank adopts another convention to
follow for this purpose, in which case the Bank will inform the Borrower in writing.

ARTICLE 3.15.        Place of Payments. All payments shall be made at the principal office of the
Bank in Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America, unless the Bank designates
another place or places for this purpose by written notification to the Borrower.


                                     CHAPTER IV
                 Disbursements, Renunciation, and Automatic Cancellation

ARTICLE 4.01.        Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of Resources of the Loan.
Without prejudice to the other requirements set forth in the Special Conditions, the first
disbursement of the resources of the Loan shall be subject to the fulfillment of the following
requirements to the satisfaction of the Bank:

       (a)     The Bank shall have received one or more well-founded legal opinions which
               establish, with citations of the pertinent constitutional, legal, and regulatory
               provisions, that the obligations undertaken by the Borrower in this Contract, and
               those of the Guarantor in the Guarantee Contracts, if any, are valid and enforceable.
               Such opinions shall also refer to any other legal question that the Bank may deem
               relevant.

       (b)     The Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall have designated
               one or more officials to represent it for purposes of requesting disbursements of the
               Loan and for other acts relating to the financial management of the Project, and
               shall have furnished the Bank with authentic copies of the signatures of said
               representatives. Should two or more officials be designated, the designation shall
               indicate whether such officials may act separately or must act jointly.

       (c)     The Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall have provided to
               the Bank information in writing, through its representative authorized to request
               disbursements of the Loan, regarding the bank account into which disbursements
               of the Loan are to be deposited. Separate accounts shall be required for
               disbursements in Local Currency, Dollars, and Principal Currency. This
               information will not be necessary in the event the Bank agrees that the resources of
               the Loan are to be posted in the Borrower's general treasury account.

       (d)    The Borrower or Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall have demonstrated to
              the Bank that it has an adequate financial information system and internal control
              structure for the purposes indicated in this Contract.




                                           5928/0C-SU
                                               - 24 -


ARTICLE 4.02.         Period for Fulfilling the Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement. If
within one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of this Contract, or within such longer
period as the Parties may agree in writing, the conditions precedent to the first disbursement
established in Article 4.01 of these General Conditions and other conditions precedent to the first
disbursement agreed upon in the Special Conditions have not been fulfilled, the Bank may
terminate this Contract in advance by giving notice to the Borrower.

ARTICLE 4.03.        Conditions for All Disbursements. (a) As a condition for all disbursements
of the resources of the Loan, and without prejudice to the conditions precedent to the first
disbursement of the resources of the Loan established in Article 4.01 of these General Conditions
and in the Special Conditions, if any, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be,
undertakes to present to the Bank in writing, whether physically or by electronic means, in such
form and conditions as may be specified by the Bank, a disbursement request together with the
pertinent documents and other background materials required by the Bank. Unless the Bank agrees
otherwise, the last disbursement request shall be presented to the Bank no later than thirty (30)
days in advance of the expiration date of the Original Disbursement Period or any extension
thereof.

      (b)     Unless the Parties agree otherwise, disbursements of the resources of the Loan shall
be made only in amounts of not less than the equivalent of fifty thousand Dollars (US$50,000)
each.

        ( c)   Any charge, fee, or expense assessed to the bank account into which disbursements
of the resources of the Loan are deposited shall be borne by, and are the responsibility of, the
Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be.

        (d)     In addition, the Guarantor, if any, shall not be more than one hundred twenty (120)
days late on the payment of sums owed to the Bank on any loan or guarantee.

ARTICLE 4.04.       Income Generated in the Bank Account for Disbursements. Income
generated from the resources of the Loan deposited in the bank account designated to receive
disbursements shall be used to finance Eligible Expenditures.

ARTICLE 4.05.         Disbursement Methods. At the request of the Borrower or the Executing
Agency, as the case may be, the Bank may make disbursements of the resources of the Loan
through: (a) reimbursement of expenditures; (b) Advance of Funds; (c) direct payments to third
parties; and ( d) reimbursement under a letter of credit guarantee.

ARTICLE 4.06.       Reimbursement of Expenditures. (a) The Borrower or the Executing
Agency, as the case may be, may request disbursements under the reimbursement of expenditures
method when the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, has paid for Eligible
Expenditures with its own resources.

       (b)     Unless the Parties agree otherwise, disbursement requests for reimbursing
expenditures shall be made promptly to the extent that the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as




                                          5928/OC-SU
                                                - 25 -


the case may be, has incurred such expenditures, and not later than sixty (60) days following the
conclusion of each calendar semester.

ARTICLE 4.07.        Advance of Funds. (a) The Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case
may be, may request disbursements under the Advance of Funds method. The amount of the
Advance of Funds shall be set by the Bank on the basis of (i) the liquidity needs of the Project in
order to cover periodic projections of Eligible Expenditures during a period of up to six ( 6) months,
unless the Financial Plan provides for a longer period, which in no case may exceed twelve (12)
months, and (ii) the risks associated with the capacity demonstrated by the Borrower or the
Executing Agency, as the case may be, to manage and use the resources of the Loan.

         (b)     Each Advance of Funds shall be subject to: (i) the request for Advance of Funds
being presented in a manner acceptable to the Bank; and (ii) with the exception of the first Advance
of Funds, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, having presented a
justification for the use of at least eighty percent (80%) of the total cumulative balances pending
justification for this purpose, and the Bank having accepted such justification, unless the Financial
Plan specifies a lower percentage, which in no case may be less than fifty percent (50%).

        (c)    The Bank may, during the term of the Financial Plan, provide for a one-time
increase in the amount of the last Advance of Funds granted to the Borrower or the Executing
Agency, as the case may be, to the extent that additional resources are needed to pay Eligible
Expenditures that were unforeseen in said plan.

        (d)    The Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall present the last
Advance of Funds request no later than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the expiration of the
Original Disbursement Period or any extension thereof, in the understanding that the justification
for such Advance of Funds shall be presented to the Bank during the Closing Period. The Bank
shall not disburse resources subsequent to the expiration of the Original Disbursement Period or
any extension thereof.

        (e)    The value of each Advance of Funds to the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as
the case may be, must be maintained in the equivalent value expressed in the respective
disbursement currency or in the Approval Currency. Eligible Expenditures incurred with resources
of an Advance of Funds must be justified in the equivalent of the total amount of the Advance of
Funds expressed in the respective disbursement currency or in the Approval Currency, using the
exchange rate established in this Contract. The Bank may accept adjustments in the justification
of the Advance of Funds due to exchange rate fluctuations, provided that they do not impact the
execution of the Project.

ARTICLE 4.08.       Direct payments to third parties. (a) The Borrower or the Executing
Agency, as the case may be, may request disbursements under the method of direct payments to
third parties, by means of which the Bank directly pays Eligible Expenditures to providers or
contractors on behalf of the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be.

        (b)    In case of direct payments to third parties, the Borrower or the Executing Agency
shall be responsible for payment of the amount equivalent to the difference between the amount



                                           5928/OC.,SU
                                               -26 -


of the disbursement requested by the Borrower or the Executing Agency and the amount received
by the third party as the result of exchange rate fluctuations, commissions, and other financial
costs.

       (c)    Notwithstanding paragraph (a) above and Article 8.04(b) of these General
Conditions, whenever the Bank so determines, it may, by written notice to the Borrower or the
Executing Agency, as appropriate, render void the request for direct payment submitted by the
Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be.

ARTICLE 4.09.          Reimbursement under a Letter of Credit Guarantee. The Borrower or the
Executing Agency, as the case may be, may request disbursements through reimbursement under
a letter of credit, in order to reimburse commercial banks for payments made to contractors or
providers of goods and services by virtue of a letter of credit issued and/or confirmed by a
commercial bank and guaranteed by the Bank. The letter of credit must be issued and/or confirmed
in a manner satisfactory to the Bank. The resources committed under the letter of credit and
guaranteed by the Bank shall be used exclusively for the purposes established in the letter of credit
for as long as the guarantee remains in effect.

ARTICLE 4.10.      Exchange rate. (a) The Borrower undertakes to justify, or to cause the
Executing Agency to justify, as the case may be, expenditures chargeable to the Loan or the
Additional Resources, expressing such expenditures in either the currency of denomination or the
Approval Currency of the respective disbursement.

        (b) To determine the equivalence of an Eligible Expenditure incurred in the Local
Currency of the Borrower's country to the currency in which the disbursements are made, or
alternatively to the Approval Currency, for purposes of accounting and justification of expenses,
regardless of the source of financing of the Eligible Expenditure, one of the following exchange
rates shall be used, pursuant to the Special Conditions:

               (i)     the exchange rate in force on the date on which the Approval Currency or
                       disbursement currency is converted into the Local Currency of the
                       Borrower's country; or

               (ii)    the exchange rate in force on the date of payment of the expenditure in the
                       Local Currency of the Borrower's country.

        ( c)    In those cases in which the exchange rate established in paragraph (b )(i) of this
Article is selected, to determine the equivalent of expenditures incurred in the Local Currency
chargeable to the Additional Resources or the reimbursement of expenditures chargeable to the
Loan, the rate used shall be the exchange rate agreed upon with the Bank in the Special Conditions.

ARTICLE 4.11.     Receipts. At the request of the Bank, the Borrower shall sign and deliver to
the Bank, upon completion of disbursements, a receipt or receipts for the amounts disbursed.

ARTICLE 4.12.        Renunciation of Part of the Loan. The Borrower, with the concurrence of
the Guarantor, if any, may renounce, by notice to the Bank, its right to utilize any part of the Loan



                                           5928/OC-SU
                                                   -27 -


    which has not been disbursed before the receipt of such notice, provided that the resources of the
    Loan are not subject to the guarantee of an irrevocable letter of credit, pursuant to Article 8.04 of
    these General Conditions.

    ARTICLE 4.13         Automatic Cancellation of Portion of the Loan. Upon expiration of the
    Original Disbursement Period and any extension thereof, any portion of the Loan not committed
    or disbursed shall automatically be cancelled.

    ARTICLE 4.14.        Closing Period. (a) The Borrower undertakes to carry out, or to cause the
    Executing Agency to carry out, as the case may be, the following actions during the Closing Period:
    (i) finalize pending payments to third parties, if any; (ii) reconcile its records and present to the
    Bank's satisfaction the supporting documentation relating to expenditures charged to the Project
    and other information that the Bank may request; and (iii) return to the Bank the unjustified balance
    of disbursed resources of the Loan.
)
            (b)    Notwithstanding the foregoing, if this Contract provides for external financial audit
    reports financed with resources of the Loan, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case
    may be, agrees to reserve, in the manner agreed with the Bank, sufficient resources to cover the
    payment of the corresponding auditing services. In this case, the Borrower or the Executing
    Agency, as the case may be, also undertakes to agree with the Bank as to how the corresponding
    payments for such audits will be made. In the event the Bank does not receive the above-mentioned
    external financial audit reports within the periods stipulated in this Contract, the Borrower or the
    Executing Agency, as the case may be, agrees to return to the Bank the resources reserved for such
    purpose, which shall not be construed as a waiver by the Bank to exercise the rights set forth in
    Chapter VIII of this Contract.


                                               CHAPTER V
                                               Conversions

    ARTICLE 5.01.         Exercise of Conversion Options. (a) The Borrower may request a Currency
)   Conversion, an Interest Rate Conversion, a Commodity Conversion or a Catastrophe Protection
    Conversion by delivering to the Bank an irrevocable Conversion Request Letter in form and
    substance satisfactory to the Bank, indicating the financial terms and conditions requested by the
    Borrower for the respective Conversion. The Bank may provide the Borrower with a model
    Conversion Request Letter. For Catastrophe Protection Conversion, the Borrower will be able to
    submit the Conversion Request Letter to the Bank at any time after (i) entering into a Catastrophe
    Protection Engagement Letter; and (ii) signing-off on the final form of the transaction documents
    of the transaction in the financial markets that, in the determination of the Bank, are relevant to
    the Catastrophe Protection Conversion.

            (b)   The Conversion Request Letter shall be signed by a duly authorized representative
    of the Borrower, with the consent of the Guarantor, if any, and shall contain at least the following
    information:




                                               5928/OC-SU
                                - 28 -


(i)     For all Conversions. (A) Loan number; (B) amount subject to Conversion;
        (C) Conversion type (Currency Conversion, Interest Rate Conversion,
        Commodity Conversion, or Catastrophe Protection Conversion);
        (D) Execution Period; (E) account number where funds shall be deposited,
        if applicable; and (F) Interest Rate Calculation Convention.

(ii)    For Currency Conversions. (A) currency into which the Borrower
        requests to convert the Loan; (B) Amortization Schedule associated with
        such Currency Conversion, which may have an amortization period equal
        to or less than the Final Amortization Date; (C) the portion of the
        disbursement or Outstanding Loan Balance to which the Conversion shall
        apply; (D) the type of interest rate applicable to the amounts subject to the
        Currency Conversion; (E) whether the Currency Conversion is a
        Partial-term Conversion or a Full-term Conversion; (F) Settlement
        Currency; and (G) any other instructions regarding the Currency
        Conversion request. If the Conversion Request Letter relates to a
        disbursement, the request shall indicate the amount of the disbursement in
        units of the Approval Currency, in Dollar units, or in units of the desired
        currency for the Conversion, except in the case of the last disbursement, in
        which case the request shall be made in units of the Approval Currency. In
        such cases, if the Bank effects the Conversion, the disbursements shall be
        denominated in the Converted Currency and the disbursements shall be
        made in: (i) the Converted Currency; or (ii) an equivalent amount in Dollars
        at the exchange rate set forth in the Conversion Notification Letter, to be
        determined by the Bank when sourcing its financing. If the Conversion
        Request Letter relates to Outstanding Loan Balances, the request shall
        indicate the amount in units of the currency of denomination of the
        Outstanding Loan Balances.

(iii)   For Interest Rate Conversions. (A) type and tenor of interest rate
        requested; (B) the portion of the Outstanding Loan Balance to which the
        Interest Rate Conversion shall apply; (C) whether the Interest Rate
        Conversion is a Partial-term Interest Rate Conversion or a Full-term Interest
        Rate Conversion; (D) the Amortization Schedule associated with the
        Interest Rate Conversion, which may have an amortization period equal to
        or less than the Final Amortization Date; (E) for Interest Rate Conversions
        establishing an Interest Rate Cap or an Interest Rate Collar, the applicable
        upper and/or lower limits, as the case may be; and (F) any other instructions
        regarding the Interest Rate Conversion request.

(iv)    For Commodity Conversions. (A) whether a Commodity Put Option or
        Commodity Call Option is requested; (B) the Option Type; (C) the identity
        of the commodity that is the subject of such Commodity Conversion
        (including the physical properties thereof); (D) the Notional Quantity;
        (E) the Underlying Commodity Index; (F) the Strike Price;
        (G) the Commodity Conversion Maturity Date; (H) whether the Conversion



                            5928/OC-SU
                                                    -29 -


                           is a Full-Term Commodity Conversion or a Partial-Term Commodity
                           Conversion; (I) the formula for the determination of the Cash Settlement
                           Amount, if applicable; (J) the Required Outstanding Loan Balance;
                           (K) a specification of the bank account information where the Cash
                           Settlement Amount, if any, will be paid by the Bank to the Borrower on the
                           Commodity Conversion Settlement Date; (L) at the option of the Borrower,
                           the maximum amount of premium it is willing to pay to enter into a
                           Commodity Conversion given a certain Notional Quantity and Strike Price,
                           as contemplated in paragraph (e) below; and (M) any other instructions
                           regarding the Commodity Conversion request.

                  (v)     For Catastrophe Protection Conversions. (A) the Catastrophe type for
                          which the Borrower is requesting protection; (B) the Cash Settlement Event
                          Determination Instructions; (C) the Protection Amount being sought; (D) the
)                         term of the Catastrophe Protection Conversion; (E) whether the Conversion
                          is a Full-Term Catastrophe Protection Conversion or a Partial-Term
                          Catastrophe Protection Conversion; (F) the Outstanding Loan Balance;
                          (G) the Catastrophe Protection Engagement Letter; (H) a specification of the
                          bank account information where the Bank would transfer the Cash Settlement
                          Amount, if any; (I) at the option of the Borrower, the maximum amount of
                          premium it is willing to pay to enter into a Catastrophe Protection Conversion
                          given a certain Protection Amount, as contemplated in paragraph (f) below;
                          (J) the Borrower's sign-off to the final form of the transaction documents of
                          the transaction in the financial markets that are relevant to the Catastrophe
                          Protection Conversion, which must be attached to the Conversion Request
                          Letter; and (K) other terms, conditions, or special instructions, if any,
                          regarding the Catastrophe Protection Conversion request.

           (c)     Any principal amount payable during the period of fifteen (15) days prior to the
    beginning of the Execution Period until and including the Conversion Date may not be subject to
    a Conversion and shall be paid pursuant to the terms applicable prior to the execution of the
    Conversion.

            ( d)    Once the Bank has received a Conversion Request Letter, it will proceed to review
    the same. If the Bank finds such letter acceptable, it will effect the Conversion during the Execution
    Period pursuant to the terms of this Chapter V. Once the Conversion has been effected, the Bank
    will deliver a Conversion Notification Letter or Catastrophe Conversion Notification Letter, as
    applicable, to the Borrower indicating the financial terms and conditions of the Conversion.

            (e)     With respect to Commodity Conversions, the Borrower may indicate in the
    Conversion Request Letter the maximum amount of premium it is willing to pay to enter into a
    Commodity Conversion given a certain Notional Quantity and Strike Price. If no limit is specified,
    the Bank may execute the related commodity hedge at the prevailing premium market price.
    Alternatively, at a given Dollar premium amount and a defined Strike Price, the Borrower may
    instruct the Bank to execute the related commodity hedge. The resulting Notional Quantity will
    reflect market conditions at the time of execution.



                                                5928/0C-SU
                                                - 30 -



        (f)     With respect to Catastrophe Protection Conversions, the Borrower may indicate in
the Conversion Request Letter the maximum amount of premium it is willing to pay to enter into
a Catastrophe Protection Conversion given a certain Protection Am ount and risk metrics (such as
the probability of attachment, expected loss, and exhaustion probability). If no limit is specified,
the Bank may execute the related transaction in the financial markets at the prevailing premium
market price. Alternatively, at a given Dollar premium amount and defined risk metrics (such as
the probability of attachment, expected loss, and exhaustion probability), the Borrower may
instruct the Bank to execute the related transaction in the financial markets. The resulting
Protection Amount will reflect market conditions at the time of execution.

        (g)     If the Bank determines that the Conversion Request Letter does not comply with
the requirements provided in this Contract, it shall so notify the Borrower during the Execution
Period. The Borrower may deliver a new Conversion Request Letter, in which case the Execution
Period for this Conversion will start from the time the Bank receives the new Conversion Request
Letter.

        (h)     If the Bank cannot effect the Conversion pursuant to the terms requested by the
Borrower in the Conversion Request Letter within the Execution Period, such Conversion Request
Letter shall be considered null and void, without prejudice to the Borrower's right to deliver a new
Conversion Request Letter.

        (i)     If a national or international catastrophe, a financial or economic crisis, a change in
the capital markets, or any other extraordinary circumstance occurs during the Execution Period
that, in the opinion of the Bank, may have a material negative impact on its ability to effect a
Conversion or enter into a related funding or hedge, the Bank shall so notify the Borrower and
agree on the actions to be taken regarding the Conversion Request Letter.

        (j)    Considering that the Execution Period of a Catastrophe Protection Conversion is
longer than those for other Conversions, the Bank reserves the right to seek the Borrower's written
confirmation of the terms of the transaction in the financial markets regarding such Catastrophe
Protection Conversion prior to its execution.

ARTICLE 5.02.       Conversion Requirements. Any Conversion shall be subject to the following
requirements, as applicable:

       (a)     The feasibility of the Bank to execute any Conversion will depend on the ability of
               the Bank to source its funding or, if applicable, on the ability of the Bank to enter
               into any hedge on terms and conditions acceptable to the Bank in its sole discretion,
               in accordance with its policies, and will be subject to legal, operational, and risk
               management considerations and prevailing market conditions.

       (b)     The Bank will not execute Conversions on amounts that are less than the equivalent
               of three million Dollars (US$3,000,000), unless: (i) in the case of the last
               disbursement, the undisbursed amount is less; or (ii) in the case of a fully disbursed
               Loan, the Outstanding Loan Balance under any tranche of the Loan is less.



                                            5928/0C-SU
                                                - 31 -



          ( c)   The number of Currency Conversions to Principal Currencies may not exceed
                 four (4) during the term of this Contract. This limit shall not apply to Currency
                 Conversions to Local Currency.

          ( d)   The number of Interest Rate Conversions may not exceed four ( 4) during the term
                 of this Contract.

          (e)    There will be no limit to the number of Commodity Conversions or Catastrophe
                 Protection Conversions that can be executed during the term of this Contract.

          ( f)   Each Commodity Conversion will only be executed by the Bank in relation to
                 Outstanding Loan Balances in accordance with the following formula (hereinafter,
                 the "Required Outstanding Loan Balance"):
)
                 (i)    For Commodity Call Options, the Required Outstanding Loan Balance will
                        be the Notional Quantity * (Z - Strike Price), where Z is the highest
                        expected forward commodity price at the Commodity Conversion Maturity
                        Date, for the relevant Option Type, as calculated by the Bank; and

                 (ii)   For Commodity Put Options, the Required Outstanding Loan Balance will
                        be the Notional Quantity * (Strike Price - Y), where Y is the lowest
                        expected forward commodity price at the Commodity Conversion Maturity
                        Date, for the relevant Option Type, as calculated by the Bank.

          (g)    Any modification to the Amortization Schedule requested by the Borrower at the
                 time of requesting a Currency Conversion shall be subject to the provisions of
                 Articles 3.02(c) and 5.03(b) of these General Conditions. Any modification to the
                 Amortization Schedule requested by the Borrower at the time of requesting an
                 Interest Rate Conversion shall be subject to the provisions of Articles 3.02(c) and
                 5.04(b) of these General Conditions.

          (h)    The Amortization Schedule defined in the Conversion Notification Letter, resulting
                 from a Currency Conversion or Interest Rate Conversion may not be subsequently
                 modified during the Conversion Period, unless the Bank agrees otherwise.

          (i)    Unless the Bank agrees otherwise, an Interest Rate Conversion with respect to
                 amounts that have been subject to a previous Currency Conversion may only be
                 effected: (i) on the entire Outstanding Loan Balance associated with such Currency
                 Conversion; and (ii) for a term equal to the remaining term of such Currency
                 Conversion.

    ARTICLE 5.03.      Partial or Full-Term Currency Conversion. (a) The Borrower may request
    a Full-Term Currency Conversion or a Partial-Term Currency Conversion.




                                            5928/OC-SU
                                               - 32 -


         (b)    A Full-Term Curr ency Conversion and a Partial-Term Currency Conversion may
be requested and executed at any time until the Final Am ortization Date. Notw ithstanding the
foregoing, if the Borrower makes a request within less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration
of the Original Disbursement Period, such Curr ency Conversion will have the limitation that the
Outstanding Loan Balance under the new Amortization Schedule requested for the Conversion
shall at no time exceed the Outstanding Loan Balance under the original Am ortization Schedule,
taking into account the exchange rates set forth in the Conversion Notification Letter.

       ( c)    In the case of a Partial-Term Curr ency Conversion, the Borrower shall include in
the Conversion Request Letter: (i) the Amortization Schedule for the period up to expiration of the
Conversion Period; and (ii) the Am ortization Schedule for the Outstanding Loan Balance payable
from the expiration of the Conversion Period to the Final Amortization Date, which shall
correspond to the term s and conditions applicable prior to effecting the Curr ency Conversion.

       ( d)     Prior to the expiration of a Partial-Term Curr ency Conversion, the Borrower, with
the consent of the Guarantor, if any, may request from the Bank one of the following options:

               (i)     Effecting a new Currency Conversion, upon delivery of a new Conversion
                       Request Letter not less than fifteen (15) Business Days prior to the
                       expiration date of the Partial-Term Curr ency Conversion. Such new
                       Currency Conversion will have the additional limitation that the
                       Outstanding Loan Balance un der the new Amortization Schedule shall at no
                       time exceed the Outstanding Loan Balance un der the Am ortization
                       Schedule requested in the original Partial-Term Curr ency Conversion.
                       If, subject to market conditions, it is feasible to effect a new Conversion,
                       the Outstanding Loan Balance of the amount originally converted will
                       continue to be denominated in the Converted Currency, applying the new
                       Base Interest Rate that reflects prevailing market conditions at the time of
                       effecting the new Conversion.

               (ii)    The prepayment of the Outstanding Loan Balance of the converted amount,
                       by providing the Bank written notice at least thirty (30) days prior to the
                       expiration date of the Partial-Term Currency Conversion. This prepayment
                       shall be made on the expiration date of the Partial-Term Currency
                       Conversion in the Settlement Currency pursuant to Article 5.05 of these
                       General Conditions.

        (e)     For purposes of paragraph (d) of this Article 5.03, the Outstanding Loan Balance
originally subject to a Currency Conversion shall be automatically converted to Dollars on the
expiration of the respective Partial-Term Currency Conversion, and shall be subject to the Interest
Rate set forth in Article 3.07(a) of these General Conditions if: (i) the Bank is unable to effect a
new Conversion; or (ii) fifteen (15) days before the expiration date of the Partial-Term Currency
Conversion, the Bank has not received a request from the Borrower pursuant to paragraph ( d) of
this Article 5.03; or (iii) on the expiration date of the Partial-Term Currency Conversion, the
Borrower fails to make the requested prepayment.




                                           5928/OC-SU
                                                    - 33 -


            (f)   If the Outstanding Loan Balance originally subject to a Curr ency Conversion is
    converted to Dollars as provided in paragraph (e) above, the Bank, at the expiration of the
    Partial-Term Curr ency Conversion, shall inform the Borrower, and the Guarantor, if any, of the
    amounts converted to Dollars and the applicable exchange rate determined by the Calculation
    Agent, based on prevailing market conditions.

           (g)   The Outstanding Loan Balance converted to Dollars may be subject to a new
    Currency Conversion, subject to the provisions of this Chapter V.

             (h)     At the expiration of a Full-Term Currency Conversion, the Borrower shall pay in
    full the Outstanding Loan Balance of the converted amount in the Settlement Curr ency, pursuant
    to Art icle 5.05 of these General Conditions, and cannot request a new Curr ency Conversion.

            (i)      Within thirty (30) days from the date of cancellation or modification of a Curr ency
)   Conversion, the Borrower shall receive from the Bank, or alternatively, shall pay to the Bank, as
    applicable, the amounts corresponding to any gain or cost incurred by the Bank as a result of
    unwinding or reallocating its corresponding funding ( or any related hedge) associated with the
    cancelation or modification of such Currency Conversion. In case of a gain, the amount will be
    credited first to any amounts due and payable by the Borrower to the Bank.

    ARTICLE 5.04.       Partial or Full-Term Interest Rate Conversion. (a) The Borrower may
    request a Full-Term Interest Rate Conversion or a Partial-Term Interest Rate Conversion.

             (b)    A Full-Term Interest Rate Conversion and a Partial-Term Interest Rate Conversion
    may be requested and executed at any time until the Final Amortization Date. Notwithstanding the
    foregoing, if the Borrower makes a request within less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration
    of the Original Disbursement Period, such Conversion will be subject to the limitation that the
    Outstanding Loan Balance under the new Amortization Schedule requested for the Conversion
    shall at no time exceed the Outstanding Loan Balance under the original Amortization Schedule.

            ( c)    In the case of a Partial-Term Interest Rate Conversion of amounts denominated in
    Dollars, the Borrower shall include in the Conversion Request Letter: (i) the Amortization
    Schedule for the period up to expiration of the Conversion Period; and (ii) the Amortization
    Schedule for the Outstanding Loan Balance payable from the expiration of the Conversion Period
    to the Final Amortization Date, which shall correspond to the terms and conditions applicable prior
    to effecting the Interest Rate Conversion.

            ( d)    In the case of a Partial-Term Interest Rate Conversion on amounts denominated in
    Dollars, the interest rate applicable to the Outstanding Loan Balances upon the expiration of the
    Partial-Term Interest Rate Conversion shall be the interest rate set forth in Article 3.07(a) of these
    General Conditions. Partial-Term Interest Rate Conversions of Outstanding Loan Balances
    denominated in currencies other than the Dollar shall be subject to the requirements of
    Article 5.02(g) and shall therefore be subject to the same treatment relative to the expiration of the
    Conversion Period of the Partial-Term Currency Conversion, as set forth in Article 5.03(d) of these
    General Conditions.




                                                5928/OC-SU
                                                - 34 -


        (e)     Within thirty (30) days from the date of cancellation or modification of an Interest
Rate Conversion, the Borrower shall receive from the Bank, or alternatively, shall pay to the Bank,
as applicable, the amounts corresponding to any gain or cost incurred by the Bank as a result of
unwinding or reallocating its corresponding fun ding ( or any related hedge) associated with the
cancellation or modification of such Interest Rate Conversion. In case of a gain, the amount will
be credited first to any amounts due and payable by the Borrower to the Bank.

ARTICLE 5.05.        Payment of Interest and Amortization Installments in the Event of a
Currency Conversion. Pursuant to Article 3.11 of these General Conditions, following a
Currency Conversion, interest and amortization installments of converted amounts shall be paid in
the Settlement Currency. If the Settlement Currency is the Dollar, the Valuation Exchange Rate in
effect on the Payment Valuation Date for the respective expiration date shall be applied, as set
forth in the Conversion Notification Letter.

ARTICLE 5.06.        Early Termination of a Conversion. (a) The Borrower can request in
writing an early termination of a Conversion which will be subject to the Bank's ability to
terminate its corresponding funding, related hedge, or related transaction in the financial markets,
as applicable.

        (b)      In the case of early termination of Conversions other than Catastrophe Protection
Conversions, the Borrower shall receive from the Bank, or alternatively, shall pay to the Bank, as
applicable, any gain (including any payoff resulting from the early termination of a commodity
hedge) or cost incurred by the Bank as a result of unwinding or reallocating its corresponding
funding ( or any related hedge), as determined by the Calculation Agent. In case of a cost, the
Borrower shall promptly pay the corresponding amount to the Bank. In case of a gain it will be
credited first to any amount due and payable by the Borrower to the Bank, such as any fees or
premium payments.

        ( c)    In the case of early termination of a Catastrophe Protection Conversion, the
Borrower shall pay to the Bank any costs incurred by the Bank as a result of such termination, as
determined by the Bank. The Borrower shall pay these early termination costs to the Bank in
Dollars, as a lump-sum amount, promptly upon termination.

ARTICLE 5.07.         Transaction Fees Applicable to Conversions. (a) The transaction fees
applicable to Conversions, as well as other fees, as the case may be, undertaken under this Contract
shall be those determined by the Bank periodically. Each Conversion Notification Letter shall
indicate, if applicable, the fee the Borrower shall be required to pay to the Bank for the execution
of the respective Conversion, which fee shall remain in effect throughout the Conversion Period
of such Conversion.

         (b)     The transaction fee applicable to a Currency Conversion: (i) shall be expressed in
the form of basis points per annum; (ii) shall accrue in the Converted Currency from the
Conversion Date (inclusive) on the Outstanding Loan Balance of such Currency Conversion; and
(iii) shall be paid together with each interest payment as set forth in Article 5.05 of these General
Conditions.




                                           5928/OC-SU
                                                    - 35 -


            ( c)  The transaction fee applicable to an Interest Rate Conversion: (i) shall be expressed
    in the form of basis points per annum; (ii) shall accrue in the currency of denomination of the
    Outstanding Loan Balance subject to such Interest Rate Conversion; (iii) shall accrue, from the
    Conversion Date (inclusive) on the Outstanding Loan Balance subject to the Interest Rate
    Conversion; and (iv) shall be paid together with each interest payment as set forth in Art icle 3.07
    of these General Conditions.

            (d)     Notwithstanding the transaction fees provided for in paragraphs (b) and (c) above,
    in the case of Currency Conversions or Interest Rate Conversions involving an Interest Rate Cap
    or an Interest Rate Collar, a transaction fee associated with such Interest Rate Cap or Interest Collar
    shall apply. Such transaction fee: (i) shall be denominated in the same currency as the Outstanding
    Loan Balance subject to the Interest Rate Cap or Interest Rate Collar; and (ii) shall be paid in a
    lump-sum, in the Settlement Currency, on the first interest payment date, as set forth in Art icle 5.05
    of these General Conditions.
)
            (e)    The transaction fee applicable to a Commodity Conversion: (i) shall be expressed
    in the form of basis points; (ii) shall be calculated on the basis of the Notional Quantity times the
    commodity closing price on the Commodity Conversion Date according to the Underlying
    Commodity Index; and (iii) shall be paid in Dollars, in a lump-sum upfront or in installments, as
    agreed upon between the Bank and the Borrower and specified in the Conversion Notification
    Letter. In no event shall the Borrower pay such fee to the Bank later than the Commodity
    Conversion Maturity Date, or, if the case may be, the date in which a Commodity Conversion is
    terminated early pursuant to Article 5.06 of these General Conditions.

            (f)    In case of an early termination of a Commodity Conversion, an additional fee will
    apply, which: (i) shall be expressed in the form of basis points; (ii) shall be calculated on the basis
    of the Notional Quantity times the commodity closing price on the date of the early termination
    according to the Underlying Commodity Index; and (iii) shall be paid in Dollars, as a lump-sum
    amount, promptly upon termination.

            (g)    For Catastrophe Protection Conversion, the Bank will charge the Borrower the
    applicable transaction fees and, as the case may be, other fees that may be due in connection with
    a Cash Settlement Event. These fees: (i) shall be expressed in the form of basis points; (ii) shall be
    calculated on the basis of the Catastrophe and Protection Amount; (iii) shall be paid in Dollars, in
    a lump-sum upfront or in installments, as agreed upon between the Bank and the Borrower and
    specified in the Conversion Notification Letter; and (iii) may be deducted from the Cash
    Settlement Amount as provided in Article 5 .13 of these General Conditions. In no event shall the
    Borrower pay such fees to the Bank later than the last day of the Conversion Period for a
    Catastrophe Protection Conversion or, if the case may be, the date on which a Catastrophe
    Protection Conversion is terminated early pursuant to Article 5.06 of these General Conditions.

            (h)     In case of early termination of a Catastrophe Protection Conversion, an additional
    fee will apply, which: (i) shall be expressed in the form of basis points; (ii) shall be calculated on
    the basis of the Catastrophe and Protection Amount; and (iii) shall be paid in Dollars, as a
    lump-sum amount, promptly upon termination.




                                                5928/OC-SU
                                               - 36 -


ARTICLE 5.08.         Funding Expenses, Premiums or Discounts, and Other Costs Associated
with a Conversion. (a) In the event that the Bank uses its actual cost of funding to determine the
Base Interest Rate, the Borrower shall pay the fees and expenses incurred by the Bank in sourcing
its funding. In addition, any premiums or discounts related to the Bank's funding shall be paid by
or credited to the Borrower, as the case may be. These expenses and premiums or discounts will
be specified in the Conversion Notification Letter.

        (b)    Accordingly, when a Conversion ( other than Catastrophe Protection Conversion) is
effected in connection with a disbursement, the amount to be disbursed to the Borrower shall be
adjusted to deduct or to add any amounts owed by or due to the Borrower as described in
paragraph (a) above.

        (c)     Alternatively, when a Conversion (other than Catastrophe Protection Conversion)
is effected on Outstanding Loan Balances, the amounts owed by or due to the Borrower as
described in paragraph (a) above, shall be paid by the Borrower or the Bank, as the case may be,
within thirty (30) days following the Conversion Date.

        ( d)     In the case of a Catastrophe Protection Conversion, the Borrower shall pay to the
Bank all costs that the Bank may incur associated with the structuring of a Catastrophe Protection
Conversion and the corresponding market transaction and costs related to the occurrence of a Cash
Settlement Event and the Cash Settlement Event calculation. Such costs: (i) shall be paid in
Dollars, (ii) shall be paid in a lump-sum amount upfront or in installments, as agreed upon between
the Bank and the Borrower and specified in the Catastrophe Conversion Notification Letter; and
(iii) may be deducted from the Cash Settlement Amount as provided in Article 5.13 of these
General Conditions. These costs include administration cost and the costs of all third parties the
Bank may need to retain. The Bank may agree to alternative payment mechanisms, such as
expressing these costs in the form of basis points per annum, in which case they will be paid
together with interest on each interest payment date, as long as it is operationally possible for the
Bank. In no event shall the Borrower pay such costs to the Bank later than the last day of the
Conversion Period for a Catastrophe Protection Conversion or, if the case may be, the date on
which a Catastrophe Protection Conversion is terminated early pursuant to Article 5.06 of these
General Conditions.

      (e)     In the case of a Catastrophe Protection Conversion, the provisions of Article 5 .13
may apply to any deduction of any premium, cost, or fees associated with a Catastrophe Protection
Conversion.

ARTICLE 5.09.         Premiums Payable in Connection with Interest Rate Caps or Interest
Rate Collars. (a) In addition to the transaction fees payable pursuant to Article 5.07 of these
General Conditions, the Borrower shall pay the Bank a premium on the Outstanding Loan Balance
subject to the Interest Rate Cap or Interest Rate Collar requested by the Borrower, equivalent to
the premium paid by the Bank to a counterparty, if any, as a result of the purchase of the Interest
Rate Cap or Interest Rate Collar. Such premium shall be paid: (i) in the currency of denomination
of the Outstanding Loan Balance subject to the Interest Rate Cap or Interest Rate Collar, or its
equivalent in Dollars, at the exchange rate set forth in the Conversion Notification Letter, which
shall be the exchange rate determined at the time the Bank sourced the funding or entered into the



                                           5928/OC-SU
                                                    - 37 -


    related hedge; and (ii) in a lump-sum amount, on a date agreed by the Parties, but in no event later
    than thirty (30) days after the Conversion Date; unless, if operationally feasible for the Bank, the
    Bank agrees to a different payment mechanism .

           . (b)    If the Borrower requests an Interest Rate Collar, it may request the Bank to establish
    the lower limit of the Interest Rate Collar to ensure that the premium corresponding to the lower
    limit be equal to the premium corresponding to the upper limit, thereby establishing an Interest
    Rate Collar at no cost (zero-cost collar). If the Borrower selects the upper and lower limits, the
    premium payable to the Bank by the Borrower with respect to the upper limit of the Interest Rate
    Collar will be offset by the premium payable by the Bank with respect to the lower limit of the
    Interest Rate Collar. Nevertheless, the premium payable to the Borrower by the Bank in respect of
    the lower limit of the Interest Rate Collar may in no case exceed the premium payable by the
    Borrower to the Bank with respect to the upper limit of the Interest Rate Collar. Accordingly,
    during the Execution Period, the Bank may reduce the lower limit of the Interest Rate Collar such
)   that the corresponding premium does not exceed the premium on the upper limit of the Interest
    Rate Collar.

    ARTICLE 5.10.        Premiums Payable in Connection with a Commodity Conversion. In
    addition to the transaction fees payable pursuant to Article 5.07 of these General Conditions, but
    subject to Article 5.0l(e) of these General Conditions, the Borrower shall pay to the Bank a
    premium equivalent to the premium paid by the Bank to a counterparty for entering into a related
    commodity hedge. Such premium shall be paid in Dollars, in a lump-sum amount upfront or in
    installments, as agreed upon between the Bank and the Borrower and specified in the Conversion
    Notification Letter. The Bank may agree to alternative payment mechanisms, such as expressing
    the premium in the form of basis points per annum, in which case it will be paid together with
    interest on each interest payment date. In no event shall the Borrower pay such premium to the
    Bank later than the Commodity Conversion Maturity Date, or, if the case may be, the date in which
    a Commodity Conversion is terminated early pursuant to Article 5.06.

    ARTICLE 5.11.         Premiums Payable in Connection with a Catastrophe Protection
    Conversion. In addition to the fees payable pursuant to Article 5.07 of these General Conditions,
)   but subject to Article 5.0l(f) of these General Conditions, the Borrower shall pay to the Bank a
    premium equivalent to the premium paid by the Bank in the financial markets for entering into a
    related Catastrophe Protection Conversion hedge. Such premium: (i) shall be paid in Dollars,
    (ii) shall be paid in a lump-sum amount upfront or in installments, as agreed upon between the
    Bank and the Borrower and specified in the Catastrophe Conversion Notification Letter; and
    (iii) may be deducted from the Cash Settlement Amount as provided in Article 5.13 of these
    General Conditions. The Bank may agree to alternative payment mechanisms, such as expressing
    the premium in the form of basis points per annum, over a timeline agreed between the Bank and
    the Borrower, in which case it will be paid together with interest on each interest payment date, as
    long as it is operationally possible for the Bank. The Borrower shall pay the premium to the Bank
    over a timeline agreed between the Bank and the Borrower or, as the case may be, no later than
    the date on which a Catastrophe Protection Conversion is terminated early pursuant to Article 5.06
    of these General Conditions.




                                                ~928/0C-SU
                                            - 38 -


ARTICLE 5.12.        Commodity Conversions. Each Commodity Conversion shall be entered
into on the following terms and conditions:

      (a)    Each Commodity Conversion shall relate to either a Commodity Put Option or a
             Commodity Call Option ( each, a "Commodity Option"). A Commodity Option
             shall constitute the grant by the Bank to the Borrower of the right (exercisable as
             provided in this Article 5.12) to cause the Bank to pay the Cash Settlement Amount,
             if any, on the Commodity Conversion Settlement Date.

      (b)    If, at the Commodity Conversion Maturity Date under a Commodity Call Option,
             the Specified Price exceeds the Strike Price, the "Cash Settlement Amount" shall
             equal the product of (i) the excess of the Specified Price over the Strike Price
             multiplied by (ii) the Notional Quantity of such Commodity Option. Otherwise, the
             "Cash Settlement Amount" for such Commodity Call Option shall be zero.

      (c)    If, at the Commodity Conversion Maturity Date under a Commodity Put Option,
             the Strike Price exceeds the Specified Price, the "Cash Settlement Amount" shall
             equal the product of (i) the excess of the Strike Price over the Specified Price
             multiplied by (ii) the Notional Quantity of such Commodity Option. Otherwise, the
             "Cash Settlement Amount" for such Commodity Put Option shall be zero.

      ( d)   In case the Commodity Conversion refers to a binary Option Type, the "Cash
             Settlement Amount" will be determined on the basis of a formula to be specified in
             the Conversion Notification Letter (Article 5.0l(b)(iv)(l) of these General
             Conditions).

      (e)    On the Commodity Conversion Maturity Date, the Bank will determine and give
             notice to the Borrower of the Cash Settlement Amount. If the Cash Settlement
             Amount is greater than zero, the Bank will pay such amount to the Borrower on the
             Commodity Conversion Settlement Date. If a loan made to the Borrower, or
             guaranteed by the Borrower, is in arrears for over thirty (30) days, then the Bank
             may deduct from the Cash Settlement Amount due to the Borrower in connection
             with a Commodity Conversion all amounts due and payable by the Borrower to the
             Bank under any loan made to or guaranteed by the Borrower that is in arrears for
             any length of time (either for more, or for less, than thirty (30) days).

      (f)    If the Borrower shall fail to make a payment when due of any premium payable
             under the Commodity Conversion, and such failure is not cured within a reasonable
             time, the Bank may by written notice to the Borrower terminate the related
             Commodity Option, whereupon the Borrower shall pay to the Bank an amount
             determined by the Bank to be the amount that would be incurred by the Bank as a
             result of its unwinding or reallocating any related commodity hedge. Alternatively,
             the Bank may choose not to terminate the Commodity Option, in which case any
             Cash Settlement Amount resulting upon a Commodity Conversion Maturity Date
             will be applied as provided for in Article 5.06 of these General Conditions.




                                        5928/OC-SU
                                                 - 39 -


    ARTICLE 5.13.       Catastrophe Protection Conversions. Each Catastrophe                 Protection
    Conversion shall be entered into on the following terms and conditions:

          (a)    If at the time of occurrence of a Cash Settlement Event, as determined in an Event
                 Report by the Event Calculation Agent, there is a Cash Settlement Amount to be
                 paid to the Borrower by the Bank, the Bank will pay such Cash Settlement Amount
                 to the Borrower within five (5) Business Days, unless otherwise agreed between
                 the Bank and the Borrower.

          (b)    If a loan made to the Borrower, or guaranteed by the Borrower, is in arrears for
                 over thirty (30) days, then the Bank may deduct from the Cash Settlement Amount
                 due to the Borrower in connection with a Catastrophe Protection Conversion all
                 amounts due and payable by the Borrower to the Bank under any loan made to or
                 guaranteed by the Borrower that is in arrears for any length of time ( either for more,
)                or for less, than thirty (30) days).

          ( c)   In addition to the deductions set forth in paragraph (b) above, the Bank, at its own
                 discretion, may deduct from the Cash Settlement Amount due to the Borrower in
                 connection with a Catastrophe Protection Conversion all amounts due and payable
                 by the Borrower to the Bank related to fees, premiums and costs as set forth,
                 respectively, in Articles 5.07(g), 5.11, and 5.08(d) of these General Conditions, in
                 accordance with the following:

                 (i)    Costs. The Bank may deduct from the corresponding Cash Settlement
                        Amount any outstanding unpaid costs associated with the Catastrophe
                        Protection Conversion.

                 (ii)   Outstanding Installments. If the Bank and the Borrower have agreed that
                        the fees, premium, and/or costs will be paid by the Borrower in installments
                        or annualized, then:

                        (A)     Fees. The Bank may deduct from any Cash Settlement Amount the
                                entirety of the outstanding fees, including amounts owed but not yet
                                due under the relevant installments schedule agreed to between the
                                Borrower and the Bank.

                        (B)     Costs. The Bank may deduct from any Cash Settlement Amount the
                                entirety of the outstanding costs, including amounts owed but not
                                yet due under the relevant installments schedule agreed to between
                                the Borrower and the Bank.

                        (C)     Premiums - Protection Amount Not Exhausted. The Bank may
                                deduct from any Cash Settlement Amount the outstanding premium,
                                including amounts owed but not yet due under the relevant
                                installments schedule agreed to between the Borrower and the Bank,
                                up to a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the Cash Settlement



                                             ~928/OC-SU
                                                -40-


                               Amount, if the Cash Settlement Amount does not exhaust the
                               Protection Amount under the Catastrophe Protection Conversion.

                       (D)     Premiums - Protection Amount Exhausted. The Bank may
                               deduct from the Cash Settlement Amount the entirety of the
                               outstanding premium, including amounts owed but not yet due
                               under the relevant installments schedule agreed to between the
                               Borrower and the Bank, if the Cash Settlement Amount is such that
                               it exhausts the Protection Amount under the Catastrophe Protection
                               Conversion.

               (iii)   Remaining Balance. If the Cash Settlement Event exhausts the Protection
                       Amount and, after deducting from the Cash Settlement Amount the
                       applicable fees, costs, and premium described above, the Borrower still
                       owes the Bank any of amounts for fees, costs, or premiums; then the
                       Borrower shall promptly make those payments to the Bank in accordance
                       with the terms and in the manner indicated by the Bank.

        ( d)   All determinations and calculations made by the Event Calculation Agent in an
               Event Report shall be final and binding on the Borrower.

ARTICLE 5.14.        Market Quotes Disruption Events. The Parties acknowledge that the
amortization and interest payments made by the Borrower in connection with amounts subject to
a Conversion, shall at all times be linked to the corresponding funding of the Bank in relation to
payments under such Conversion. Therefore, the Parties agree that, notwithstanding the occurrence
of any disruption event that may materially affect the currency exchange rates, interest rates, and
inflation adjustment index used in this Contract, if any, or in any Conversion Notification Letter,
the Borrower's payments shall remain linked to the Bank's funding. For purposes of obtaining and
maintaining such link under such circumstances, the Parties expressly agree that the Calculation
Agent, acting in good faith and in a commercially reasonable manner, seeking to reflect the Bank's
corresponding funding, shall determine the applicability of: (a) such disruption events; and
(b) the replacement rate or index applicable to determine the appropriate amount to be paid by the
Borrower using the methodology and conventions determined by the Calculation Agent, including
any necessary conforming changes in interest period, interest rate determination date or other
technical, administrative or operational changes that the Calculation Agent decides are appropriate.

ARTICLE 5.15.         Cancellation and Reversal of the Currency Conversion. If, after the
signature date of this Contract, a change in a law, decree, or other applicable rule or regulation is
enacted or issued, or if there is a change in the interpretation of a law, decree, or other applicable
rule or regulation in force at the time this Contract is signed that, as reasonably determined by the
Bank, prevents the Bank from continuing to maintain, in whole or in part, its funding in the
Converted Currency, for the remainder of the period and under the same terms as the corresponding
Currency Conversion, the Borrower, upon being notified by the Bank, shall have the option to
redenominate the Outstanding Loan Balance subject to the Currency Conversion to Dollars at the
exchange rate applicable at that time, as determined by the Calculation Agent. Such Outstanding
Loan Balance shall remain subject to the Amortization Schedule agreed for such Currency



                                            5928/OC-SU
                                                    - 41 -


    Conversion and the Interest Rate set forth in Article 3.07(a) of these General Conditions.
    Alternatively, the Borrower may prepay to the Bank all amounts that it owes in the Converted
    Currency, pursuant to the provisions of Article 3.12 of these General Conditions.

    ARTICLE 5.16.         Gains or Costs Associated with the Redenomination into Dollars. If the
    Borrower, with the consent of the Guarantor, if any, decides to redenominate the Outstanding Loan
    Balance subject to a Currency Conversion into Dollars pursuant to Article 5 .15 above, within
    thirty (30) days after the redenomination date, the Borrower shall receive from the Bank, or
    alternatively, shall pay to the Bank, as applicable, the amounts corresponding to any gain or cost
    as determined by the Calculation Agent, up until the Dollar redenomination date, in connection
    with variations in the interest rates. In case of a gain, the amount will be credited first to any
    amounts due and payable by the Borrower to the Bank.

    ARTICLE 5.17.          Delay in Payment in Case of Currency Conversion. In the event of any
)   payment delay in respect of amounts of principal or financial charges that the Borrower owes the
    Bank as a result of a Conversion and any premiums payable to the Bank pursuant to Article 5.09
    in a currency other than the Dollar, the Bank may charge interest at a floating rate in the Converted
    Currency determined by the Calculation Agent, plus a spread of 100 basis points (1 %) over the
    total amount in arrears, irrespective of the applicability of additional charges to ensure a full
    transfer of costs in the event such spread is not sufficient for the Bank to recover the costs incurred
    as a result of such delay.

    ARTICLE 5.18.          Additional Costs in Case of Conversions. If an action or omission by the
    Borrower, or the Guarantor, if any, including: (a) nonpayment of principal, interest, and fees
    relating to a Conversion on the due dates; (b) revoking or changing the terms set forth in a
    Conversion Request Letter; ( c) nonfulfillment of a partial or full prepayment of the Outstanding
    Loan Balance in the Converted Currency, if such prepayment had been previously requested by
    the Borrower in writing; ( d) a change in laws or regulations that have an impact on the maintenance
    of all or part of the Loan on the agreed Conversion terms; or (e) other actions not described above,
    results in the Bank incurring additional costs to those described in this Contract, the Borrower shall
    pay the Bank such amounts, as determined by the Calculation Agent, to ensure a full transfer of
)   the costs incurred by the Bank. In the case of Catastrophe Protection Conversion, the Borrower
    shall pay the Bank such additional costs according to Article 5.08(d) of these General Conditions.


                                             CHAPTER VI
                                         Execution of the Project

    ARTICLE 6.01.         Financial Management Systems and Internal Control. (a) The Borrower
    shall maintain, or cause the Executing Agency and Procurement Agent, if any, to maintain, as the
    case may be, internal controls so as to reasonably ensure: (i) that Project resources are used for the
    purposes of this Contract, devoting special attention to the principles of economy and efficiency;
    (ii) that Project assets are adequately safeguarded; (iii) that Project transactions, decisions, and
    activities an: duly authorized and executed in accordance with the provisions of this Contract and
    any other contract related to the Project; and (iv) that transactions are properly documented and
    recorded in a way that facilitates the production of timely and reliable reports.


                                                5928/OC-SU
                                                -42 -



         (b)     The Borrower shall maintain, and shall cause the Executing Agency and the
Procurement Agent, if any, to maintain, an acceptable and reliable financial management system
for the timely management of Project resources that provides for: (i) financial planning;
(ii) accounting, budgetary, and financial record-keeping; (iii) contract administration;
(iv) paym ent processing; (v) the issuance of financial audit reports and other reports associated
with the resources of the Loan, the Additional Resources, and other financing sources of the
Project, if any.

        ( c)    The Borrower shall preserve, and shall cause the Executing Agency or the
Procurement Agent, as the case may be, to preserve, the original records of the Project for a
minimum period of three (3) years after the expiration date of the Original Disbursement Period
or any extension thereof. Such documents and records shall be maintained adequately in order to:
(i) substantiate Project-related activities, decisions, and transactions, including all expenditures
incurred; and (ii) show the correlation of the expenditures incurred under the Loan to the respective
disbursement made by the Bank.

        ( d)    The Borrower shall include, or cause the Executing Agency and the Procurement
Agent, if any, to include in all bidding docum ents, requests for proposals, and contracts financed
with the resources of the Loan that they enter into, respectively, a provision requiring that providers
of goods or services, contractors, subcontractors, consultants and their agents, personnel,
subconsultants, subcontractors, or concessionaires contracted by them, keep all documents and
records related to activities financed with resources of the Loan for a period of seven (7) years
after completion of the work contemplated in the relevant contract.

ARTICLE 6.02.        Additional Resources. The Borrower, directly or through the Executing
Agency, as the case may be, commits to contribute Additional Resources in a timely manner. If,
as of the approval date of the Loan by the Bank, it has been determined that Additional Resources
are needed, the estimated amount of such Additional Resources shall be that specified in the
Special Conditions. Whether or not an estimate of the amount of the Additional Resources has
been determined shall neither limit nor diminish the obligation of the Borrower, directly or through
the Executing Agency, to contribute in a timely manner all additional resources which may be
necessary for the complete and uninterrupted execution of the Project.

ARTICLE 6.03.         General Provisions for Execution of the Proiect. (a) The Borrower shall
execute, or cause the Executing Agency, as the case may be, to execute the Project in accordance
with the objectives thereof, with due diligence in an economically, financially, administratively,
and technically efficient manner, and in accordance with the provisions of this Contract and the
plans, specifications, investment schedule, budgets, regulations, and other relevant documents of
the Project approved by the Bank. The Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be,
further agrees that all of its obligations shall be fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Bank.

       (b)     Any significant modification of the plans, specifications, investment schedule,
budgets, regulations, or other documents which the Bank approves, as well as any substantial
change in contracts financed with resources of the Loan, shall require the written consent of the
Bank.



                                            5928/0C-SU
                                                  -43 -



           ( c)    In case of contradiction or inconsistency between the provisions of this Contract
    and any plan, specification, investment schedule, budget, regulations, or other relevant document
    of the Project approved by the Bank, the provisions of this Contract shall prevail over those
    documents.

    ARTICLE 6.04.        Selection and Contracting of Works and Non-consulting Services,
    Procurement of Goods, and Selection and Contracting of Consulting Services. (a) Subject to
    the provisions of paragraph (b) of this Article, the Borrower undertakes to carry out and, where
    appropriate, cause the Executing Agency or the Procurement Agent, if any, to carry out the
    procurement of works and non-consulting services, as well as the procurement of goods, in
    accordance with the Procurement Policies and the Procurement Plan approved by the Bank, and
    the selection and contracting of consulting services, in accordance with the Consultant Policies
    and the Procurement Plan approved by the Bank. The Borrower represents that it is aware of the
)   Procurement Policies and Consultant Policies and undertakes to inform the Executing Agency, and
    the Procurement Agent, as the case may be, of these Policies.

            (b)     When the Bank has satisfactorily assessed and deemed acceptable the procurement
    rules, procedures and systems of the Borrower, of an entity of the Borrower or of the Executing
    Agency, as the case may be, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, may carry
    out the procurement and contracting financed wholly or partially with resources of the Loan using
    such procurement rules, procedures and systems, in accordance with the terms of the acceptance
    of the Bank and applicable accepted legislation and processes. The terms of such acceptance shall
    be notified in writing by the Bank to the Borrower and the Executing Agency. Use of the
    procurement rules, procedures and systems of the Borrower, of an entity of the Borrower, or of the
    Executing Agency, as the case may be, may be suspended by the Bank when, in its opinion,
    changes have occurred in the parameters or practices the Bank used as the basis for its acceptance,
    until such time as the Bank determines whether such changes are compatible with international
    best practices. During such suspension, the Procurement Policies and Consultant Policies of the
    Bank will apply. The Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, as the case may be,
    undertakes to notify the Bank of any change in the applicable legislation or processes that have
)   been so accepted. The use of procurement rules, procedures and systems of the Borrower, of an
    entity of the Borrower, or of the Executing Agency, as the case may be, does not constitute a
    waiver of the application of the provisions set forth in Section I of the Procurement Policies and
    Consultant Policies, including the requirement that the respective procurement and contracting of
    services be contained in the Procurement Plan and is subject to the remaining provisions of this
    Contract. The provisions of Section I of the Procurement Policies and Consultant Policies shall
    apply to all contracts, regardless of amount or contracting method. The Borrower agrees to include,
    or to cause the Executing Agency, as the case may be, to include in the model bidding documents,
    contracts, and instruments used in electronic or information systems (in physical or electronic
    media) measures to ensure the application of the provisions set forth in Section I of the
    Procurement Policies and Consultant Policies, including the provisions on Prohibited Practices.

            (c)     The Rorrower agrees to update, or to cause the Executing Agency, as the case may
    be, to maintain an updated Procurement Plan, and to update the Procurement Plan at least annually




                                              5928/0C-SU
                                               -44 -


or more frequently, depending on the Project needs. Each updated version of the Procurement Plan
shall be submitted for review and approval of the Bank.

        ( d)   The Bank will conduct a review of the selection, contracting, and procurement
processes, as set forth in the Procurement Plan. At any time during the execution of the Project,
the Bank may change the method of review of these processes, with prior notice to the Borrower
or the Executing Agency. The changes approved by the Bank shall be reflected in the Procurement
Plan.

ARTICLE 6.05.      Use of Goods. Except as otherwise expressly authorized by the Bank, any
goods procured with the resources of the Loan shall be used exclusively for the purposes of the
Project.

ARTICLE 6.06.         Environmental and Social Management. (a) The Borrower, directly or
through the Executing Agency, agrees to carry out the execution (preparation, construction, and
operation) of the activities included in the Project in accordance with the Environmental and Social
Policy Framework of the Bank, its Environmental and Social Performance Standards, and pursuant
to the specific provisions on environmental and social considerations included in the Special
Conditions.

        (b)     The Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, as the case may be, agrees
to immediately inform the Bank of any noncompliance with the environmental and social
obligations set forth in the Special Conditions.

       (c)    The Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, as the case may be, agrees
to implement a corrective action plan, agreed upon with the Bank, to mitigate, correct, and
compensate any adverse consequences that may result from the failure to comply with the
implementation of the environmental and social obligations set forth in the Special Conditions.

        ( d)     The Borrower agrees to allow the Bank, whether directly or through the contracting
of consulting services, to carry out supervision activities, including environmental and social
audits of the Project, in order to confirm compliance with the environmental and social obligations
set forth in the Special Conditions.

ARTICLE 6.07.        Ineligible Expenditures for the Proiect. In the event that the Bank
determines that an expenditure incurred does not meet the requirements to be considered an
Eligible Expenditure or Additional Resources, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case
may be, shall take such actions as are necessary to remedy the situation, as required by the Bank,
without prejudice to any other measures the Bank may exercise under this Contract.


                                       CHAPTER VII
                          Supervision and Evaluation of the Proiect

ARTICLE 7.01.        Inspections. (a) The Bank may establish such procedures as it deems
necessary to ensure the satisfactory development of the Project.



                                           5928/0C-SU
                                                -45 -



        (b)      The Borrower shall permit, or cause the Executing Agency, as the case may be, and
the Procurement Agent, if any, to permit the Bank, its investigators, agents, auditors, and experts
it engages, to inspect, at any time, the Project and the facilities, equipment, and materials involved
therein, and to examine such systems, records, and documents as the Bank may deem pertinent. In
addition, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, and the Procurement Agent,
if any, shall ensure that their agents fully cooperate with the personnel which the Bank sends or
designates for this purp ose. All the costs relating to transportation, salaries, and other expenses of
such personnel shall be borne by the Bank.

        (c)     The Borrower shall provide, or cause the Executing Agency, as the case may be,
and the Procurement Agent, if any, to provide to the Bank any documents relating to the Project
that the Bank may request, in a form and within a time frame acceptable to the Bank. Without
prejudice to any measures the Bank may take under this Contract in the event such documentation
is not available, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, and the Procurement
Agent, if any, shall submit an affidavit to the Bank setting forth the reasons why the requested
material is unavailable or is being withheld.

         ( d)  The Borrower shall include, or cause the Executing Agency, as the case may be,
and the Procurement Agent, if any, to include a provision in bidding documents, requests for
proposals, and contracts entered into by them relating to the execution of the Loan in order to:
(i) allow the Bank , its investigators, agents, auditors, or experts, to inspect accounts, records, and
other documents relating to the submission of bids and to the performance of the corresponding
contract or agreement; and (ii) provide that such accounts, records, and documents may be
submitted to the auditors designated by the Bank for an opinion.

ARTICLE 7.02.         Plans and Reports. To enable the Bank to supervise progress in the execution
of the Project and the scope of its results, the Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency,
as the case may be shall:

        (a)    Present to the Bank the information, plans, reports, and other documents in such
               form and substance as the Bank may reasonably request, based on the progress of
               the Project and its level of risk;

        (b)     Comply with the actions and obligations established in such plans, reports, and
                other documents agreed upon with the Bank;

        ( c)    Inform the Bank upon identifying any risks or significant changes that cause or may
                cause delays or difficulties in Project execution; and

        (d)    Inform the Bank within no more than thirty (30) days of the initiation of any
               proceedings, claim, suit, or legal, arbitral, or administrative action relating to the
               Project and keep the Bank informed on the status thereof.

ARTICLE 7.03.      External Financial Audit Reports and other Financial Reports. (a) Unless
the Special Conditions establish otherwise, the Borrower, directly or through the Executing



                                            5928/OC-SU
                                                -46 -


Agency, as the case may be, shall present the Bank with the external financial audit reports and
other reports identified in the Special Conditions within one hundred twenty (120) days following
the closing of each fiscal year of the Project and within the Original Disbursement Period or any
extension thereof, and within one hundred twenty (120) days following the date of the last
disbursement.

       (b)     In addition, the Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, as the case
may be, shall present to the Bank other financial reports in such form and with such content and
frequency as the Bank may reasonably request during the Project's execution when, in the opinion
of the Bank, the analysis of the level of the Project's fiduciary risk, complexity, or nature so
warrant.

       ( c)    Any external audit that may be required under the provisions of this Article and the
corresponding provisions of the Special Conditions shall be performed by independent auditors
who have been previously accepted by the Bank or by a supreme audit institution previously
accepted by the Bank, in accordance with auditing principles and standards acceptable to the Bank.
The Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall authorize the
supreme audit institution or the independent auditors to provide the Bank with such additional
information it may reasonably request with respect to the external financial audit reports.

        (d)      The Borrower, directly or through the Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall
select and contract the independent auditors indicated in paragraph ( c) above, in accordance with
the procedures and terms of reference agreed upon with the Bank. In addition, the Borrower or the
Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall provide to the Bank any information it requests
relating to the independent auditors under contract.

          (e)     In the event an external audit required under the provisions of this Article and in
the corresponding provisions of the Special Conditions is to be performed by a supreme audit
institution and such agency is unable to perform the audit in accordance with requirements
satisfactory to the Bank or within the deadlines, for the period, or with the frequency stipulated in
this Contract, the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, shall select and contract
the services of independent auditors acceptable to the Bank, as provided under paragraphs ( c) and
( d) of this Article.

         (f)     Notwithstanding the provisions above, the Bank may, on an exceptional basis,
select and contract the services of independent auditors to audit the financial audit reports provided
for in this Contract when: (i) pursuant to the findings of a Bank-conducted cost-benefit analysis, it
is determined that the benefits associated with the hiring of such services by the Bank outweigh
the costs; (ii) there is limited access to auditing services in the country; or (iii) special
circumstances warrant the selecting and hiring of such services by the Bank.

        (g)     The Bank reserves the right to request the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as
the case may be, to have external audits other than financial audits or to have services carried out
relating to the auditing of projects, of the Executing Agency and related entities, of the financial
information system, and of the bank accounts of the Project, among others. The nature, frequency,




                                            5928/OC-SU
                                                   -47 -


    scope, timmg, methodology, typ e of applicable auditing norms, reports, auditor selection
    procedures, and terms of reference for the audits shall be agreed upon between the Parties.


                                       CHAPTER VIII
          Suspension of Disbursements, Accelerated Maturity, and Partial Cancellations

    ARTICLE 8.01.     Suspension of Disbursements. The Bank, by written notice to the Borrower,
    may suspend disbursements if any of the following circumstances occurs and so long as it
    continues:

           (a)    Delay in the payment of any sums owed by the Borrower to the Bank for principal,
                  fees, interest, return of resources of the Loan used for ineligible expenditures, or
                  for any other reason, under this Contract or any other contract entered into between
)                 the Bank and the Borrower, including another loan contract or Derivative Contract.

           (b)    Nonfulfillment by the Guarantor, if any, of any payment obligation set forth in the
                  Guarantee Contract; any other contract entered into between the Guarantor, as
                  Guarantor, and the Bank; or any Derivative Contract entered into with the Bank.

           (c)    Noncompliance by the Borrower, the Guarantor, if any, or the Executing Agency,
                  as the case may be, of any other obligation set forth in any contract entered into
                  with the Bank for the financing of the Project, including this Contract, the
                  Guarantee Contract, or any Derivative Contract entered into with the Bank, as well
                  as noncompliance by the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be,
                  with any contract they enter into for the execution of the Project.

           ( d)   Withdrawal or suspension from membership in the Bank of the country in which
                  the Project is to be executed.

           (e)    When, in the opinion of the Bank, the objective of the Project or the Loan may be
                  adversely affected or the execution of the Project may be improbable owing to:
                  (i) any restriction, modification, or alteration of the legal capacity, functions, or
                  assets of the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be; or (ii) any
                  modification or change made without the written concurrence of the Bank of any
                  condition fulfilled before the approval of the Loan by the Bank.

           (f)    Any extraordinary circumstance which, in the opinion of the Bank: (i) makes it
                  unlikely that the Borrower, the Executing Agency, or the Guarantor, if any, as the
                  case may be, will be able to fulfill the obligations established in this Contract or the
                  Guarantee Contract, respectively; or (ii) prevents the fulfillment of the Project's
                  development objectives.

           (g)    Whenever the Bank determines that an employee, agent, or representative of the
                  Borrower, the Executing Agency, or the Procurement Agent, as the case may be,
                  has engaged in a Prohibited Practice in connection with the Project.



                                              . 5928/0C-SU
                                                -48 -



ARTICLE 8.02.       Early Termination and Cancellation ofUndisbursed Balances. The Bank,
by means of a written notification, may declare the entire Loan or a portion thereof immediately
due and payable, together with interest, fees, and other charges accrued up to the date of payment,
and may cancel the undisbursed portion of the Loan, if:

       (a)     any of the circumstances set forth in paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of the preceding
               Article continues for more than sixty (60) days;

       (b)     any of the circumstances set forth in paragraphs (e) and ( f) of the previous Article
               occurs and so long as it continues, and the Borrower or the Executing Agency, as
               the case may be, fails to provide to the Bank the clarifications or additional
               information that the Bank considers necessary;

       (c)     the Bank determines that any firm, entity, or individual bidding for or participating
               in a Bank-financed activity, including applicants, bidders, contractors, consulting
               firms and individual consultants, personnel, subcontractors, subconsultants,
               providers of goods or services, concessionaires, financial intermediaries, or a
               Contracting Agency (including their respective officers, employees, and agents,
               irrespective of whether their authority has been expressly or implicitly granted), has
               engaged in a Prohibited Practice in connection with the Project; and that the
               Borrower, the Executing Agency, or the Procurement Agent, as the case may be,
               has not taken adequate remedial measures (including providing adequate notice to
               the Bank upon learning of the Prohibited Practice) within a period of time the Bank
               considers reasonable; and

       ( d)    the Bank determines at any time that a procurement of goods or the contracting of
               works or non-consulting services was carried out without following the procedures
               set forth in this Contract. In this case, the cancellation or early termination will
               apply to the portion of the Loan used for such procurement or contracting.

ARTICLE 8.03.        Provisions Not Affected. The application of the measures provided in this
Chapter shall not affect the obligations of the Borrower established in this Contract, which shall
remain in full force and effect, except that in case the entire Loan has been declared due and
payable, only the pecuniary obligations of the Borrower shall continue in force.

ARTICLE 8.04.         Disbursements Not Affected. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Articles 8.01 and 8.02 above, none of the measures set forth in this Chapter shall affect the
disbursement by the Bank of any amounts of the resources of the Loan: (a) subject to the guarantee
of an irrevocable letter of credit; (b) which, by specific written agreement with the Borrower, the
Executing Agency, or the Procurement Agent, as the case may be, the Bank has agreed to provide
to pay Eligible Expenditures directly to the respective supplier, unless the Bank has provided a
notification to the Borrower or the Executing Agency in accordance with Article 4.08(c) of these
General Conditions; and (c) payable to Bank, pursuant to the Borrower's instructions.




                                           5928/0C-SU
                                                    -49 -


                                             CHAPTERIX
                                           Prohibited Practices

    ARTICLE 9.01.        Prohibited Practices. (a) In addition to the provistons established in
    Articles 8.0l(g) and 8.02(c) of these General Conditions, if the Bank determines, that a firm, entity,
    or individual bidding for or participating in a Bank-financed activity, including, among others,
    applicants, bidders, contractors, consulting firms and individual consultants, personnel,
    subcontractors, subconsultants, providers of goods or services, concessionaires, financial
    intermediaries, or a Contracting Agency (including their respective officers, employees, and
    agents, irrespective of whether their authority has been expressly or implicitly granted) has
    engaged in a Prohibited Practice in connection with the execution of the Project, the Bank may
    take the following actions, including:

                   (i)     Denying financing of contracts for the procurement of goods or the
)                          contracting of works or consulting or non-consulting services.

                   (ii)    Declaring a contract ineligible for Bank financing whenever there is
                           evidence that the agent of the Borrower, the Executing Agency, or the
                           Contracting Agency, as the case may be, has not taken adequate remedial
                           measures (including providing adequate notice to the Bank upon learning
                           of the commission of the Prohibited Practice) within a period of time the
                           Bank considers reasonable.

                   (iii)   Issuing the firm, entity, or individual determined to be responsible a
                           reprimand in the form of a formal letter of censure for its behavior.

                   (iv)    Declaring a firm, entity, or individual determined to be responsible for
                           engaging in the Prohibited Practice ineligible, either permanently or
                           temporarily, to participate in Bank-financed activities, whether directly as a
                           contractor or supplier, or indirectly as a subconsultant, subcontractor, or a
                           supplier of goods, consulting services, or non-consulting services.
)
                   (v)     Referring the matter to appropriate law enforcement authorities.

                   (vi)    Imposing fines representing reimbursement to the Bank of costs associated
                           with investigations and proceedings.

             (b)     The provisions of Article 8.0l(g) and Article 9.0l(a)(i) shall also apply in cases in
    which the Procurement Agent or any firm, entity, or individual bidding for or participating in a
    Bank-financed activity, including applicants, bidders, contractors, consulting firms and individual
    consultants, personnel, subcontractors, subconsultants, providers of goods or services,
    concessionaires (including theirrespective officers, employees, and agents, irrespective of whether
    their authority has been expressly or implicitly granted) has been temporarily suspended from
    eligibility to take part in a bidding or other selection process for the awarding of new contracts
    pending the final outcome of an investigation into a Prohibited Practice.




                                                5928/OC.,SU
                                                 - 50 -


        ( c)   The imposition of any action to be taken by the Bank pursuant to the provisions
referred to above may be made public.

         (d)    An y firm, entity, or individual bidding for or part icipating in a Bank-financed
activity, including applicants, bidders, contractors, consulting firms and individual consultants,
personnel, subcontractors, subconsultants, providers of goods or services, concessionaires, or a
Contracting Agency (including their respective officers, employees, and agents, irrespective of
whether their authority has been expressly or implicitly granted) may be sanctioned by the Bank
pursuant to agreements the Bank may have with other international financial institutions regarding
the mutual enforcement of debarment decisions. For purposes of this paragraph (d), the term
"sanction" shall mean any permanent or temporary debarment, conditions on future contracting,
or any publicly disclosed action taken in response to a violation of an international financial
institution's applicable framework for addressing allegations of Prohibited Practices.

         (e)     Wh en the Borrower procures goods or contracts works or non-consulting services
directly from a specialized agency under an agreement between the Borrower and such specialized
agency, all provisions under this Contract regarding sanctions and Prohibited Practices shall apply
in their entirety to applicants, bidders, providers of goods and their agents, contractors, consultants,
personnel, subcontractors, subconsultants, service providers, concessionaires (including their
respective officers, employees, and agents, irrespective of whether their authority has been
expressly or implicitly granted), or to any other entities that have signed contracts with such
specialized agency, to supply goods, works, or non-consulting services in connection with
Bank-financed activities. The Borrower or the Executing Agency, as the case may be, agrees to
adopt, as may be required by the Bank, remedies such as suspension or termination of the
corresponding contract. The Borrower agrees that the contracts it enters into with specialized
agencies shall include provisions requiring them to consult the Bank's list of firms and individuals
debarred either temporarily or permanently by the Bank from participating in a procurement or
contracting operation financed wholly or partially with resources of the Loan. In the event a
specialized agency signs a contract or purchase order with a firm or an individual temporarily or
permanently debarred by the Bank as indicated in this Article, the Bank will not finance such
contracts or expenditures and will apply such other remedies as it deems appropriate.


                                         CHAPTER X
                          Provision on Encumbrances and Exemptions

ARTICLE 10.01. Commitment on Encumbrances. The Borrower shall not create any specific
encumbrance on all or part of its assets or revenues to secure an external debt without, at the same
time, creating an encumbrance guaranteeing to the Bank, equally and proportionally, the
fulfillment of the pecuniary obligations arising from this Contract. The foregoing shall not apply:
(a) to encumbrances on goods used as security for payment of the unpaid balance of the purchase
price; and (b) to encumbrances created in banking operations to secure payment of debts with
maturities of not more than one year. In the event that the Borrower is a member country, the term
"assets or revenues" shall mean all types of assets or revenues which belong to the Borrower or
any of its dependent agencies which are not autonomous entities with their own separate capital.




                                            5928/0C-SU
                                                   - 51 -


    ARTICLE 10.02. Tax exemption. The Borrower undertakes to ensure that principal, interest,
    fees, premiums, and any other Loan charge, as well as any other payment for expenses or costs
    that may be imputed to this Contract, shall be paid without any deduction or restriction whatsoever,
    exempt from any tax, fee, duty, or charge established or that may be established by the laws of its
    country, and to pay any tax, fee, or duty applicable to the signing, recording, and execution of this
    Contract.


                                             CHAPTER XI
                                          Miscellaneous Provisions

    ARTICLE 11.01. Assignment of Rights. (a) The Bank may assign to other public or private
    institutions, in the form of participations, the rights corresponding to the Borrower's pecuniary
    obligations under this Contract. The Bank shall immediately notify the Borrower of each
)   assignment.

          (b)     The Bank may grant participations in respect of either outstanding loan balances or
    amounts of the Loan which are still undisbursed at the time of entering into the participation
    agreement.

            ( c)     With the prior consent of the Borrower and of the Guarantor, if any, the Bank may
    assign all or part of the undisbursed amount of the Loan to other public or private institutions. To
    that end, the portion subject to assignment shall be denominated in terms of a fixed number of
    units of either the Approval Currency or Dollars. Likewise, with the prior consent of the Borrower
    and of the Guarantor, if any, the Bank may set, for the portion subject to assignment, an interest
    rate other than that established in this Contract.

    ARTICLE 11.02. Modifications and Contractual Waivers. Any modification or waiver of the
    provisions of this Contract shall be agreed upon in writing by the Parties, with the consent of the
    Guarantor, if any, and to the extent that such consent may be applicable.

)   ARTICLE 11.03. Non-waiver of Rights. Any delay or failure by the Bank to exercise its rights
    pursuant to this Contract may not be construed as a waiver of such rights or as implied acceptance
    of events, actions, or circumstances that would have empowered it to exercise them.

    ARTICLE 11.04. Termination. (a) The Contract and all obligations arising from it shall be
    deemed terminated upon full payment of the principal, interest, fees, premiums, and all other
    expenses related to the Loan, as well as all other expenses, costs and payments arising from this
    Contract, with the exception of those referred to in paragraph (b) of this Article.

            (b)    The obligations acquired by the Borrower under this Contract with respect to
    Prohibited Practices and other obligations relating to the operational policies of the Bank, shall
    remain in effect until such obligations are deemed fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Bank.




                                               5928/0C-SU
                                                 - 52 -


ARTICLE 11.05. Validity. The rights and obligations established in this Contract are valid and
enforceable in accordance with the terms agreed upon herein, regardless of the laws of any given
country.

ARTICLE 11.06. Disclosure of Information. The Bank may disclose this Contract and any
information related thereto, in accordance with its access to information policy in effect at the time
of such disclosure.


                                          CHAPTER XII
                                       Arbitration Procedure

ARTICLE 12.01. Composition of the Tribunal. (a) The arbitration tribunal shall be composed
of three members to be appointed in the following manner: one by the Bank; another by the
Borrower; and a third, hereinafter the "President," by direct agreement between the Parties or
through their respective arbitrators. In all decisions, the President of the tribunal shall have the
right to cast a double vote in the case of deadlock. If the Parties or the arbitrators fail to agree on
who the President shall be, or if one of the Parties is unable to designate an arbitrator, the President
shall be appointed, at the request of either Party, by the Secretary General of the Organization of
American States. If either of the Parties fails to appoint an arbitrator, one shall be appointed by the
President. If either of the appointed arbitrators or the President is unwilling or unable to act or to
continue to act, his or her successor shall be appointed in the same manner as for the original
appointment. The successor shall have the same functions as his or her predecessor.

        (b)    In any conflict, both the Borrower and the Guarantor, if any, shall be considered a
single party and, consequently, shall act jointly in the designation of the arbitrator and for the other
purposes of the arbitration proceedings.

ARTICLE 12.02. Initiation of the Procedure. In order to submit the conflict to arbitration, the
claimant shall address to the other party a written notification setting forth the nature of the claim,
the satisfaction or compensation it seeks, and the name of the arbitrator it appoints. The party
receiving such notification shall, within forty-five (45) days, notify the adverse party of the name
of the person it appoints as arbitrator. If, within seventy-five (75) days as of the notification of the
initiation of the arbitral proceeding, the Parties have not agreed upon the person who is to act as
President, either party may request the Secretary General of the Organization of American States
to make the appointment.

ARTICLE 12.03. Convening of the Tribunal. The arbitration tribunal shall be convened in
Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America, on the date designated by the
President, and, once convened, shall meet on the dates which the tribunal itself shall establish.

ARTICLE 12.04. Procedure. (a) The tribunal is specifically empowered to decide any matter
under its jurisdiction and shall adopt its own procedures. In any case, it shall give the Parties the
opportunity to make oral presentations. All decisions of the tribunal shall be made by majority
vote.




                                            5928/OC-SU
                                                   - 53 -


           (b)     The Tribunal shall base its rulings on the terms of the Contract, and shall render its
    award even if one of the Parties fails to appear.

            ( c)    The award shall be in writing and shall be adopted with the concurrent vote of at
    least two (2) members of the tribunal. It shall be handed down within approximately
    sixty (60) days from the date on which the President is appointed, unless the tribunal determines
    that, due to special and unforeseen circumstances, such period should be extended. The award shall
    be notified to the Parties by means of a notification signed by at least two (2) members of the
    tribunal, and shall be complied with within thirty (30) days from the date of notification. The award
    shall be final and will not be subject to any appeal.

    ARTICLE 12.05. Costs. The fees of each arbitrator and the costs of arbitration (with the
    exception of attorneys' fees and the fees of other experts, which shall be covered by the Parties
    that appointed them) shall be covered by both Parties in equal proportion. Any doubt regarding the
)   division of costs or the manner in which they are to be paid shall be determined, without appeal,
    by the tribunal.

    ARTICLE 12.06. Notification. All notifications relative to the arbitration or to the award shall
    be made in the manner provided in this Contract. The parties waive any other form of notification.




)




                                               5928/OC-SU
                                                                  LEG/SGO/CCB/EZIDB0000366-171363792-6059




                                               ANNEX

                                          THE PROGRAM

           Strengthening Spatial Planning and Environmental Management in Suriname

    I.     Objective

    1.01   The objective of the Program is to improve Suriname's institutional capacity to manage
           land use.

)   1.02   The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen Suriname's spatial planning and
           environmental frameworks, regulations and instruments; (ii) increase the availability and
           use of data for spatial planning, climate change, and environmental management; and
           (iii) strengthen the Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment (MinROM) and the
           National Environment Authority's (NMA) operational conditions.

    II.    Description

    2.01   To achieve the objectives indicated in paragraphs 1.01 and 1.02 above, the Program
           comprises the following components:

           Component l. Strengthening MinROM's Capacity for Spatial Planning, Climate
           Change and Environmental Management

    2.02   This component seeks to enhance MinROM's spatial planning, Climate Change (CC),
           environmental management, and operational capacities. To this end, it will support the
           Ministry in outlining the priorities to achieve and monitor the country's environmental
           vision. The component will support the design and enforcement of spatial planning
           frameworks that will guide land use and territorial development, with environmental and
           CC considerations, at the national and sub-national levels. It will also support training
           activities and the physical space MinROM requires to comply with its functions. The
           activities financed under this component are grouped into three categories:

              (a)      Instruments for CC and Environmental Management. It includes: (i) the
                       creation of a Green Development Vision (GDV) framework and
                       implementation action plan, integrating aspects of CC, biodiversity, and
                       environmental protection; (ii) support for the definition of the GDV
                       framework's political, economic, and social aspects through modeling of the
                       government-defined valued for sustainable and low carbon development; and
                       (iii) the development of an inclusive, participatory stakeholder engagement
                       strategy.




                                             5928/OC-SU
                                                       -2-


             (b)      Land Use and Spatial Planning Frameworks and Instruments. It includes:
                      (i) the design of Suriname's Spatial Planning Strategy in line with the national
                      environmental priorities; (ii) the drafting of Structural Development Plans and
                      Zoning Plans that will guide the implementation of the spatial planning strategy
                      at the subnational level; (iii) the design and implementation of the Zoning and
                      Land Use Platform to promote transparency on applicable regulations and
                      proposals and increase availability of data for decision-making, public
                      awareness, and enforcement; and (iv) the design and implementation of a
                      Zoning and Spatial Development Permits and Licensing System, which are
                      accessible for the visually impaired. The platform and licensing system will
                      foster people with disabilities (PwD) access to data and tools to participate in
                      planning processes with informed decisions.

             ( c)     Institutional and Operational Strengthening. It includes: (i) the
                      strengthening of MinROM through the design of a change management plan
                      and development of critical managerial systems like document, facility,
                      material resource, and personnel management systems; (ii) the design and
                      implementation of a strategic operation plan which leverages digitalization and
                      promotes progress monitoring and impact evaluation systems for the set-up of
                      a Donor Coordination Unit1 with the purpose of leveraging and articulating
                      donors' contributions for Suriname's sustainable development; (iii) the
                      development of a training plan for MinROM staff. It encompasses the design
                      and implementation of training materials and programs on spatial planning and
                      environmental management, project and organizational management, and soft
                      skills. Regarding gender and diversity, training will be developed in
                      non-discriminatory practices in the workplace and towards public services to
                      promote women and PwD inclusion; (iv) the creation and implementation of
                      partnerships with academic institutions for the development of advanced
                      education curricula associated to spatial planning, environmental management,
                      and CC; and (v) the design and construction of two (2) bioclimatic buildings to
                      house MinROM and NMA 2, complying with Excellence in Design for Greater
                      Efficiencies (EDGE) standards, including gender sensitive elements in the
                      design, as well as incorporating design and wayfinding elements for ensuring
                      access of PwD.

         Component 2. Strengthening NMA's Capacity for Environmental Management and
         Climate Transparency

2.03    This component will contribute to strengthening environmental frameworks, regulations,
        and instruments, increasing the availability of CC and environmental data, and building
        NMA's operational capacities. This will be achieved through the following activities
        grouped into four categories:


1
  All systems developed for the set-up of the Donor Coordination Unit will be linked to the Ministry of Finance and
Planning.
2
  The buildings will be developed on a lot owned by MinROM and designated for this use.


                                                 5928/0C-SU
                                   -3-


(a)   Environmental Information System. It will finance: (i) the implementation of
      a Geospatial Intelligence Hub (GIH) which will serve as a systematized,
      centralized, and up-to-date repository for all spatial data that is needed in the
      country. It shall encompass robust functionalities, including advanced reporting
      capabilities, mapping, and viewing tools for comprehensive spatial analysis,
      and the ability to efficiently extract and download relevant data, which includes:
      (1) the creation of institutional arrangements to provide legal soundness to the
      GIH; (2) the setup of the GIH governance system, including the creation of the
      steering committee, the strengthening of the relevant departments within the
      Suriname Environmental Information Network (SMIN) to support the GIH;
      (3) the drafting and establishment of data sharing arrangements, including
      definition of data standards and protocols; (4) the purchasing of energy-efficient
      hardware and software; (5) the development and implementation of a data
      collection plan, including identification of new data sources and digitalization
      of existing physical assets; (6) purchasing of data sets; and (7) development of
      sector specific applications within the GIH; and (ii) the design and
      implementation of the Environmental Information System (EIS) which will
      provide public geospatial and statistical data to users on environmental
      indicators, and will encourage women to access information for decision
      making.

(b)   Environmental Enforcement System. It will finance the optimization of the
      Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and environmental
      permitting process currently carried out manually by NMA through a digital
      permit and licensing system by establishing standards, protocols, and
      procedures for authorizing, monitoring, and enforcing ESIA, environmental
      permits, and policing. It includes the drafting of the environmental standards,
      the establishment of permitting procedures, the development and
      implementation of monitoring protocols including the purchasing of
      energy-efficient equipment, designing and implementing an awareness,
      outreach, and communication plan, and the deployment of the environmental
      enforcement strategy.

(c)   Implementation Mechanisms for Climate Transparency. It will finance the
      development and implementation of a national Monitoring, Reporting and
      Verification system from priority economic sectors to ensure accurate
      measurement of Greenhouse Gas emissions, with accompanying cross sectoral
      technical training, including the establishment of a National Carbon Emission
      Monitoring Unit.

(d)   NMA Institutional Capacity. It will finance: (i) supporting NMA's
      organizational structure and processes reengineering, including the
      development and implementation of a change management plan, which
      accompanies the final phases of the NMA transition; (ii) the design and setting
      up of critical managerial systems like the financial, document and personnel
      management systems; (iii) the design and implementation of a training plan



                              5928/0C-SU
                                               -4-


                  with NMA public officials, including the development of training materials and
                  the implementation of training programs on CC and environmental
                  management, project management, financial, human resources and
                  organizational management and soft skills. Regarding gender and diversity,
                  training will be developed in non-discriminatory practices in the workplace and
                  towards public services to promote women and PwD inclusion; and (iv) the
                  creation of partnerships with academic institutions for the development of
                  advanced education curricula associated to environmental management and
                  cc.
       Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Audits

2.04   It will finance: (i) the hiring of a transitional Program Implementation Unit (PIU); (ii) the
       hiring of the External Operation Unit (EOU); (iii) Program monitoring and evaluation
       activities, including a mid-term and a final evaluation; (iv) external annual financial
       auditing; and (v) implementation of Environmental and Social Governance instruments
       including stakeholder engagement activities.

III.   Financing Plan

3.01   The distribution of the resources of the Loan is set forth in the following table:

                                       Cost and Financine
                                             (in US$)

                                Components                              Bank        Total      %
       Component l. Strengthening MinROM's capacity for
       Spatial Planning, Climate Change, and Environmental           16,950,000 16,950,000    56.5
       Management
       1.1 Instruments for CC and Environmental Management             750,000     750,000     2.5
       1.2 Land Use and Spatial Planning Frameworks and
                                                                      8,650,000   8,650,000   29.0
       Instruments
       1.3 Institutional and Operational Strengthening                7,550,000   7,550,000   25.0
       Component 2. Strengthening NMA's capacity for
                                                                     10,050,000 10,050,000    33.5
       Environmental Management and Climate Transparency
       2.1 Environmental Information System                           4,555,000 4,555,000     15.0
       2.2 Environmental Enforcement System                           2,575,000 2,575,000      8.6
       2.3 Implementation Mechanisms for Climate Transparency         1,670,000 1,670,000      5.5
       2.4 NMA Institutional Capacity                                 1,250,000 1,250,000     4.2
       Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Audits         3,000,000 3,000,000     10.0
                                     Total                           30,000,000 30,000,000    100




                                           5928/0C-SU
                                                  - 5 -


    IV.    Execution

    4.01   The Borrower of the Program is the Republic of Suriname through the Ministry of Finance
           and Planning (MOFP).

    4.02   The Executing Agency (EA) is the MinROM. The MinROM will be responsible for
           implementing and executing the Program.

    4.03   The EA will establish a transitional PIU conformed of external consultants experienced in
           the Bank's policies and project management to ensure the contracting of the EOU. The task
           description, role, and responsibilities of the transitional PIU are included in the Project
           Operations Manual (POM). The PIU will hire a firm to provide technical assistance to serve
           as an EOU. This EOU will support the Executing Agency in the Program planning,
           management and monitoring, preparation and supervision of technical documents, among
\          others.

    4.04   In addition, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic
           and policy guidance to aid the decision-making process and coordination between the
           MinROM and NMA, and direct and guide the technical aspects of the Program. The task
           description, role, and responsibilities of the PSC are included in the POM.




>




                                              5928/0C-SU
