                                                                                         PUBLIC




                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                          ARGENTINA




URBAN SOCIAL INTEGRATION AND HOUSING IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM



                                           (AR-L1361)




                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Luis Felipe Vera (CSD/HUD),
Project Team Leader; Verónica Adler (CSD/HUD) and Juliana Almeida (CSD/CCS), Project
Team Co-leaders; Ramiro De Marco (CSD/CCS); Dalve Soria, Dianela Ávila,
Matías Lince Marino, Sofia Del Castillo, and Ana Cristina García (CSD/HUD); Cecilia Ares
and Eduardo Arraiza (CSC/CAR); Natalia Pérez Fontela and Marilia de Souza Santos
(VPC/FMP); Ruth Catacoli and María Cóvolo (VPS/ESG); Juan Manuel Casalino Franciskovic
(LEG/SGO); Ana Cuesta Bernal and María Fernanda Merino (SPD/SDV); Julieta Abad
(INE/TSP); and Jorge Oyamada (INE/WSA).



Under the Access to Information Policy, this document is subject to public disclosure.
                                                    CONTENTS



PROGRAM SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost .............................................................. 16
       C.    Key results indicators ................................................................................. 19

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 21

       A.    Financing instruments ................................................................................ 21
       B.    Social and environmental risks ................................................................... 23
       C.    Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 23
       D.    Other key issues and risks .......................................................................... 23

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 25

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 25
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 28




                                                  APPENDICES


Proposed resolution
                                                    - ii -




                                                 ANNEXES
 Annex I       Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix
 Annex II      Results Matrix
 Annex III     Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                             REQUIRED LINKS
1.    Monitoring and evaluation plan

2.    Environmental and social review summary


                                             OPTIONAL LINKS
1.    Economic evaluation

2.    Gender and diversity analysis

3.    Climate change analysis

4.    Sector analysis: housing in Argentina (2022 update)

5.    Program Operating Regulations

6.    Eco-efficiency measures

7.    Theory of change

8.    Vulnerability and adaptation risk atlas for Argentina – annex

9.    Lessons learned from neighborhood and housing improvement programs

10.   Report on public transportation in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Region (2022)

11.   Gap analysis of the environmental and social management system

12.   Indicative output cost analysis and assignment of disbursement indicators

13.   Safeguard policy filter and safeguard screening form

14.   Assessment of the executing agency's procurement system
                                    - iii -




                              ABBREVIATIONS


AGN       Auditoría General de la Nación [Office of the Auditor General]
DGPEyCI   Dirección General de Proyectos Especiales y Cooperación
          Internacional [Office for Special Projects and International Cooperation]
EDGE      Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies [certification]
EPH       Encuesta Permanente de Hogares [Permanent Household Survey]
ICAP      Institutional Capacity Assessment Platform
INDEC     Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos [National Institute of
          Statistics and the Census]
LBRs      Loans Based on Results
PEG       Master implementation plan
POT       Infrastructure works plan
RENABAP   Registro Nacional de Barrios Populares [National Registry of Informal
          Urban Settlements]
SGAS      Sistema de Gestión Ambiental y Social [environmental and social
          management system]
SISU      Secretaría de Integración Socio Urbana [Secretariat for Social and
          Urban Integration]
SOFR      Secured Overnight Financing Rate
                                                               PROGRAM SUMMARY
                                                    ARGENTINA
                            URBAN SOCIAL INTEGRATION AND HOUSING IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
                                                    (AR-L1361)

                                                         Financial Terms and Conditions
Borrower:                                                                                          Flexible Financing Facility(a)
Argentine Republic                                                                   Amortization period:               25 years
Executing agency:                                                                    Disbursement period:               5 years
The borrower, acting through the Ministry of Social Development                      Grace period:                      5.5 years(b)
                                                                                     Interest rate:                     SOFR-based
             Source                   Amount (US$)                      %
                                                                                     Credit fee:                        (c)


IDB (Ordinary Capital):                  150 million                   100           Inspection and supervision fee:             (c)


                                                                                     Weighted average life:                      15.25 years
Total:                                   150 million                   100
                                                                                     Approval currency:                          U.S. dollar
                                                                 Program at a Glance
Program objective/description: The program’s general objective is to promote socio-urban integration and help to improve
housing conditions for vulnerable households. Its specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the management capabilities of the
executing agency and its technical support units; (ii) improve housing conditions for vulnerable households in informal urban
settlements and adjacent formal-sector areas; (iii) improve the habitat and increase the security of land tenure for residents in
informal urban settlements; and (iv) promote socioeconomic and community development in informal urban settlements.
Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: The borrower, acting through the executing
agency, will provide evidence of: (i) the approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations in accordance with
terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank, which will include the environmental and social requirements
established in the environmental and social management system (SGAS) and the Environmental and Social Action Plan; and
(ii) the recruitment of an independent inspector to verify the program outcomes in accordance with terms of reference previously
agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4).
Special contractual conditions of execution: Before bringing a technical support unit on board, the borrower, acting through
the executing agency, will provide evidence that the corresponding framework participation agreement or its equivalent has been
signed between the executing agency and the technical support unit and has entered into force in accordance with the terms
previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.6).
See Annex B of the environmental and social review summary for the special contractual conditions precedent to the first
disbursement and execution.
Exceptions to Bank policies: None
                                                                 Strategic Alignment
Challenges:(d)                                            SI ☒                                  PI ☒                                   EI ☒

Crosscutting themes:(e)                           GE ☒ and DI ☒                              CC ☒ and ES ☒                             IC ☒
(a)
      Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization
      schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe coverage conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk
      management considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)
      Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted, provided that they do not entail
      any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan, or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)
      The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the
      Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the applicable policies.
(d)
      SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(e)
      GE (Gender Equality) and DI (Diversity); CC (Climate Change) and ES (Environmental Sustainability; and IC (Institutional Capacity and
      Rule of Law).
                             I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Background. Argentina is one of the most urbanized countries in Latin America,
          with 92% of its inhabitants residing in urban areas. 1 Moreover, much of its
          population is concentrated in large cities; in fact, out of an estimated total of
          45 million people, 2 51% 3 live in one of 10 major metropolitan areas 4 with
          populations of over 500,000. 5 The pressure on urban land generated by Argentine
          cities’ rapid growth, coupled with difficulties in providing basic services and urban
          infrastructure, has led more and more people to build their homes in informal urban
          settlements (barrios populares) where adequate access to urban services is
          lacking.
1.2       In 2016, in an effort to gauge the scale of the country’s informal habitats and
          settlements and to gather more information on them, the government partnered
          with civil society organizations to conduct a nationwide survey which then served
          as a basis for the development of the National Registry of Informal Urban
          Settlements (RENABAP). The registry has since been updated and now includes
          a total of 5,687 informal urban settlements made up of 1,168,731 households; 52%
          of these settlements were in existence before 2000, while 28% emerged in the
          2000s and 19% between 2010 and 2020. 6 These settlements typically have limited
          access to public utilities, are composed of substandard housing, and their
          inhabitants generally do not have registered title to their land. In addition,
          community infrastructure (schools, clinics, community centers) and good
          transportation links to formal-sector areas of the city and public spaces are either
          entirely absent or of poor quality.
1.3       The country is also witnessing a progressive deterioration of its housing stock. As
          of 2021, the housing deficit was estimated at the equivalent of 38.1% of Argentine
          households, 7 having increased from 3.3 million households in 2016 to 3.6 million 8
          by 2021. Of those households, 1 million (10.6%) 9 were suffering from a quantitative
          deficit, while the other 2.6 million (27.5%) 10 were experiencing a qualitative one.

1    National Population Bureau (DNP) (2020).
2    Ibid.
3    Population estimate as of May 2020, National Institute of Statistics and the Census (INDEC) (2020).
4    Data derived from the 2020 Permanent Household Survey (EPH), INDEC (2020).
5    RENABAP, Secretariat for Social and Urban Integration (SISU), 2016.
6    SISU. In 2022, the scope of RENABAP was expanded to include informal urban settlements located in towns
     having populations of over 2,000 inhabitants; in 2016, the threshold had been towns with populations of
     10,000 or more. The 2022 update resulted in the inclusion of 1,126 more settlements, 495 of which were
     informal settlements in towns having between 2,000 and 10,000 inhabitants.
7    This estimate refers to the geographic domains used by INDEC for its 2021 Permanent Household Survey,
     which correspond to 31 urban clusters representing approximately 70% of Argentina’s population.
8    EPH (2016 and 2021).
9    Of this total, 75.6% are classified as unsalvageable dwellings; the other 24.4% correspond to multiple-
     household living arrangements and severe overcrowding.
10   The qualitative deficit is composed of 973,475 households (37.8%) whose dwelling units have substandard
     roofing, 466,498 (18.1%) that have deficient kitchen facilities, 104,215 (4.1%) whose dwellings suffer from
     other structural defects, 844,508 (32.8%) that lack certain public utilities, and 184,274 (7.2%) that are subject
     to moderate overcrowding/multiple-household living arrangements.
                                                         -2-



          The number of new urban housing solutions 11 provided annually by the formal
          housing market (177,000, on average) falls short of the demand generated by new
          household formation (nearly 233,000).

                                Map 1. Households in informal urban settlements, by province




            Source: IDB on the basis of RENABAP data.


1.4       Although there are housing deficits in all income quintiles in Argentina, the largest
          deficits are in the first and second quintiles, where they represent 53% and 45%
          of all households, respectively (1,823,500 vulnerable households in total). 12 These
          households exhibit a series of interconnected vulnerabilities, including social
          vulnerabilities because they are subject to sudden changes in living standards
          associated with changes in their members’ employment situations or income
          levels 13 or climate-related vulnerability because they live in substandard housing
          units located in high-risk zones 14 where they have a greater degree of exposure to



11   The provision of housing solutions entails the use of a series of mechanisms for providing safe and secure
     housing, including home ownership, multi-household arrangements that do not involve overcrowding,
     affordable rentals, and others.
12   EPH (2020).
13   Deledicque, M. et al. (2001). “Vulnerabilidad, ¿Antesala de la Pobreza?”
14   Argentina is highly vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters. The main causal factors are the large
     size of its territory, the fact that it has ecosystems that are directly exposed to the impacts of global warming,
     and the fact that a large part of its population is located in flood-prone coastal areas. GermanWatch. 2021.
     Global Climate Risk Index 2021. “Who Suffers Most from Extreme Weather Events? Weather-related Loss
     Events in 2019 and 2000 to 2019”.
                                                         -3-



          the effects of climate change. 15 This situation has put greater pressure on the
          existing housing stock in informal urban settlements and nearby degraded
          areas, 16, 17 where many dwelling units do not meet livability standards (1.54 million
          households) or lack access to basic services (845,000 households), or where
          preexisting units are being inhabited by multiple households and are severely
          overcrowded (241,000 households) or moderately so (184,000 households). 18
1.5       The existing program. In order to address the housing issues reflected in the
          RENABAP data, in 2019 the Ministry of Social Development, with IDB support,
          established the Social and Urban Integration Program (4804/OC-AR) and the
          Social and Urban Integration Fund. Under this program, the government has
          developed a successful comprehensive, crosscutting model for helping Argentine
          cities to integrate informal urban settlements into their formal sectors and to halt
          the deterioration of their housing stock. This has helped the country’s cities to
          narrow what had been the widening gaps that were hindering the access of more
          than 375 informal urban settlements to suitable living environments and urban
          services. 19 This program coordinates the efforts of civil society organizations and
          program beneficiaries to deploy a wide range of actions on the ground aimed at
          achieving the urban and socioeconomic integration of target households. It is
          currently working on more than 20 community initiatives in 6 different settlements
          along with housing improvements in another 20 settlements designed to provide
          suitable living conditions for vulnerable households in those locations. The pace of
          implementation (6.65 years) of the four operations (940/OC-AR, 1842/OC-AR,
          2662/OC-AR, and 3458/OC-AR) conducted under the Neighborhood Improvement
          Program (PROMEBA), whose execution and interventions are similar to those of
          this program, have been used as a basis for the design of a comparable timetable.
          Given the scale of the problem in the country, opportunities have been identified
          for boosting the efficiency and effectiveness of program interventions and for
          speeding up execution, thereby strengthening the response capacity of the
          Ministry of Social Development and enabling it to have a greater impact in a shorter
          amount of time.


15   Historically, according to the International Disaster Database (EM‑DAT), floods have been the type of natural
     disaster associated with the most serious impacts in terms of the number of events, persons affected, health
     impacts, deaths, and property damage. Property damage from floods is estimated at US$1.4 billion (at 2015
     purchasing power parity) annually, which translates to as much as US$4 billion in welfare losses. Climate-related
     events account for 98% of the 15 million persons affected by disasters (97% by floods 1% by storms). In
     provinces whose populations are exposed to both poverty and flooding, major floods wipe out nearly 100% of
     total social assistance payments (Rozenberg et al. (2021); World Bank (2021b).
16   Informal urban settlements (barrios populares) are defined as vulnerable settlements in which at least eight
     families are living either together or adjacent to one another and in which more than half of the population
     lacks land titles and regular access to two or more utilities (running water, metered residential power supply,
     and/or sewerage connections) (Decree 2670 of 2015).
17   In the City of Buenos Aires, 42% of the tenant households in informal settlements are composed of young people
     (between 20 and 30 years of age) who need to move out of their parents’ home and establish one of their own
     but who lack savings capacity, do not qualify for formal rental agreements, and do not have enough money to
     buy a plot of their own; 67% of these households are headed by women. Rodríguez, M.C. (2017). “Mujeres,
     Inmigrantes y Jóvenes: Formas de Acceso Informal al Hábitat en la Ciudad”. REDALYC.
18   EPH (2021).
19   Calculated by the authors based on information available at: https://datosabiertos.desarrollosocial.gob.ar/
     dataset/proyectos-de-integracion-socio-urbana/.
                                                        -4-



1.6       Opportunities for improvement. The main recommended improvements are:
          (i) strengthen the social support process in order to speed up vulnerable
          households’ integration into the formal sector of the city; (ii) develop survey and
          information management tools that will make it possible to improve diagnostic
          assessments, works and project planning, management follow-up, and
          physical/financial traceability; (iii) develop indicators for measuring improvements
          in living conditions and service access, reductions in the deterioration of housing
          stock, and improvements in the quality of the goods and services delivered to the
          households in question; and (iv) put in place strategies for averting the emergence
          of new informal settlements. In addition, one of the challenges for program
          management is the limited integration and updating of information across
          systems/programs that are accessible to other government agencies and the
          public at large regarding the status of vulnerable households in informal urban
          settlements.
1.7       Problem addressed. The continuing deterioration of vulnerable households’ living
          conditions is increasing the barriers to their socio-urban integration. Four main
          causes of this problem have been identified:
1.8       Cause 1. Technical/administrative constraints exist at all three levels of
          government that reduce the efficiency of land management efforts and the
          government’s ability to deliver suitable living conditions quickly enough to keep
          pace with the evolving housing problem. Because of its federal structure, Argentina
          has difficulty coordinating interagency efforts to efficiently implement sector
          policies that influence living conditions, such as those relating to: (i) drinking water;
          (ii) housing and urban development; (iii) sewerage systems; (iv) transportation;
          and (v) the environment. This situation is exacerbated by issues relating to
          information generation, systematization, and transparency, which vary a great deal
          from one province to the next, 20 and the lack of integrated physical/financial
          monitoring tools and systems. The end result is delays, shortcomings, and
          inefficiencies in the design, implementation, and monitoring of socio-urban
          integration projects.
1.9       Cause 2. The housing stock for vulnerable households has deteriorated, and the
          production of suitable housing solutions and improvements for vulnerable
          households in informal urban settlements and nearby degraded areas is slow and
          of limited scope. On the one hand, the national housing policy is focused primarily
          on eliminating the quantitative housing deficit, but the tools being used to do so
          are not achieving the pace of implementation needed to stop that deficit from
          growing. On the other hand, few resources and instruments are available for
          mitigating the qualitative deficit in a timely manner. 21 Furthermore, macroeconomic
          instability and successive bouts of high inflation hamper the provision of long-term
          mortgage financing in a country, such as Argentina, that is far from meeting
          international standards in this regard. 22 The housing programs currently being

20   Granero Realini, G. et al. (2018). “La Política Habitacional en Argentina. Una Mirada a Través de los Institutos
     Provinciales de la Vivienda”, CIPPEC.
21   Ibid.
22   The number of mortgages issued in Argentina is only 5 for every 1,000 persons, in contrast to the situation
     in Chile and Colombia, where 85 and 27 credits, respectively, are disbursed for every 1,000 persons. Silva,
     Julio Miguel (2022). Informe Sectorial de Vivienda.
                                                       -5-



          implemented by the executing agency suffer from a number of design and
          implementation flaws at the various stages of the housing improvement process:
          targeting and prioritization, program enrollment, and construction/installation.
          These problems mainly stem from a lack of the necessary tools for preparing
          diagnostic assessments and for designing and properly managing housing
          projects.
1.10      Cause 3. Security of tenure and access to basic urban services and utilities in
          informal urban settlements are increasingly lacking, and the government is having
          difficulty resolving these issues efficiently. According to the most recent census
          data available, 14.4% of urban households in Argentina do not hold title to the land
          on which their dwelling is located and are occupying their homes under loan or
          work-related arrangements. On average, 17% of the population resides in housing
          under some type of irregular agreement or arrangement, but the figure is higher in
          informal urban settlements, where over 50% of the households do not hold title to
          the property where they live. 23 Because of the challenges involved in coordinating
          all the agencies and bureaucratic procedures entailed in improving security of
          tenure, this process moves more slowly than is needed to actually reduce the
          percentage of households that lack secure tenure. The lack of secure tenure
          discourages households from investing in their dwellings, increases their level of
          uncertainty, 24 and makes it difficult for them to gain access to credit. 25 In recent
          years, shortfalls in access to basic services and utilities have also increased. 26
          Currently, only 14.7% of households in informal urban settlements have sewerage
          connections, and only 3.3% have authorized hook-ups to the system. Only 1.7%
          have access to natural gas connections, only 30.8% live adjacent to paved roads,
          and 51.8% live close to landfills or dumping sites. In addition, 64% of informal
          urban settlements experience flooding at least once a year, and this figure will
          surely rise as a consequence of the effects of climate change. 27 The executing
          agency has a great deal of experience in conducting comprehensive improvement
          projects in informal urban settlements, but the evaluations that have been
          undertaken have turned up evidence of certain implementation and design flaws
          (and, hence, shortcomings in budget execution) that have slowed the
          implementation of comprehensive project works.
1.11      Cause 4. There are a number of problems involved in reducing the socioeconomic
          barriers that limit informal settlement dwellers’ opportunities for social integration.
          These settlements have limited access to social services: (i) the coverage of basic
          health-care services is scanty (only 5.6% of informal urban settlements have
          clinics, and only 30% of this population group received at least one basic health-
          care service in the preceding 12 months, compared to 73% of the rest of the
          population); (ii) there is little access to early child development and stimulation
          services (80% of children between 0 and 4 years of age in these settlements do

23   In order for a settlement to be listed in RENABAP, at least 50% of its resident households must have insecure
     tenure. Disaggregated microdata are unavailable.
24
     What Tenure Security? Land Use Policy, 27: 449–456 (2010).
25   Rajack, Robin (2022). Tenurial Security, Property Freedoms, Dwelling Improvements & Squatter
     Regularisation: A Case Study of Trinidad.
26   Sector analysis: housing in Argentina. 2022 update.
27   Bonfiglio J.I., J. Vera, and A. Salvia (2019), and RENABAP data.
                                                   -6-



          not attend daycare centers, compared to 68% in formal-sector urban areas); and
          (iii) educational services are lacking (only 3.5% of informal urban settlements have
          a daycare center, 6.6% have a nursery school, 5.8% have elementary schools,
          and 4% have secondary schools). Informal urban settlements are also subject to
          significant developmental gaps: only 15.5% of young people (between 18 and
          24 years of age) have an advanced level of schooling, compared to 29.7% at the
          national level; and only 26% of the heads of household in informal urban
          settlements (men and women) have completed secondary school, compared to
          51% of the residents of neighborhoods located within established urban tracts
          and/or private housing developments. The employment figures for informal urban
          settlements are also lower: 44.5% of the adult population is not economically
          active, 39.4% of adult residents are in a situation of labor vulnerability (22% have
          jobs that do not offer a pension plan, 9.4% are own-account workers who lack
          stable incomes, and 8% are unemployed), while only 16.1% have a formal-sector
          job. 28 Civil society organizations play an important role in the socioeconomic
          organization of informal urban settlements, and many of them work to create jobs
          in the circular economy. These are typically informal organizations, however, that
          lack the financial, physical, and technical resources and capacities to carry out
          their work on an efficient and sustainable basis. The executing agency has proven
          experience in carrying out comprehensive initiatives and promoting social and
          community development in informal urban settlements. However, implementation
          and design flaws have been identified in its current projects that have led to long
          delays in their design and execution which have hampered them from achieving
          the desired results.
1.12      Theory of change. The Bank will take advantage of the existing opportunities for
          making improvements by focusing its support on: (i) strengthening the management
          capabilities of the executing agency and its technical support units; (ii) improving
          housing conditions for vulnerable households in informal urban settlements and
          nearby degraded areas; (iii) improving the habitat and increasing the security of land
          tenure for residents in informal urban settlements; and (iv) promoting socioeconomic
          and community development in these settlements. The following figure outlines this
          operation’s vertical logic and theory of change.




28   RENABAP, National Survey of Social Structure (ENES) (2019), and SISU (2019).
                                                       -7-



                                                 Figure 1. Theory of change




1.13       Component I will focus on boosting efficiency in order to expedite the diagnostic
           assessment, design, and implementation of program components and the
           achievement of results, as detailed in the following table. 29

                             Table 1. Current and expected time frames for program stages
                                                                        Current average    Expected average
             Stage
                                                                        time frame         time frame
             Time frame for enrollment in the housing improvement
             program (starting from the time of beneficiary             1.5 to 2.5 years   Less than 1 year
             prioritization)
             Time frame for completion of the works (from the time of
                                                                        3 years            Less than 2 years
             enrollment)
             Development and approval of the master implementation
                                                                        2 to 3 years       Less than 2 years
             plan (PEG) or the infrastructure works plan (POT)
             Design and preparation of socioeconomic and/or
             community development project budgets (following a         1 to 2 years       Less than 1 year
             proposal’s approval by the executing agency)
             Achievement of social and community development
                                                                        60%                75%
             project targets




29   For further details, see optional link 7.
                                                 -8-



1.14      Gender considerations. According to RENABAP data, 63.7% of the households
          in informal urban settlements are headed by women. 30 As a majority of the activities
          engaged in by women have to do with their household and community, a lack of
          access to basic services is a significant hurdle. The data indicate that 88.7% of
          these households do not have proper access to running water, 97.85% do not have
          proper access to a sewerage connection, 63.8% lack proper access to the power
          grid, and 98.9% lack proper access to the natural gas distribution network. 31 In
          addition, 60% of households headed by women have incomes that are less than
          the equivalent of two minimum wages and thus tend to be more vulnerable than
          households headed by men. 32 The housing deficit affecting 38% of households
          headed by women 33 includes qualitative shortcomings, with substandard flooring,
          roofing, kitchen facilities, bathrooms, and/or utility access existing in 70.4% of the
          households and 30% lacking access to services. Another 29.6% are subject to a
          quantitative housing deficit, with nearly 80% of those households residing in units
          that are classified as unsalvageable. With respect to income levels and
          employability, women’s economic activity rate is 20 percentage points lower than
          that of men (49.4% and 69.4% respectively), and women’s employment rate
          reflects a similar situation (the employment rate for women is 44.7% while the
          corresponding rate for men is 63.6%). 34 In all, 12% of women work in informal jobs
          and 26% are unemployed, while women perform more unpaid work and undertake
          more domestic tasks than men (91.7% versus 75.1% 35 and 89.9% versus 68.3%, 36
          respectively) (optional link 2).
1.15      Diversity considerations. In Argentina, 10.3% of the population has some type
          of disability 37 that requires accessibility arrangements or accommodations in their
          homes, public spaces, and greater inclusion in the workforce. In terms of the
          qualitative housing deficit, 26.5% of households that include a person with
          disabilities report that some type of accommodation or adaptation is needed in
          their dwelling. Two out of every three persons with disabilities are unemployed
          (INDEC, 2021), and the economic activity rate for persons with disabilities is
          35.9%, which means that only approximately one third of this population group is
          economically active. The economic activity rate for women is nearly 15 percentage
          points lower than it is for their male counterparts. The same type of differential
          exists between their employment rates as well (40.3% for men versus 25.8% for
          women). The economic inactivity rate for persons with disabilities aged 14 and
          over is 64.1%. Official data at the national level on the economic and housing
          status of LGBTQ+ persons is unavailable but, according to a study conducted by
          INDEC in the municipality of La Matanza in 2012, 80% of the persons in this group
          stated that their gender identity made it difficult for them to find work in the formal

30   Observatorio de Géneros y Políticas Públicas (2020). “Desigualdad Social y Desigualdad de Género:
     Radiografía de los barrios populares en la Argentina actual”.
31   Ibid.
32   Permanent Household Survey (2021).
33   Ibid.
34   INDEC (2021).
35   National time use survey (2021).
36   Ibid.
37   Estudio Nacional sobre el Perfil de las Personas con Discapacidad (2018).
                                                       -9-



          sector. The data also indicated that half of the persons who were surveyed lived in
          substandard dwellings, with even higher percentages being recorded for those
          lacking waste disposal services, paved roads, and public lighting; 75% did not have
          Internet access and 66% lacked cooling/heating systems. For the migrant
          population, employment in the informal sector of the economy, insufficient
          economic resources, and a lack of access to mortgages, local co-signers for formal
          rental agreements, and public housing policies for this population group all make
          it difficult for them to access suitable housing (optional link 2).
1.16      Climate change considerations. Argentina is highly vulnerable to the effects of
          climate change and natural disasters. In 2020 and 2021 alone, more than
          4,000 people were displaced by weather-related events and disasters. 38 This is
          mainly attributable to the size of the country’s territory, the existence of ecosystems
          that are directly exposed to the impacts of global warming, and the fact that a
          considerable portion of the population lives in flood-prone areas. 39
1.17      Vulnerable households are more heavily impacted by the effects of climate change
          because of the poor quality and location of their dwellings. 40 The country’s most
          recent permanent household survey 41 indicates that 27.7% of Argentine
          households (in which 36.5% of its population resides) are below the poverty line
          and that 6.8% of those households are below the extreme poverty line. The
          construction materials used in the dwellings of 12.2% of poor households are rated
          as deficient and those of another 19.4% of the dwellings are classified as partially
          deficient. For households below the extreme poverty line, the corresponding
          figures are 24.5% and 27.9%, respectively; 42 10% of poor households are located
          in flood-prone areas and 6.7% near landfills, with these figures rising to 17.9% and
          13.2%, respectively, for extremely poor households. 43 Vulnerable households are
          also more exposed to storms and heat waves, which have become considerably
          more frequent in Argentina. (The number of such events in the city of Buenos Aires
          doubled between 1960 and 2010.) 44 Between 1970 and 2015, there were 604
          floods in that city and 588 storms; these events have taken their toll in vulnerable
          neighborhoods and have often made it necessary for residents to evacuate. 45 Heat
          waves are also becoming more common, with 80 days of such events being
          recorded in the past decade, and increasingly severe in terms of both their duration
          and intensity. 46 In the city of Buenos Aires, annual high temperatures are on the
          rise, climbing from 21.5ºC to 23ºC between 1910 and 2019. 47 The impacts and

38   Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC). (2022).
39   GermanWatch. (2021). Global climate risk index 2021. Who Suffers Most from Extreme Weather Events,
     2000-2019.
40   Felipe Vera and Jeannette Sordi (2021). Diseño Ecológico. Estrategias para la ciudad vulnerable, Inter-
     American Development Bank, pp. 58-59.
41   EPH, January–June 2022, INDEC.
42   EPH, July–December 2021, INDEC.
43   Ibid.
44
     Tercera Comunicación Nacional, 2015.
45   IDOM. “Plan de Acción Climática Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires. Análisis de riesgos climáticos. 2020”.
46   Ibid.
47   Ministry of Defense, Secretariat of Planning, Meteorological Information Center of the National Meteorological
     Service. Central Buenos Aires Observatory, 1910–2019.
                                                   - 10 -



       risks associated with these events are not evenly distributed among the urban
       population either. Vulnerable households are more likely to sustain damage during
       natural disasters, and it is more difficult for them to recover from disasters because
       of the location and poor quality of their dwellings and the vulnerability of household
       members.
1.18   Residents of informal urban settlements tend to lack access to parks,
       air-conditioning, and health-care services and, consequently, feel the effects of the
       climate crisis more intensely. For example, in Buenos Aires alone,
       483,000 households are at risk of drought. Since they are not included in urban
       planning processes, informal urban settlements are not equipped with adaptive
       measures to help them cope with the impacts of climate change and are subject
       to significant environmental risks owing to their location on cropland, which is more
       prone to erosion and pollution. It is estimated that 45% of informal urban
       settlements are located in areas that are subject to environmental risks and the
       effects of climate change, and approximately 50% of these settlements are in
       flood-prone areas.

                                 Map 2. Extreme and prolonged drought risk
                                             Drought categories*

            D1 Moderate                D2 Severe             D3 Extreme               D4 Exceptional
       % of exposure to drought risk

       0.1.                    0.5                      1.0
       Projection of probability and spatial distribution of extreme and prolonged drought events
       (categories D3-D4).
       Units: 0.1=unlikely / 1.0=imminent.




       *U.S. National Drought Mitigation Center
                                      - 11 -




    Map 3. Vulnerable households in informal urban settlements exposed to drought




Source: IDB, based on RENABAP data.
                                              - 12 -




      Map 4. Vulnerable households in informal urban settlements exposed to flooding

            Risk of coastal flooding                                 Risk of river flooding
Low          Medium         High       Extreme         Low          Medium          High        Extreme

Risk of coastal flooding as a percentage of the        Risk of river flooding as a percentage of the
population affected by rising sea levels and           population affected by excess streamflow and
increased storm surges. Units = x for every y          overflowing of rivers and other inland bodies of
persons.                                               water. Units = x for every y persons.




Flood impact scale
Low. 0-1 per 1,000       Medium. 2-6 per 1,000 High. From 7 per 1,000               Extreme. More than
population               population            population to 1 per 100              1 per 100 population
                                               population


Map 5. Vulnerable households in informal urban settlements exposed to flooding, by department




Source: IDB, on the basis of RENABAP data.
                                                       - 13 -



 1.19      In addition to these aggravating factors, there are other barriers to vulnerable
           households’ socio-urban inclusion 48 that further increase the likelihood of such
           households being located in substandard housing or of migrating to informal urban
           settlements and that may also pose a threat to the sustainability of recently
           improved and formalized urban settlements. The absence of mechanisms for
           producing new housing solutions of acceptable quality, increasing the carrying
           capacity of existing units, and halting their progressive deterioration compounds
           the problem posed by the informality and declining quality of the country’s housing
           stock.
 1.20      The Bank’s experience. The IDB has a great deal of experience with initiatives
           focusing on informal urban settlements. These programs have progressed along a
           learning curve that started with an emphasis on basic infrastructure but has now
           advanced to approaches that complement that focus with social action. Its
           experience in this area includes: the Urban Integration and Social and Educational
           Inclusion Program in the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (AR-O0005), the
           Neighborhoods Improvement Program II (PROMEBA II) (AR-X1004), the Social
           and Urban Integration Program in Greater Buenos Aires (4823/OC-AR), the
           previously mentioned Social and Urban Integration Program (4804/OC-AR); the
           Irregular Settlements Program (UR-X1003) in Uruguay; the Urban Resilience and
           Revitalization Program in Socially and Environmentally Vulnerable Areas
           (ProMorar Recife) (5732/OC-BR); the Program for Integrated Urban Development
           of the Municipality of Campo Grande (3630/OC-BR), and the Rio de Janeiro Low-
           income Neighborhood Urban Development Program III (2482/OC-BR) in Brazil;
           the Multiphase Neighborhood Improvement Program (2082/BL-BO) in Bolivia; the
           Housing and Habitat Improvement Program (3538/OC-PR) and the Rehabilitation
           and Housing Program for Bañado Sur in Asunción (Barrio – Tucumbú)
           (4700/OC-PR) in Paraguay.
 1.21      Argentina also has experience executing Loans Based on Results (LBRs), which
           substantiates the country’s capacity to use this instrument. Previously, it executed
           the Program for the Development of a Satellite System and Applications Based on
           Earth Observation (PROSAT) (1777/OC-AR) and the Technological Innovation
           Program V (AR-X1015), and, recently, it executed the Program for Strengthening
           and Integrating Health Networks in the Province of Buenos Aires (AR-O0013). All
           of these operations have achieved excellent results with respect to efficacy and
           efficiency. 49 Additionally, the IDB’s Housing and Urban Development Division has
           concrete experience with the LBR instrument in the context of informal settlements.
           In Chile, the Program for the Urban Integration of Informal Settlements
           (5313/OC-CH), which is currently in execution, has demonstrated significant
           advances in achieving results related to preventing the emergence of informal
           settlements and improving spending quality.




 48   Vulnerable households in low-income neighborhoods are subject to other poverty traps, such as those
      associated with the distance between their places of work and their homes, a greater prevalence of disease,
      and other factors that act as barriers to their integration into the country’s productive fabric.
49    The amounts and results of these loan operations are available in the respective project termination
      reports: AR-X1004, 2482/OC-BR, 1777/OC-AR, AR-X1015, and AR-O0013.
                                              - 14 -



1.22      The proposed operation draws on lessons learned in earlier tranches of the
          PROMEBA program, 50 particularly with regard to: (i) the inclusion of an integrated,
          multidimensional approach to habitat issues and the need to attain greater
          efficiency and effectiveness in the design and execution stages in order to enhance
          the speed and scope of the State’s response to the challenge of integrating
          vulnerable areas; (ii) the importance of strengthening management partnerships
          and community participation as essential factors for ensuring the sustainability of
          these types of processes and related technical capabilities; and (iii) the need to
          build technical capacity for housing improvements in order to ensure the scalability
          of program interventions and to improve spending quality.
1.23      Strategic institutional alignment. The program is consistent with the second
          Update to the Institutional Strategy (document AB-3190-2) and the IDB Group
          Corporate Results Framework 2020-2023 (document GN-2727-12), as it is aligned
          with the development challenges of: (i) social inclusion and equality, since it will
          help to reduce poverty and promote equity by reducing deficits in basic
          infrastructure and access to social services for population groups with unmet basic
          needs; (ii) productivity and innovation, since it provides for activities focusing on
          job creation and improvements in the provision of green, resilient housing; and
          (iii) economic integration, as it will promote the socioeconomic development of
          vulnerable population groups. It is also aligned with the crosscutting
          themes of: (i) gender equality and diversity, as it will promote: (a) land titling for
          women, (b) the prioritization of the participation of women, persons with
          disabilities, and LGBTQ+ persons in community initiatives, and (c) the
          incorporation of universal design criteria that will improve conditions for a diverse
          range of population groups; (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability,
          since it will incorporate green housing construction criteria, climate solutions in
          public spaces, more accessible public transportation and soft mobility options, LED
          lighting, recycling infrastructure, and other solutions. In line with the joint
          methodology of the multilateral development banks for tracking climate change
          adaptation finance, IDB will provide 53.37% of the resources for this operation in
          connection with climate change mitigation and adaptation measures. These
          resources will contribute to the achievement of the Bank’s climate finance target
          (30% of annual approvals); and (iii) institutional capacity and the rule of law, as it
          will provide training in topics relating to efficiency in project management and
          execution and in the development and use of digital process optimization systems
          and tools.
1.24      Alignment with the Bank’s country strategy with Argentina. This operation is
          consistent with the strategic objective of the Bank’s country strategy with Argentina
          2021-2023 (document GN-3051) of improving the population’s habitat and mobility
          conditions. It is also consistent with the Bank’s sector frameworks documents in
          the following areas: (i) housing and urban development (document GN-2732-11),
          as it will promote structural social inclusion by improving underserved and informal
          neighborhoods and promoting access to adequate housing; (ii) climate change
          (document GN-2835-10), as it will use planning and design processes to
          implement specific mitigation and adaptation measures; and (iii) gender and
          diversity (document GN-2800-10), as it will provide better economic opportunities

50   See optional link 9.
                                          - 15 -



       for women, persons with disabilities, and LGBTQ+ persons. This operation is also
       aligned with the IDB Group Gender and Diversity Action Plan 2022-2025
       (document GN-3116-1), as it will promote the social and economic integration of
       women, persons with disabilities, and LGBTQ+ persons, and with the Employment
       Action Framework with a Gender Perspective, as it will strengthen the
       employability and/or production capacity of women and LGBTQ+ persons.
1.25   Institutional capacity. In line with the LBR policy tool (document GN-2869-10),
       the institutional, financial, and procurement capacities and the integrity of the
       Ministry of Social Development were analyzed using the Institutional Capacity
       Assessment Platform (ICAP). Its procurement system was also evaluated using
       the simplified version of the Methodology for the Assessment of Procurement
       Systems (MAPS) of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
       Development.
1.26   Evaluation of institutional capacity. The Bank shared the ICAP results and the
       findings of its evaluation of the procurement system and, after analyzing the
       responses provided by the Ministry of Social Development to specific
       questionnaires and its responses regarding program indicators, made a series of
       recommendations for building the Ministry’s capacity for executing this program.
       These assessments confirmed that the Ministry has sufficient institutional capacity
       but also indicated that it could become more effective in resolving development
       issues by strengthening implementation-related processes that would allow it to
       attain time efficiencies and gain in effectiveness.
1.27   The main recommendations are: (i) agree upon a program performance tracking
       and monitoring methodology with the Secretariat for Social and Urban Integration
       (SISU) and the Office for Special Projects and International Cooperation
       (DGPEyCI), with emphasis on the work undertaken on the ground by the technical
       support units; (ii) update the established methodology for analyzing the
       implementation capacity of local teams based on the technical activities to be
       carried out; (iii) analyze existing needs for strengthening human resource
       capabilities, particularly in the areas of technical management and of procurement
       and recruitment; (iv) update and apply the DGPEyCI administrative procedures
       manual; (v) incorporate an institutional flowchart into the program Operating
       Regulations that defines the procedures for coordination across government
       ministries, with other agencies at the national and subnational levels, and with
       technical support units; (vi) incorporate a description into the program Operating
       Regulations of the responsibilities of each actor in crosscutting processes such as
       strategic and operational planning, the execution of program components,
       procurement and recruitment, the preparation and submission of financial reports,
       achievement of indicators, tracking and monitoring, supervision, verification of
       observance of integrity standards and avoidance of prohibited practices, conflicts
       of interest, and dealings with firms on the Bank’s sanctions list, etc.; and
       (vii) devise an action plan for managing environmental and social impacts and
       acting upon recommendations made pursuant to the analysis of existing gaps.
1.28   Financial and institutional viability. The analysis carried out by the Bank’s
       fiduciary area indicates that the DGPEyCI does not have any significant
       institutional, technical, or financial weaknesses and that its human resources are
                                                      - 16 -



          well qualified and have the necessary experience to administer this operation with
          the technical support units that will be involved. 51
1.29      Beneficiaries. The beneficiaries of this operation will be 8,350 vulnerable
          households included on the RENABAP registry, are located in informal urban
          settlements and nearby degraded areas, and are affected by the country’s housing
          deficit. Priority will be placed on households headed by women, LGBTQ+ persons,
          older adults, migrants, and/or functionally diverse persons that are located in areas
          vulnerable to the effects of climate change in which mitigation measures can be
          applied.
1.30      Eligibility criteria. Vulnerable households listed on the RENABAP registry that
          are residing in informal urban settlements or nearby degraded areas that are
          affected by the housing deficit.
1.31      Vulnerable household prioritization criteria. For the prioritization of households
          for housing improvements, the criteria are: (i) households located in informal urban
          settlements or nearby degraded areas that have previously benefited from
          neighborhood improvement activities or that are being considered as possible
          beneficiaries of such activities; (ii) households located in areas where qualitative
          housing deficits are the greatest; (iii) households headed by women and/or
          LGBTQ+ persons; (iv) households subject to serious overcrowding; (v) migrant
          households; and (vi) households located in areas prone to flooding and landslides.
          The Bank will verify the fulfillment of eligibility and prioritization criteria. These
          criteria are set out in detail in the program Operating Regulations. Population
          groups exhibiting other types of vulnerability will be served by the preexisting
          program.
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.32      The program’s general objective is to promote socio-urban integration and help to
          improve housing conditions for vulnerable households. Its specific objectives are
          to: (i) strengthen the management capabilities of the executing agency and its
          technical support units; (ii) improve housing conditions for vulnerable households
          in informal urban settlements and adjacent formal-sector areas; (iii) improve the
          habitat and increase the security of land tenure for residents in informal urban
          settlements; and (iv) promote socioeconomic and community development in
          informal urban settlements. This operation has been structured into the
          components outlined below.
1.33      Component I. Modernization and institution-strengthening at all three levels
          of government (IDB: US$6,000,000). The objective of this component is to
          strengthen the management capabilities of the executing agency and its technical
          support units. This will be accomplished by: (i) providing technical assistance to
          strengthen the fiduciary, procurement, and assessment processes of the executing
          agency and its technical support units through the introduction of coordination
          mechanisms and management and technical tools for boosting the efficiency of
          program execution activities; (ii) providing training to strengthen the technical,
          fiduciary, and procurement capacities of the executing agency, its technical
51   In order to set up a technical support unit for the program, a province or municipio must have neighborhoods
     that are listed on RENABAP and have the necessary institutional capacity to enter into agreements with the
     executing agency.
                                                     - 17 -



          support units, and their teams in the field with a view to building management
          capacity, improving intersectoral and multilevel coordination, and promoting the
          acquisition of technical and social skills required for program implementation;
          (iii) recruiting support teams and acquiring equipment; (iv) conducting studies as a
          basis for the design of intervention strategies and monitoring tools for averting the
          emergence of new settlements and/or the expansion of existing ones;
          (v) acquiring, developing, upgrading, installing, and using tools, services, and
          technological and/or computer aids and hardware to improve program
          management by means of diagnostic assessments, the reduction of execution
          times, and monitoring and improving the quality of expenditure; (vi) developing
          systems for processing and managing information on climate-related vulnerability
          in tandem with existing systems; (vii) using new technologies to update RENABAP;
          and (viii) developing strategies and training plans that incorporate climate and
          social risk criteria for advance interventions in informal urban settlements.
1.34      Component II. Improvement of housing conditions for vulnerable
          households (IDB: US$58,500,000). The objective of this component is to improve
          housing conditions for vulnerable households in informal urban settlements and
          adjacent formal-sector areas. The expected outcomes will be achieved by: (i) using
          management tools developed by the program to undertake housing improvements
          incorporating resilience and energy and water efficiency criteria; (ii) providing
          technical and social assistance that incorporates intersectoral and multilevel
          coordination mechanisms developed by the program; (iii) preparing project
          implementation plans that incorporate climate change and environmental
          sustainability considerations with the help of efficiency-boosting processes and
          mechanisms; (iv) implementing housing solutions that will incorporate gender- and
          diversity-based perspectives, 52 along with resilience and energy- and water-
          efficiency criteria, using management tools embedded in physical and financial
          traceability systems developed in the course of the program; (v) providing goods
          and services to support the incorporation of green and resilient mixed-use housing
          designs; and (vi) providing public utility connections. The projects and works
          carried out under this component will be implemented using management, physical
          and financial traceability, and assessment tools developed within the framework of
          this operation.
1.35      Component III. Socio-urban integration of informal urban settlements based
          on a gender and diversity perspective (IDB: US$72,000,000). The objective of
          this component is to improve the habitat of residents of informal urban settlements
          and increase their security of land tenure. The projects and works to be carried out
          under this component will be designed and executed based on a gender and
          diversity perspective, through the implementation of the following subcomponents:
          a. Subcomponent III.1. Integrative urban interventions and the provision
             and improvement of urban infrastructure and social and community
             facilities. The outcomes pursued under this subcomponent will be achieved
             by means of the following: (i) the preparation of a baseline diagnostic
             assessment using program-generated information platforms; (ii) the

52   Priority will be placed on having women take part in designing the housing improvements to be implemented
     so that those improvements will address their particular needs. The designs will also afford universal
     accessibility for households whose members include persons with disabilities.
                                                     - 18 -



              preparation of implementation plans and the associated preliminary studies;
              (iii) the construction of drinking water distribution networks, sewerage systems,
              stormwater drains, natural gas distribution systems, electrical power systems,
              public LED lighting, and telecommunications services; (iv) the construction of
              utility hookups in housing units; (v) the installation of mobility infrastructure
              (including mass transportation and soft mobility systems); (vi) the construction
              of safe public spaces and green areas whose designs incorporate digital and
              mapping technologies; (vii) the establishment of smart and sustainable urban
              facilities; (viii) the establishment of community facilities meeting the minimum
              standards for green EDGE certification; (ix) construction and provision of
              goods and services for solid urban waste treatment and management;
              (x) strategic works for integrating informal urban settlements into formal-sector
              areas of cities; and (xi) advance works that can be fast-tracked in order to lay
              the groundwork for the implementation of projects. The projects and works to
              be carried out under this subcomponent will be conducted using management,
              physical/financial traceability, and assessment tools developed over the course
              of the program.
          b. Subcomponent III.2. Land management and security of tenure. The
             outcomes sought under this component will be achieved by means of the
             following: (i) technical and legal studies; (ii) proposals for the modification of
             urban regulatory codes; (iii) expenditures relating to community participation,
             with special emphasis on gender considerations; 53 (iv) survey plats;
             (v) marking of property lines; (vi) addition of new parcels to the land register;
             (vii) legal registration of plots so that title to them can then be transferred;
             (viii) expenditures relating to subdivisions and housing; and (ix) expenditures
             relating to the regularization of public utilities. New technologies, such as the
             use of blockchain systems for some of the steps to be taken in preparation for
             the issuance of land titles, may be introduced under this subcomponent.
             Management, physical/financial traceability, and assessment tools developed
             as part of this operation will be used to carry out the projects and works to be
             implemented under this subcomponent.
1.36      Component IV. Socioeconomic and community development in informal
          urban settlements based on a gender and diversity perspective
          (IDB: US$8,250,000). The objective of this component is to promote
          socioeconomic and community development in informal urban settlements. These
          outcomes will be achieved by means of: (i) diagnostic social and environmental
          studies and studies on gaps in the provision of social services will be conducted
          using survey tools developed over the course of this operation; (ii) measures for
          expanding social program coverage and participation using multilevel information
          gathering and coordination mechanisms; (iii) the design and implementation of
          economic development plans that will promote a circular economy and the
          incorporation of adaptation and mitigation measures in informal urban settlements;
          (iv) the design and implementation of measures focusing on health, habitat,
          education, gender and diversity, the environment, and other areas; (v) the
          enhancement and expansion of community spaces; (vi) tutorials and other types
53   Participation by women at the program intake stage and thereafter will be supported by the provision of
     childcare services in order to lower the access barriers to community participation related to caregiving
     responsibilities.
                                            - 19 -



       of training in the development of mechanisms for dealing with emerging land-
       related issues, increasing the effectiveness of program interventions, and
       expediting the delivery of social services; (vii) the provision of goods and services
       to support social, community, and productive development; (viii) technical and/or
       financial assistance for new production units and for strengthening existing ones,
       with a focus on practices that reduce emissions and increase resilience;
       (ix) training for women and LGBTQ+ persons designed to increase their
       employability and/or production capacity; (x) the upgrading and expansion of
       economic infrastructure within the neighborhood and/or infrastructure to support
       local and regional development; and (xi) the provision of goods and services
       related to integrated urban solid waste management.
1.37   Administration, oversight, evaluations, and audits (IDB: US$5,250,000). This
       item includes operating expenses, supplies, and management expenses of the
       executing agency, the cost of corporate or individual consulting services in
       connection with evaluations, external audits, the independent verification of
       results, and program administration and supervisory activities.
C.     Key results indicators
1.38   This program will benefit at least 8,350 vulnerable households located in informal
       urban settlements and/or adjacent formal-sector areas. The following impact
       indicators will be used to evaluate socio-urban integration and improvements in
       housing conditions: (i) the percentage of households benefiting from housing
       improvements that report feeling that their level of well-being in their home has
       increased; (ii) the percentage of households in informal urban settlements that
       report being more satisfied with their neighborhood. The following outcomes are
       expected: (i) more efficient management of socio-urban integration programs;
       (ii) more effective prioritization processes and more efficient enrollment
       procedures and monitoring of housing improvement projects; (iii) improved
       housing conditions for vulnerable households; (iv) a reduction in the critical
       overcrowding rate; (v) a reduction in the amount of time required for the design
       and execution of master implementation plans, infrastructure works plans, and
       related infrastructure projects; (vi) increased coverage of basic utilities in informal
       urban settlements; (vii) greater security of tenure in informal urban settlements;
       (viii) greater integration of informal urban settlements into the surrounding city;
       (ix) a reduction in the amount of time required to design and implement social and
       community projects in informal urban settlements; (x) an increase in the
       employability and production capacities of the economically active population in
       informal urban settlements; and (xi) an increase in the production capacities of civil
       society organizations and economic units that are contributing to community
       development in informal urban settlements. The indicators to be used to measure
       the results of this intervention are outlined in the results matrix (see Annex II).
                                                      - 20 -



1.39    The disbursement indicators for each component are outlined in Table 2.

                                      Table 2. Disbursement indicators

                                                                                       Target
                                                   Unit of
                 Indicators                                                                                         Total
                                                                    Year 1    Year 2    Year 3    Year 4   Year 5
                                                 measurement


Component I. Modernization and institution-strengthening at all three levels of government
Indicator 1.1 Beneficiary informal urban          # of informal      0         1         3         3        0        7
settlements that have made use of the                urban
management system developed with                  settlements
program support
Indicator 1.2 Management tools designed            # of tools        2         3         0         0        0        5
within the planned time frame that have been
used for program design or for
environmental, social, physical, and/or
financial monitoring
Component II. Improvement of housing conditions for vulnerable households
Indicator 2.1. Households that have been         # of vulnerable   1,250     2,000     2,250       0        0       5,500
prioritized for receipt of housing                households
improvements because they are headed by
women, older adults, LGBTIQ+ persons,
migrants, and/or persons with disabilities and
on the basis of energy and water use
inefficiencies within two months following the
completion of the diagnostic social and
housing assessment
Indicator 2.2 Vulnerable households that         # of vulnerable   1,125     1,800     2,075       0        0       5,000
have joined the housing improvement               households
program within one year of having been
assigned priority as beneficiaries
Indicator 2.3 Vulnerable households that         # of vulnerable     0       500       1,000     1,200     1,300 4,000
have benefited from housing improvements          households
meeting minimum efficiency standards for
energy and water use which have been
completed within two years of the approval
of the participation agreement
Component III. Socio-urban integration of informal urban settlements based on a gender and diversity
perspective
Indicator 3.1 Prioritized informal urban          # of informal      3         4         0         0        0        7
settlements with master implementation               urban
plans (PEGs) or infrastructure works plans        settlements
(POTs) that include climate change
mitigation and adaptation measures and
plans for reducing social vulnerability gaps
and that have been approved within two
years since the start of the operation
Indicator 3.2 Vulnerable households in           # of vulnerable     0       2,400     1,600       0        0       4,000
informal urban settlements for which basic        households
utilities coverage has increased thanks to
program support
                                                       - 21 -



                                                                                      Target
                                                   Unit of
                   Indicators                                                                                      Total
                                                                    Year 1   Year 2    Year 3    Year 4   Year 5
                                                 measurement


 Indicator 3.3 Vulnerable households in          # of vulnerable     0        0       1,200     1,700     1,100 4,000
 informal urban settlements in which security     households
 of tenure and access to the basic formal-
 sector utilities network have increased
 thanks to program support
 Component IV. Socioeconomic and community development in informal urban settlements based on a
 gender and diversity perspective
 Indicator 4.1 Socioeconomic and/or                # of projects    22       51        65        61        44      243
 community development projects designed
 and budgeted within one year of the
 executing agency’s approval of the project
 proposal
 Indicator 4.2 Socioeconomic and/or                # of projects    18       40        52        48        35      193
 community development projects that have
 reached at least 75% of their targets



                             II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       Rationale of the LBR instrument. This operation will provide US$150 million in
          financing from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital over a five-year disbursement period. 54
          This will be an LBR loan for two reasons. First, it meets the requirements set out
          in document GN-2869-10 and its Guidelines (document GN-2869-3), since: (i) it
          will provide financing to support the deliverables of an existing government
          program and the outputs necessary to achieve them; 55 and (ii) it will improve
          habitat and urban integration programs by concentrating the Bank’s technical
          support efforts on strengthening the executing agency’s capabilities in the areas
          of monitoring, targeting, support, and evaluation for results-based management.
          Second, it is the most suitable instrument for addressing the existing program’s
          efficiency challenges, as the Bank’s value added can best be brought to bear by
          providing the executing agency with a targeted tool for introducing: (i) effective
          institutional and coordination arrangements; and (ii) technical mechanisms and
          tools for expediting and boosting the effectiveness of program interventions. The
          efficiency of the existing program can thus be improved at a low transaction cost
          by improving the quality of program expenditures.




54   The disbursement period has been determined on the basis of a plan that details the program outputs and
     outcomes. A detailed indicative planning analysis of the specific costs of the outputs required to produce the
     desired outcomes is provided in optional link 12.
55   Optional link 12 shows how to plan expenditures associated with the outputs and intermediate results that
     make it possible to achieve the final outcomes.
                                                      - 22 -



                                 Table 3. Estimated program costs (U.S. dollars) 56

                                  Components                             IDB            Total            %
           Component I. Modernization and institution-
                                                                       6,000,000      6,000,000        4.00
           strengthening at all three levels of government
           Component II. Improvement of housing conditions for
                                                                      58,500,000     58,500,000        39.00
           vulnerable households
           Housing improvements in informal urban settlements         43,688,826     43,688,826        29.13
           Housing improvements in adjacent formal-sector areas       14,811,174     14,811,174        9.87
           Component III. Socio-urban integration of informal
           urban settlements based on a gender and diversity          72,000,000     72,000,000        48.00
           perspective
           Subcomponent III.1. Integrative urban interventions and
           the provision and improvement of urban infrastructure      70,040,000     70,040,000        46.69
           and social and community facilities
           Subcomponent III.2. Land management and security of
                                                                       1,960,000      1,960,000        1.31
           tenure
           Component IV. Socioeconomic and community
           development in informal urban settlements based on a        8,250,000      8,250,000        5.50
           gender and diversity perspective
           Administration, oversight, evaluations, and audits          5,250,000     5,250,000         3.50
           Total                                                      150,000,000   150,000,000       100.00

                              Table 4. Program disbursement schedule and
                        disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) tranches (U.S. dollars)
     Disbursement-                                                                                Cumulative
     linked                 Year 1         Year 2          Year 3        Year 4       Year 5      or at end of
     indicators                                                                                   program
     DLI 1.1                   0           170,374        511,121       511,121         0           1,192,617
     DLI 1.2               2,010,000      3,015,000         0              0            0           5,025,000
     Component 1
     Total                 2,010,000      3,185,374       511,121       511,121          0          6,217,617
     DLI 2.1               1,244,318      1,990,909      2,239,773         0             0          5,475,000
     DLI 2.2               3,722,406      5,955,850      6,865,772         0            0          16,544,028
     DLI 2.3                   0          4,825,342      9,650,683     11,580,820   12,545,888     38,602,733
     Component 2
     Total                4,966,725      12,772,101     18,756,228     11,580,820   12,545,888     60,621,762
     DLI 3.1              4,796,447       6,395,263          0             0             0         11,191,710
     DLI 3.2                  0          15,668,394     10,445,596         0            0          26,113,990
     DLI 3.3                  0               0         11,191,710     15,854,922   10,259,067     37,305,699
     Component 3
     Total                 4,796,447     22,063,657      21,637,306    15,854,922   10,259,067     74,611,399
     DLI 4.1                193,501        448,570         571,707      536,525      387,002        2,137,306
     DLI 4.2                598,003       1,328,895      1,727,563     1,594,674    1,162,783      6,411,917
     Component 4
     Total                 791,504       1,777,465       2,299,270     2,131,199    1,549,785      8,549,223
     Disbursements
                          12,564,675     39,798,596      43,203,925    30,078,063   24,354,740    150,000,000
     by year

56   See optional link 12. The indicative output cost analysis was carried out and the disbursement indicators
     were defined in the course of the preparations for this program for the sole purpose of determining the
     appropriate disbursements for each indicator. This does not mean that the executing agency must maintain
     this cost structure.
                                                    - 23 -




B.        Social and environmental risks
2.2       In line with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework and based on
          the available information, this program is classified as a Category “B” operation
          because its activities will have moderate, localized, short-term environmental and
          social impacts. The evaluation of the Environmental and Social Management
          System (SGAS) of the Ministry of Social Development was conducted in
          accordance with the Framework and covered the system’s structure, procedures,
          resources, and distribution of responsibilities for the management of the existing
          program’s social and environmental components. Based on an analysis of the
          environmental and social impacts of these types of works, areas in which the
          SGAS did not meet the applicable environmental and social regulatory standards
          were identified and an environmental and social action plan was agreed upon. The
          disbursement verification protocols include the following environmental and social
          performance parameters: (i) a semiannual report on the environmental and social
          performance indicators agreed upon by the Bank and the executing agency, to be
          included in the semiannual progress report; and (ii) the determination of corrective
          plans in the event that targets are missed. Stakeholder participation and the
          dissemination of information about the program began in January 2023 when the
          findings of the SGAS evaluation were made known to the key actors identified on
          a preliminary basis in order to obtain their feedback. The final version of the SGAS
          evaluation was issued before the meeting of Management’s Operations Policy
          Committee, and the report on outreach efforts will be issued before it is distributed
          to the Board of Executive Directors. 57 The following types of projects and activities
          will not be permitted: (i) Category “A” projects; (ii) activities that would have
          adverse impacts on indigenous peoples and/or critical habitats; (iii) projects
          assigned a high risk rating with respect to natural disasters or climate change; and
          (iv) projects assigned a high environmental or social risk rating.
C.        Fiduciary risks
2.3       During the preparatory phase, it was determined that the program entails a
          medium-high level of fiduciary risk inasmuch as a failure to establish a sufficient
          credit allocation could impact the scope of program outcomes by occasioning
          delays in its execution. If this were to occur, it could become necessary to extend
          the execution period or to cancel the disbursement of resources. This risk will be
          mitigated through the appropriate planning of the activities and of the resources
          required to carry them out so that sufficient budget allocations can be made on a
          timely basis.
D.        Other key issues and risks
2.4       Program risks. The following risks have been identified: (i) a failure to sign the
          loan contract or to meet eligibility requirements before the end of the current
          administration’s term could occasion additional delays in the execution of this
          operation; and (ii) a failure to devise a suitable communication and community

57   The Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework includes specific requirements for LBRs, which
     were addressed in the preparation stage. The public consultation on the environmental and social studies
     of each of the works will be held during program execution, in accordance with the requirements of
     Environmental and Social Performance Standard 10 and the SGAS.
                                           - 24 -



      participation strategy could lead people to reject the program, which would impact
      execution costs and times and the sustainability of the interventions. To mitigate
      these risks, the plans for the program have been worked out in detail with the
      executing agency. As part of these plans, regular meetings will be held to monitor
      progress and avoid delays in the preparation of this loan operation. Working
      meetings will also be held to delineate community outreach approaches.
2.5   Other challenges. This program entails management and scalability challenges,
      chiefly because of technical/administrative limitations existing at all three levels of
      government in the country.
2.6   Innovation and climate change. In order to address the above challenges,
      support will be provided to the Ministry of Social Development to assist it in
      developing a management model in which data digitization and centralization will
      make real-time monitoring of this operation possible. Improved metrics and closer
      monitoring of program results will increase the chances of achieving the
      operation’s development objectives, while the strengthening and application of the
      executing agency’s fiduciary systems and safeguards will help to cut transaction
      and implementation costs. In addition, support will be provided for improvements
      in the systematization, transparency, and accessibility of RENABAP data.
      Assistance will also be provided for the incorporation of cost-efficient climate
      change adaptation and mitigation measures into the works carried out under this
      program. An effort will be made to meet building standards similar to those of the
      Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies (EDGE).
2.7   Economic evaluation. In order to establish the program’s economic viability, a
      cost-effectiveness analysis was carried out to determine how much it will cost to
      produce the effects that the program is designed to have. A determination of
      economic feasibility is arrived at by comparing the cost-effectiveness ratio with
      those of similar programs or projects. This methodology is designed to show how
      much the desired program effects will cost, while the comparison with similar
      projects makes it possible to see whether or not the cost of producing those effects
      is reasonable. This study covered Components II and III. The cost-effectiveness
      ratio of Component II was higher than those of similar programs. In the case of
      Component II, the cost-effectiveness ratios for interventions focusing on street
      lighting, roads, drainage, community facilities/infrastructure, and security of tenure
      were lower than those of the comparator. Program activities dealing with the water
      and electricity supplies and with pedestrian networks are between 40% and 50%
      more expensive than those of the comparator. The other cost-effectiveness ratios
      are higher than those of the projects used for the comparator.
2.8   Sustainability. The program will support the sustainability of the planned
      interventions by means of the following measures: (i) sharing the relevant
      methodology and building capacity for meeting the challenge of reducing the
      qualitative housing deficit (this can later be replicated at the provincial and
      municipal levels to benefit other informal settlements); (ii) strengthening
      community organizations in areas served by the program to promote linkages with
      other social service agencies; (iii) ensuring that neighborhood residents take part
      in defining and implementing the projects to be undertaken; and (iv) building the
      executing agency’s capacity to ensure that habitat programs in Argentina are both
      efficient and effective.
                                          - 25 -



                   III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1   The Ministry of Social Development will be the executing agency, acting through
      the Secretariat for Social and Urban Integration (SISU), which will bear primary
      responsibility for the program, and the Office for Special Projects and International
      Cooperation (DGPEyCI), an agency of the Administrative Management
      Secretariat, which will be responsible for the program’s fiduciary and administrative
      areas. In the event of changes in the organizational structure of the executing
      agency, it may act through areas or departments with similar attributes and
      competencies that will be replacing them in the future, with prior consent from the
      Bank for the purposes of this program. Program execution will be supported in the
      provinces and municipios, which will serve as technical support units for the
      program and will be coordinated by the SISU. Provinces and municipios can be
      included as technical support units for the program, provided they have informal
      urban settlements listed on the RENABAP registry and have capacity to offer
      technical and social collaboration on the ground, according to the institutional
      capacity assessment of the executing agency. The functions of the technical
      support units include supporting the executing agency in the preparation of
      diagnostic assessments and designing strategies with specific knowledge of the
      beneficiary informal urban settlements.
3.2   Disbursements. Conditions relating to the operation’s financial management have
      been agreed upon. Disbursements will be processed as follows: (i) the executing
      agency will prepare a program status report and the results indicators to be used
      for the disbursements. That report will be submitted for use by the independent
      inspector responsible for verifying program results based on the protocols detailed
      in the program Operating Regulations; (ii) independent outside evaluators will
      verify fulfillment of the disbursement indicators; and (iii) once the fulfillment of
      those indicators has been verified, the executing agency will forward the
      appropriate disbursement request and, pursuant to the usual procedures and time
      frames, the Bank will proceed to deposit the disbursement into the account
      designated by the borrower. The Bank will deposit the sum corresponding to each
      indicator into a special dollar-denominated account opened by the Ministry of
      Social Development for that purpose if, and only if, the external verification
      exercise indicates that the value of the indicator in question is equal to or greater
      than the established target. If it is below that benchmark, the sum to be disbursed
      will be proportional to the extent of progress made toward the target in question.
      If, after the loan eligibility period has closed, the executing agency achieves
      independently verified results in excess of the benchmark during the disbursement
      period for a disbursement indicator pertaining to any part of the loan, that
      independently verified result may be taken into consideration for the purposes of
      determining the fulfillment of that same indicator for subsequent portions of the
      loan. The Bank will disburse the corresponding funds as an LBR reimbursement.
      However, upon its fulfillment of the conditions precedent to the first disbursement,
      the borrower may request an initial disbursement in accordance with the provisions
      set out in document GN-2869-10.
                                                   - 26 -



3.3       Requirements for the independent verification consultant. The firm or
          individual engaged to provide independent verification of the results must have
          experience in project evaluation and monitoring, the application of results
          indicators, and the evaluation of the reliability of information sources and the
          methods used to develop the indicators in question. The terms of reference for the
          consultancy contract will be previously agreed upon with the Bank. The cost of
          these services will be covered by funds set aside for the supervision of this
          operation.
3.4       Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement. The
          borrower, acting through the executing agency, will provide evidence of:
          (i) the approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, 58
          in accordance with the terms and conditions previously agreed upon with
          the Bank, which will include the environmental and social requirements
          established in the environmental and social management system and the
          environmental and social action plan; and (ii) the recruitment of an
          independent inspector to verify the program outcomes in accordance with
          the terms of reference previously agreed upon with the Bank. The first
          condition cited above is necessary in order to ensure that the executing agency
          has detailed regulations in place that establish the necessary guidelines and
          responsibilities of each party involved in program execution. The second condition
          cited above is necessary in order to ensure that program results are verified in
          accordance with the proposal for the introduction of an instrument for sovereign-
          guaranteed loans based on results (document GN-2869-10).
3.5       Provinces and municipios will be able to field technical support units for the
          program as long as they have informal urban settlements that are listed in the
          RENABAP and the executing agency determines that they have the necessary
          capacity to provide technical and social support for program implementation on the
          ground. Technical support units will draw on their local knowledge to assist the
          executing agency to conduct diagnostic assessments and design strategies.
3.6       Special contractual conditions of execution: Before bringing a technical
          support unit on board, the borrower, acting through the executing agency, will
          provide evidence that the corresponding framework participation agreement or its
          equivalent has been signed between the executing agency and the technical
          support unit and has entered into force in accordance with the terms previously
          agreed upon with the Bank. This condition will ensure proper program execution
          and coordination; stipulations regarding the roles and responsibilities of the
          technical support unit will also be covered.
3.7       Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the
          loan contract and the program Operating Regulations, which will include, at
          minimum: (i) a results and outputs matrix; (ii) a disbursement indicators matrix;
          (iii) the terms of reference for the engagement of an independent inspector to verify
          program results and for a financial audit of the program’s organizational
          arrangements; (iv) a flowchart for coordination among the various parties involved

58   While the program Operating Regulations are in an advanced stage of development, specific procedures
     need to be defined for central-level coordination with the technical support units for the design and
     execution of the housing improvements.
                                           - 27 -



       in carrying out the program, including technical support units; and (v) an outline of
       the responsibilities of each party to the program, including technical support units,
       in connection with crosscutting processes.
3.8    The Bank will make disbursements in the form of LBR reimbursements. The
       borrower will, however, have the option to request an initial disbursement as
       specified in paragraph 3.11 upon fulfillment of the conditions precedent to the first
       disbursement.
3.9    Procurement. Based on the LBR evaluation, the executing agency’s procurement
       system will be used for this operation. The Bank’s evaluation of the executing
       agency’s procurement system (optional link 14) indicates that its procurement
       methods are in line with internationally accepted principles, practices, and
       standards for all procurement methods and can accommodate bidders from all
       member countries. This system will thus be used for the procurement of goods,
       consulting services (both from firms and individual consultants), works, and
       nonconsulting services. The independent inspector will be engaged in accordance
       with the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the
       Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2350-15).
3.10   Financial audits. The executing agency will submit annual financial audits during
       program execution in accordance with Bank policies. These audited financial
       reports will be submitted within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year. The
       auditing reports upon program closure will be submitted within 120 days after the
       last disbursement. In accordance with the terms of reference agreed upon with the
       Bank, these audits may be carried out by an independent auditing firm deemed to
       be eligible by the Bank or by the Office of the Auditor General of Argentina. Each
       year and at the end of the disbursement period, as part of its financial reports, the
       executing agency will inform the Bank of any differential between the total
       expenditures made in pursuit of program results and the total disbursements
       issued by the Bank.
3.11   Retroactive financing for previous results and the initial disbursement. The
       program will provide up to US$15,000,000 (10% of the loan) in retroactive
       financing, to be drawn from the loan funds, for results achieved before the
       determination of eligibility subject to an evaluation by an independent external
       inspector. This retroactive financing will apply to results achieved between the
       project profile approval date (9 December 2022) and the date the loan is declared
       eligible. In addition, an initial disbursement of up to US$30,000,000 (20% of the
       loan) can be made to cover the cost of specific short-term outputs once the
       program is eligible to receive disbursements. This initial disbursement will be
       deducted, as the case may be, from the fourth and fifth disbursements of the loan.
3.12   The combined amount of the initial disbursement and retroactive financing will not
       exceed 30% of the total loan in accordance with paragraph 5.25 of the LBR policy
       (document GN-2869-10). The US$15,000,000 (10% of the loan) for results
       achieved before the determination of eligibility and the initial disbursement of
       US$30,000,000 (20% of the loan) will be linked to disbursement indicators 1.1, 1.2,
       2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.1, 3.3, 4.1, and 4.2, and will be used primarily to finance the
       following outputs: (i) management tools for environmental, social, physical, and
       financial diagnostic assessments and monitoring; (ii) housing improvement plans;
       (iii) housing in informal urban settlements and adjacent formal-sector areas served
                                          - 28 -



       by the program; (iv) improved public spaces; (v) the construction and/or
       improvement of community facilities in informal urban settlements and tools for
       providing increased land tenure security; (vi) projects for strengthening social
       integration in connection with health, education, and consumption issues; and
       (vii) circular economy projects and climate change adaptation and mitigation
       measures. For further information, see optional link 12.
B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.13   Status reports. The system for monitoring the program’s progress will be
       composed of the results matrix, progress monitoring reports, and the disbursement
       indicator information and monitoring system. These mechanisms will be
       supplemented by regular updates of the risk mitigation matrix. The executing
       agency and the Bank have agreed on a definition and verification protocol for each
       disbursement indicator (see Annex II). The executing agency will submit a
       monitoring report to the IDB within 60 days of the end of each six-month calendar
       period.
3.14   External verification of results. The loan proceeds will be used to contract a
       specialized consulting firm or individual consultant to serve as an external
       inspector for the Bank and the executing agency to verify the fulfillment of
       disbursement indicator targets.
3.15   Project completion reports. The final evaluation is an important milestone in the
       monitoring process. It will cover: (i) the financial execution results; (ii) the
       achievement of targets for outputs and outcomes; (iii) the extent to which
       environmental standards and standards pertaining to the operation and
       maintenance of program works have been met; (iv) the extent to which contractual
       commitments have been fulfilled; (v) a summary of the findings of the audits
       conducted during program execution; (vi) the verification of compliance with
       investment limits; and (vii) a summary of lessons learned.
3.16   The final evaluation will include an ex post economic assessment prepared using
       the same methodology as was used for the ex ante evaluation. The evaluation of
       the results indicators will be based on a careful review of ex post surveys
       concerning housing improvements, impact surveys, verification measures set out
       in the monitoring reports, and administrative data. Upon acceptance by the Bank,
       these reports will be made publicly available on its website.
3.17   An ex post assessment of program results will be undertaken using tried and true
       methodologies. Impact indicators will be measured using two beneficiary
       satisfaction surveys. One will be used to canvas all the households that have
       received housing improvements between three and six months after the
       completion of the works in question. The other will be distributed to a
       representative sample of the households in all the settlements covered by this
       operation during the closing months of the loan’s execution. The arrangements
       and methodology used to design and prepare these evaluations will require the no
       objection of the Bank.
                                                                                                                                                                                       Annex I - AR-L1361
                                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1 of 1




                                                                         Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                   Summary             AR-L1361
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Strategic Priorities and CRF Indicators
                                                                                                -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                -Productivity and Innovation
                                                                                                -Economic Integration
  Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Issues                                                 -Gender Equality and Diversity
                                                                                                -Climate Change
                                                                                                -Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law




                                                                                                -Beneficiaries of employment support initiatives (#)
                                                                                                -Micro / small / medium enterprises financed (#)
                                                                                                -Enterprises provided with technical assistance (#)
  CRF Level 2 Indicators: IDB Group Contributions to Development Results                        -Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)
                                                                                                -Emissions avoided (annual tons CO2 equivalent)
                                                                                                -Beneficiaries of enhanced disaster and climate change resilience (#)




2. Country Development Objectives
                                                                                                                          1.1 Poverty reduction, 2.3 Reduce infrastructure gaps, 2.5
  Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                       GN-3051           Move toward environmental sustainability, 4.1 Increase
                                                                                                                          digital inclusion


  Country Program Results Matrix



   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                             Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                   7.6
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                              1.6
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                           3.5
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                              8.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                       2.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                     3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                           2.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                             0.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                  1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                              9.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                            4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                  5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                   Medium High
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                          Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and
                                                                                                                          Reporting, External Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                 Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)             Yes
                                                                                                                          Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison,
                                                                                                                          Contracting Individual Consultant, National Public Bidding.


                                                                                                                          Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and
                                                                               Non-Fiduciary              Yes             Evaluation National System, Statistics National System,
                                                                                                                          Environmental Assessment National System.


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:


Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                          Yes                                   AR-T1264; AR-T1320
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




The general objective of the program is to contribute to the socio-urban integration and to the improvement of the housing conditions of vulnerable households (HV). The specific
objectives are: (i) to strengthen the management capacities of the Executing Agency and the Technical Support Units; (ii) improve the housing conditions of the HV residing in
Barrios Populares (BP) and their adjacent formal areas; (iii) improve habitat and increase land tenure for BP residents; and (iv) promote socioeconomic and community
development in BP.

The project presents a complete diagnosis and the indicators associated with the specific objectives included in the results matrix have means of verification. The program has 10
disbursement linked indicators, which includes an institutional strengthening output.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through a cost-efficiency analysis (CEA) for each of the interventions included in components 2 and 3. The analysis
concludes that the budgeted costs for the interventions related to home improvements are higher than similar programs. Regarding the improvement in the habitat, the budgeted
costs for the following interventions are below those of the selected comparators: lighting, road network, pluvial network, community equipment and land tenure. The other cost-
effectiveness coefficients yield higher results than the projects used as a reference. The ACE has reasonable assumptions.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is in line with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured using a before and
after methodology. The monitoring mechanisms for the disbursement linked indicators have a defined verification protocol and sources.
                                                                                                                                                                        Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                     Page 1 of 11


                                                                            RESULTS MATRIX

                                     The specific objectives of this operation are to: (i) strengthen the management capabilities of the executing agency and its technical
                                     support units; (ii) improve housing conditions for vulnerable households in informal urban settlements and adjacent formal-sector areas;
     PROGRAM OBJECTIVES:             (iii) improve the habitat and increase the security of land tenure for residents in informal urban settlements; and (iv) promote
                                     socioeconomic and community development in informal urban settlements. Achieving these objectives will contribute to the general
                                     objective of promoting socio-urban integration and improving housing conditions for vulnerable households.

                                                                     GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
                                                                                         Expected
                                        Unit of                           Baseline
           Indicators                                     Baseline                        year of            Target       Means of verification            Comments
                                      measurement                           year
                                                                                        achievement
General development objective: Promote socio-urban integration and help to improve housing conditions for vulnerable households
1. Households benefiting from        % of households          0             2023             2027             65%        Final impact survey        See required link 1
housing improvements that
report feeling that their level of
well-being in their home has
increased

2. Households in informal urban      % of households          0             2023             2027             55%        Final impact survey        See required link 1
settlements that report being
more satisfied with the various
characteristics of their
neighborhood
Annex II
Page 2 of 11


                                                                      SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                                                                                                                                                 Disbursement
                                                                         Baseline                                     End of      Means of
 Indicators                               Unit of measurement Baseline            Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5                               indicator     Comments
                                                                           year                                      program     verification       Yes/No
 Specific development objective 1: Strengthen the management capacities of the executing agency and its technical support units
 Indicator 1.1. Beneficiary informal      # of informal urban     0       2023      0      1       3       3       0     7      Management Yes                  See required
 urban settlements that have made         settlements                                                                           system reports                  link 1
 use of the management system
 developed with program support
 Indicator 1.2. Employees and officials   # of employees and      0       2023    10%     15%     20%     30%     40%   40%     Management       No             See required
 who have used newly developed            officials who are                                                                     systems                         link 1
 and/or improved management tools         active users / # of                                                                   (survey of
 for program planning, monitoring,        employees and                                                                         active users)
 and/or implementation                    officials making up
                                          the executing agency
                                          and technical support
                                          unit teams working to
                                          implement the
                                          operation
 Indicator 1.3. Prioritized vulnerable    # of vulnerable         0       2023      0     1,000   2,000   2,000    0    5,000   Management       No             See required
 households incorporated into the         households                                                                            systems                         link 1
 management systems developed
 and/or improved with program
 support
 Indicator 1.4 Tools used to update       # of tools              0       2023      0      0       1       0       0     1      Status and       No             See required
 the National Registry of Informal                                                                                              final reports on                link 1
 Urban Settlements (RENABAP),                                                                                                   services
 make RENABAP information more
 readily available, or introduce
 technological innovations in it
 Specific development objective 2: Improve housing conditions for vulnerable households in informal urban settlements and adjacent formal-sector areas
 Indicator 2.1. Households that have      # of vulnerable         0       2023    1,250   2,000   2,250    0       0    5,500   Technical             Yes       See required
 been prioritized for housing             households                                                                            report                          link 1
 improvements because they are                                                                                                  prepared by
 headed by women, older adults,                                                                                                 technicians
 LGBTIQ+ persons, migrants, and/or                                                                                              and validated
 persons with disabilities and on the                                                                                           by the SISU
 basis of energy and water use                                                                                                  secretariat or
 inefficiencies within two months                                                                                               secretary
 following the completion of the
 diagnostic social and housing
 assessment
                                                                                                                                                                      Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 11

                                                                                                                                                   Disbursement
                                                                       Baseline                                     End of         Means of
Indicators                              Unit of measurement Baseline            Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5                                   indicator     Comments
                                                                         year                                      program        verification        Yes/No
Indicator 2.2. Vulnerable households # of vulnerable              0     2023    1,125   1,800   2,075    0       0      5,000   Resolution             Yes        See required
that have joined the housing          households                                                                                with attached                     link 1
improvement program within one                                                                                                  framework
year of having been assigned priority                                                                                           participation
as beneficiaries                                                                                                                agreement for
                                                                                                                                vulnerable
                                                                                                                                households
                                                                                                                                participating in
                                                                                                                                the program
Indicator 2.3. Vulnerable households    # of vulnerable           0     2023      0     500     1,000   1,200   1,300   4,000   Works                  Yes        See required
that have benefited from housing        households                                                                              certificates,                     link 1
improvements meeting minimum                                                                                                    acceptance
efficiency standards for energy and                                                                                             and closure
water use which have been                                                                                                       document, or
completed within two years of the                                                                                               provisional
approval of the participation                                                                                                   delivery
agreement                                                                                                                       certificate
Indicator 2.4. Dwellings in informal    # of dwellings            0     2023      0     200*    700     800     1,300   3,000   Baseline               No         See required
urban settlements and adjacent                                                                                                  technical data                    link 1
formal-sector areas that are no                                                                                                 sheet and post-
longer classified as deficient thanks                                                                                           works survey
to program support
Indicator 2.5. Vulnerable households    # of vulnerable           0     2023     0%      5%      5%      5%      0%     15%     Executing              No         See required
that are no longer critically           households that are                                                                     agency                            link 1
overcrowded thanks to                   no longer                                                                               monitoring
improvements made with program          overcrowded /                                                                           report based on
support                                 # of vulnerable                                                                         baseline
                                        households that were                                                                    technical data
                                        listed on the technical                                                                 sheets and
                                        improvement or                                                                          post-works
                                        housing data sheet as                                                                   survey
                                        being overcrowded
                                        prior to the program
                                        intervention
    Annex II
    Page 4 of 11


                                                                                                                                                               Disbursement
                                                                             Baseline                                     End of              Means of
     Indicators                              Unit of measurement Baseline             Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5                                         indicator     Comments
                                                                               year                                      program             verification         Yes/No
     Specific development objective 3: Improve the habitat and increase the security of land tenure for residents in informal urban settlements
     Indicator 3.1. Informal urban         # of informal urban         0       2023        3       4       0       0        0           7   Reports                Yes        See required
     settlements with master               settlements                                                                                      approving the                     link 1
     implementation plans (PEGs) or                                                                                                         executing
     infrastructure works plans (POTs)                                                                                                      agency’s PEG
     that include climate change                                                                                                            or POT
     mitigation and adaptation measures
     and plans for reducing social
     vulnerability gaps and that have been
     approved within two years since the
     start of the operation
     Indicator 3.2. Vulnerable households # of vulnerable              0       2023        0     2,400   1,600     0        0      4,000    Before the             Yes        See required
     in informal urban settlements for    households                                                                                        existence of                      link 1
     which basic utilities coverage has                                                                                                     the
     increased thanks to program support                                                                                                    management
                                                                                                                                            system (a) 1
                                                                                                                                            and after its
                                                                                                                                            introduction
                                                                                                                                            (b) 2
     Indicator 3.3. Vulnerable households    # of vulnerable           0       2023        0       0     1,200   1,700   1,100     4,000    Before the             Yes        See required
     in informal urban settlements in        households                                                                                     existence of                      link 1
     which security of tenure and access                                                                                                    the
     to the formal-sector basic utility                                                                                                     management
     network have increased thanks to                                                                                                       system (a) and
     program support                                                                                                                        after its
                                                                                                                                            introduction (b)
     Indicator 3.4 Vulnerable households     # of vulnerable           0       2023        0       0       0       0     4,000     4,000    Evaluation             No         See required
     in informal urban settlements which     households                                                                                     report                            link 1
     are more integrated into the                                                                                                           comparing the
     surrounding city                                                                                                                       initial
                                                                                                                                            situational
                                                                                                                                            analysis with
                                                                                                                                            results
     Indicator 3.5. Households in informal   # of households           0       2023       0%      0%     35%      55%     70%      70%      Executing              No         See required
     urban settlements with increased        assigned priority                                                                              agency                            link 1
     security of tenure that were assigned   because they are                                                                               monitoring
     priority because they are headed by     headed by women / #                                                                            reports
     women                                   of households that
                                             enjoy increased

1    (a) Monitoring reports prepared by subject specialists and validated by the Secretariat for Social and Urban Integration (SISU).
2    (b) Reports generated by the management system developed or improved with program support.
                                                                                                                                                                  Annex II
                                                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 11

                                                                                                                                               Disbursement
                                                                       Baseline                                     End of     Means of
Indicators                              Unit of measurement Baseline            Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5                               indicator     Comments
                                                                         year                                      program    verification        Yes/No
                                        security of tenure
                                        thanks to program
                                        support
Indicator 3.6. Households in informal   # of households        0        2023     0%     0%     5%     5%    5%      5%       Executing             No         See required
urban settlements with increased        assigned priority                                                                    agency                           link 1
security of tenure that were assigned   because they are                                                                     monitoring
priority because they are headed by     headed by persons                                                                    reports
persons belonging to diverse groups     belonging to diverse
(persons with disabilities and          groups (persons with
LGBTQ+ persons)                         disabilities and
                                        LGBTQ+ persons) / #
                                        of households that
                                        enjoy increased
                                        security of tenure
                                        thanks to program
                                        support
Specific development objective 4: Promote socioeconomic and community development in informal urban settlements
Indicator 4.1. Completed                # of projects          0        2023     18     40     52     48     35     193      Project               Yes        See required
socioeconomic and/or community                                                                                               completion                       link 1
development projects that have                                                                                               sheet
reached at least 75% of their targets                                                                                        (prepared by
                                                                                                                             subject
                                                                                                                             specialists and
                                                                                                                             validated by
                                                                                                                             SISU) and an
                                                                                                                             attached
                                                                                                                             project design
                                                                                                                             document
                                                                                                                             outlining the
                                                                                                                             baseline
                                                                                                                             situation and
                                                                                                                             targets
Indicator 4.2. Completed projects   # of completed             0        2023     0%     5%    10%    15%    30%     30%      Executing             No         See required
aimed at closing socioeconomic gaps projects addressing                                                                      agency                           link 1
affecting women that have reached   issues affecting                                                                         monitoring
at least 75% of their targets       women that have                                                                          reports
                                    reached at least 75%
                                    of their targets / # of
                                    completed projects
                                    that have reached at
                                    least 75% of their
                                    targets
Annex II
Page 6 of 11


                                                                                                                                               Disbursement
                                                                        Baseline                                     End of      Means of
 Indicators                              Unit of measurement Baseline            Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5                              indicator     Comments
                                                                          year                                      program     verification      Yes/No
 Indicator 4.3. Completed circular       # of circular economy     0     2023     0%     2%     3%     5%    10%     10%      Executing            No         See required
 economy projects aimed at               projects that have                                                                   agency                          link 1
 increasing the value added of a given   reached at least 75%                                                                 monitoring
 product that have reached at least      of their targets / # of                                                              reports
 75% of their targets                    completed projects
                                         that have reached at
                                         least 75% of their
                                         targets
 Indicator 4.4. Persons who have         # of persons              0     2023      0    171    257    300    128     856      Certificate of       No         See required
 become more employable and/or                                                                                                training or                     link 1
 have an increased production                                                                                                 workshop
 capacity thanks to program support                                                                                           completion
 Indicator 4.5. Women who have           # of women                0     2023      0     69    103    120     52     344      Certificate of       No         See required
 become more employable and/or                                                                                                training or                     link 1
 have an increased production                                                                                                 workshop
 capacity thanks to program support                                                                                           completion
 Indicator 4.6. LGBTQ+ persons who # of LGBTQ+ persons             0     2023      0      9     13     15     7       44      Certificate of       No         See required
 have become more employable                                                                                                  training or                     link 1
 and/or have an increased production                                                                                          workshop
 capacity thanks to program support                                                                                           completion
 Indicator 4.7. Civil society         # of civil society           0     2023      0      0     12     12     8       32      Monitoring           No         See required
 organizations whose production       organizations                                                                           report                          link 1
 capacity within the framework of the
 circular economy has increased by at
 least 20% thanks to program support
                                                                                                                                                                             Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 11

                                                                           DISBURSEMENT INDICATORS MATRIX
                                                   Year 1                 Year 2                  Year 3                  Year 4                  Year 5           End of program
                                                  Associated                Associated              Associated              Associated              Associated             Associated
                                Baseline   Target            Target                      Target                  Target                  Target                  Target
                                                   amount                    amount                  amount                  amount                  amount                 amount

Disbursement indicator 1.1.        0         0              $0     1        $170,374       3         $511,121      3         $511,121      0               $0      7       $1,192,616
Beneficiary informal urban
settlements that have made
use of the management
system developed with
program support

Disbursement indicator 1.2.        0         2       $2,010,000    3        $3,015,000     0               $0      0               $0      0               $0      5       $5,025,000
Management tools
designed within the planned
time frame that have been
used for environmental,
social, physical, and/or
financial monitoring tasks
(indicator of institution-
strengthening output)

Disbursement indicator 2.1.        0       1,250     $1,244,318   2,000     $1,990,909   2,250      $2,239,773     0               $0      0               $0    5,500     $5,475,000
Households that have been
prioritized for receipt of
housing improvements
because they are headed
by women, older adults,
LGBTIQ+ persons,
migrants, and/or persons
with disabilities and on the
basis of energy and water
use inefficiencies within two
months following the
completion of the diagnostic
social and housing
assessment

Disbursement indicator 2.2.        0       1,125     $3,722,406   1,800     $5,955,850   2,075      $6,865,772     0               $       0               $     5,000    $16,544,028
Vulnerable households that
have joined the housing
improvement program
within one year of having
been assigned priority as
beneficiaries
Annex II
Page 8 of 11


                                        Year 1                 Year 2                 Year 3                 Year 4                 Year 5           End of program

Disbursement indicator 2.3.     0   0            $0    500       $4,825,342   1,000    $9,650,683    1,200    $11,580,820   1,300    $12,545,888   4,000   $38,602,733
Vulnerable households that
have benefited from
housing improvements
meeting minimum efficiency
standards for energy and
water use which have been
completed within two years
of the approval of the
participation agreement

Disbursement indicator 3.1.     0   3     $4,796,447    4       $6,395,263     0               $0       0             $0     0               $0     7      $11,191,710
Informal urban settlements
with PEGs or POTs that
include climate change
mitigation and adaptation
measures and plans for
reducing social vulnerability
gaps and that have been
approved within two years
since the start of the
operation

Disbursement indicator 3.2.     0   0            $0    2,400    $15,668,394   1,600    $10,445,596      0             $0     0               $0    4,000   $26,113,990
Vulnerable households in
informal urban settlements
for which basic utilities
coverage has increased
thanks to program support
                                                                                                                                                            Annex II
                                                                                                                                                         Page 9 of 11

                                         Year 1             Year 2                 Year 3                 Year 4                 Year 5            End of program

Disbursement indicator 3.3.     0   0             $0   0             $0    1,200    $11,191,710   1,700    $15,854,922   1,100    $10,259,067    4,000   $37,305,699
Vulnerable households in
informal urban settlements
in which security of tenure
and access to the basic
formal-sector utility network
have increased thanks to
program support

Disbursement indicator 4.1.     0   22      $193,501   51     $448,570      65       $571,707     61         $536,526    44         $387,002     243      $2,137,306
Socioeconomic and/or
community development
projects designed and
budgeted within one year of
the executing agency’s
approval of the proposal

Disbursement indicator 4.2.     0   18      $598,003   40     $1,328,895    52       $1,727,563   48        $1,594,674   35         $1,162,783   193      $6,411,918
Completed socioeconomic
and/or community
development projects that
have reached at least 75%
of their targets
Annex II
Page 10 of 11


                                                              DISBURSEMENT INDICATORS VERIFICATION PROTOCOL

                                                                                                                                                                                 Verification
                 Indicator                                                 Definition / estimation methodology                                         Verification agent
                                                                                                                                                                                  protocol
Disbursement indicator 1.1. Beneficiary       An informal urban settlement is considered to be a program beneficiary if it has an                     Consulting firm or        See required
informal urban settlements that have made     infrastructure works plan (POT) and/or a master implementation plan (PEG) and has works                 individual consultant     link 1
use of the management system developed        or other interventions that have been financed with the loan proceeds. An informal urban                performs external
with program support                          settlement is considered to be making use of the management system developed with                       verification of results
                                              program support if this system is being used for data collection and/or for monitoring
                                              integrated program management. This system will incorporate data on climate-related
                                              vulnerabilities. Calculation formula: the total number of informal urban settlements
                                              incorporated into the management system developed with program support.
Disbursement indicator 1.2 Management         A management tool is defined as a one that can be used to perform social, physical,                     Consulting firm or        See required
tools designed within the planned time        environmental, and/or financial monitoring tasks that has been designed within the time                 individual consultant     link 1
frame that have been used for                 frame established in the relevant bidding documents. Environmental and social monitoring                performs external
environmental, social, physical, and/or       includes, at minimum, supervision of compliance with environmental and social safeguards,               verification of results
financial monitoring tasks (indicator of      achievement of the various indicators for climate-related vulnerabilities, and the way in which
institution-strengthening output)             the program addresses the challenges that have been identified (e.g. areas requiring
                                              environmental remediation, and housing in flood-prone areas that need to be relocated).
                                              Calculation formula: the total number of management tools that can be used for social,
                                              physical, environmental, and/or financial monitoring that have been designed as part of this
                                              operation.
Disbursement indicator 2.1. Households        Vulnerable households are considered to have been prioritized for housing improvements                  Consulting firm or        See required
that have been prioritized for housing        because they are headed by women, older adults, LGBTIQ+ persons, migrants, and/or                       individual consultant     link 1
improvements because they are headed          persons with disabilities and on the basis of energy and water use inefficiencies if they have          performs external
by women, older adults, LGBTIQ+               been selected on the basis of the eligibility and prioritization criteria established in the            verification of results
persons, migrants, and/or persons with        program Operating Regulations. Calculation formula: the total number of vulnerable
disabilities and on the basis of energy and   households prioritized for housing improvements on the basis of gender- and/or diversity-
water use inefficiencies within two months    related considerations or vulnerabilities associated with the effects of climate change within
following the completion of the diagnostic    two months following the completion of the diagnostic social and housing assessment.
social and housing assessment
Disbursement indicator 2.2. Vulnerable        A vulnerable household is considered to have joined the program when a household member                 Consulting firm or        See required
households that have joined the housing       has signed the participation agreement. A vulnerable household is considered to have been               individual consultant     link 1
improvement program within one year of        assigned priority if it has been selected on the basis of the eligibility and prioritization criteria   performs external
having been assigned priority as              established in the program Operating Regulations. Calculation formula: the total number of              verification of results
beneficiaries                                 vulnerable households that have joined the housing improvements program within one year
                                              of having been assigned priority as beneficiaries.
Disbursement indicator 2.3. Vulnerable        The works in question are considered to have been completed when the beneficiary signs an               Consulting firm or        See required
households that have benefited from           acceptance and completion certificate (if the works have been owner-managed) or a works                 individual consultant     link 1
housing improvements meeting minimum          completion certificate (if the works have been carried out by a cooperative or company). In             performs external
efficiency standards for energy and water     order to qualify, they must meet the minimum energy and water use efficiency standards                  verification of results
use which have been completed within two      established in the program Operating Regulations. Calculation formula: vulnerable
years of the approval of the participation    households that have completed housing improvements within two years of the approval of
agreement                                     the participation agreement which meet energy and water use efficiency standards.
                                                                                                                                                                                    Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 11

                                                                                                                                                                               Verification
                Indicator                                                  Definition / estimation methodology                                       Verification agent
                                                                                                                                                                                protocol
Disbursement indicator 3.1. Informal urban    PEGs and/or POTs are documents that outline projects for promoting the socio-urban                    Consulting firm or        See required
settlements with PEGs or POTs that            integration of an informal urban settlement. A POT provides for advance works that can be             individual consultant     link 1
include climate change mitigation and         fast-tracked prior to the start-up of the PEGs. PEGs and POTs are considered to include               performs external
adaptation measures and plans for             climate change mitigation and adaptation measures when they provide for integrated climate-           verification of results
reducing social vulnerability gaps and that   related solutions such as those involving nature-based solutions, the use of recyclable
have been approved within two years since     materials and/or renewable energy sources, energy efficiency and water conservation
the start of the operation                    considerations, and access to urban mass transit services or soft mobility solutions. PEGs
                                              and POTs are considered to include measures for reducing social vulnerability gaps if their
                                              designs incorporate measures oriented toward integral human development with a focus on
                                              women, older adults, LGBTIQ+ persons, migrants, and/or persons with disabilities. Each
                                              informal urban settlement has a unique identifier, and once a PEG or POT has been
                                              submitted for a given settlement, it is not counted again. Calculation formula: the total
                                              number of prioritized informal urban settlements with a PEG or a POT that includes climate
                                              change mitigation and adaptation measures and plans for reducing social vulnerability gaps.
Disbursement indicator 3.2. Vulnerable        Essential services are defined as running water, sanitation, and electricity supplies.                Consulting firm or        See required
households in informal urban settlements      Households in the areas served by this operation will be counted. A vulnerable household is           individual consultant     link 1
for which basic utilities coverage has        considered to have experienced an increase in basic utilities coverage if it is located within        performs external
increased thanks to program support           the service area of at least one additional basic utility thanks to program support. Calculation      verification of results
                                              formula: the total number of vulnerable households in informal urban settlements for which
                                              basic utilities coverage has increased thanks to program support.
Disbursement indicator 3.3. Vulnerable        Households in the areas served by this operation will be counted. A household’s security of           Consulting firm or        See required
households in informal urban settlements      tenure is considered to have increased if it has advanced to a further stage in the following         individual consultant     link 1
in which security of tenure and access to     processing sequence: 1. receipt of a residential housing certificate (Certificado de Vivienda         performs external
the basic formal-sector utilities network     Familiar); 2. identification of the dwelling’s location on a land registry map; 3. preparation of     verification of results
have increased thanks to program support      the property plot layout; 4. preparation of site plans; 5. bill of sale; 6. title deed. A household
                                              is considered to have access to the basic formal-sector utilities network when it is located
                                              within the service area of the formal distribution network for water, sanitation, and electricity
                                              services. Calculation formula: the total number of vulnerable households in informal urban
                                              settlements in which security of tenure and access to the basic formal-sector utilities network
                                              have increased thanks to program support.
Disbursement indicator 4.1 Socioeconomic      Socioeconomic and/or community development projects are initiatives designed to improve               Consulting firm or        See required
and/or community development projects         existing socioeconomic and community capacities while also promoting community                        individual consultant     link 1
designed and budgeted within one year of      participation. Calculation formula: the total number of socioeconomic and/or community                performs external
the executing agency’s approval of the        development projects designed and budgeted within one year of the executing agency’s                  verification of results
project proposal                              approval of the project proposal.
Disbursement indicator 4.2. Completed         Socioeconomic and/or community development projects are initiatives designed to improve               Consulting firm or        See required
socioeconomic and/or community                existing socioeconomic and community capacities while also promoting community                        individual consultant     link 1
development projects that have reached at     participation. Targets will be specific to each project and should be clearly specified in the        performs external
least 75% of their targets                    project design document submitted to the executing agency for its approval. Calculation               verification of results
                                              formula: the total number of completed socioeconomic and/or community development
                                              projects that have reached at least 75% of their targets.
                                                                                   Annex III
                                                                                 Page 1 of 5




                       FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Country: Argentina       Division: HUD        Project number: AR-L1361          Year: 2023

Executing agency: The executing agency (the Argentine Republic) will act through the
Ministry of Social Development.
Name: Urban Social Integration and Housing Improvement Program

                  I.     FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1. Use of country systems in the operation

    Budget                Reports                 Information         National
                                                  system              competitive bidding
    Cash flow             Internal control        Shopping            Other
    Accounting            External auditing       Individual          Other
                                                  consultants

2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

     Special         This operation is an individual loan based on results (LBR) for which
     features of the the executing agency’s own procurement systems will be used. The
     operation’s     loan proceeds will be disbursed once the program has produced
     fiduciary       verified results (intermediate outputs and outcomes) specified in the
     execution       results matrix.
                     The Ministry of Social Development will be the executing agency,
                     acting through the Secretariat for Social and Urban Integration
                     (SISU), which will bear primary responsibility for the program, and
                     the Office for Special Projects and International Cooperation
                     (DGPEyCI), an agency of the Administrative Management
                     Secretariat, which will be responsible for the program’s fiduciary
                     and administrative areas. In the event of changes in the
                     organizational structure of the executing agency, it may act through
                     areas or departments with similar attributes and competencies that
                     will be replacing them in the future, with prior consent from the Bank
                     for the purposes of this program. Program execution will be
                     supported in the provinces and municipios, which will serve as
                     technical support units for the program and will be coordinated by
                     the SISU. Importantly, the provinces and municipios can be
                     included as technical support units for the program, provided they
                     have informal urban settlements listed on the National Registry of
                     Informal Urban Settlements (RENABAP) and have capacity to offer
                     technical and social collaboration on the ground, according to the
                     institutional capacity assessment of the executing agency. The
                     functions of the technical support units include supporting the
                     executing agency in the preparation of diagnostic assessments and
Annex III
Page 2 of 5


                        designing strategies with specific knowledge of the beneficiary
                        informal urban settlements.

3. Fiduciary capacity

 Fiduciary              In line with the loans based on results (LBR) policy tool
 capacity of the        (GN-2869-10), the Bank used the Institutional Capacity Assessment
 executing agency       Platform to analyze the national procurement system based on the
                        Methodology for the Assessment of Procurement Systems (MAPS)
                        of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
                        The various evaluations that were undertaken indicate that the
                        Ministry of Social Development has sufficient fiduciary systems to
                        ensure program execution and the achievement of the expected
                        results. The level of fiduciary risk is therefore low. Nevertheless, it is
                        recommended that the executing agency define actions that will
                        enable it to ensure the proper execution, supervision, and oversight
                        of program results (see paragraph 1.26 of the loan proposal
                        document for the recommendations).

4. Fiduciary risks and mitigation actions
Risk taxonomy Risk                                   Risk rating Mitigation action

Execution        A failure to establish a sufficient Medium-       Appropriate planning of
environment      credit allocation during the life of high         activities and the resources
                 the program could occasion                        required to carry them out
                 delays in project execution                       so that sufficient budget
                 which could make it necessary                     allocations can be made on
                 to extend the execution period                    a timely basis
                 or to cancel the disbursement of
                 program resources.


5. Applicable policies and guidelines: The program’s financial management will be based
   on the Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document
   GN-2811-10 and document OP-273-12). As this is an LBR operation, Argentina’s
   procurement systems will be used.
                                                                                           Annex III
                                                                                         Page 3 of 5


     II.      CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan (N/A)
Exchange rate. For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties
agree that the applicable exchange rate for local expenditures will be the one indicated in
subparagraph (b)(ii) of that article. For that purpose, the agreed exchange rate will be the
exchange rate in force on the first working day of the month in which the borrower, executing
agency, or any other natural or legal person to which authority to make payments has been
delegated makes payment to a contractor, supplier, or beneficiary. In the case of
expenditures of funds from the first disbursement of the loan, the applicable exchange rate
will be the one indicated in subparagraph (b)(i) of Article 4.09 of the General Conditions,
which is the effective exchange rate on the date of conversion of the approval currency or
disbursement currency into the local currency of the borrowing member country.
Audited financial reports. Audited annual financial reports for the program are to be
submitted to the Bank no later than 120 days of the close of the executing agency’s fiscal
years. These reports are to be duly certified by an independent auditing firm acceptable to
the Bank or by the Office of the Auditor General of Argentina. Final audited financial reports
are to be submitted within 120 days of the date of the last disbursement made under this
program.

           III.     AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

     Use of                As this is an LBR operation, the procurements systems of the
     national              executing agency (the Ministry of Social Development) will be used.
     systems

     Retroactive           It is expected that the program will provide up to US$15,000,000
     financing             (10% of the loan) in retroactive financing charged against loan
                           proceeds for results achieved prior to the determination of eligibility,
                           subject to an independent external evaluation. Retroactive financing
                           will apply to results obtained between the project profile approval date
                           (9 December 2022) and date the loan is declared eligible.

     Records and           The executing agency will be responsible for keeping the original files
     files                 on procurements and financial management pertaining to program
                           execution.


                  IV.   FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

    Programming           The executing agency is responsible for preparing and programming
    and budget            the annual budget and for carrying out all consolidation procedures
                          required to secure its approval. The executing agency’s budget
                          includes programmatic categories and other classifications for
                          budget items, such as expenditures on personnel, consumer goods,
                          nonpersonnel services, fixed assets, transfers, debt service,
                          reductions in other liabilities, other expenses, and intangible
                          expenses. As the need for an increase or reallocation of budget
Annex III
Page 4 of 5


                     items arises, the execution unit requests the corresponding
                     modifications and makes the necessary arrangements for their
                     approval. Budget allocations will need to be made in advance in
                     order to ensure that the operation is executed within the established
                     time frame.
      Cash flow and Bank accounts. The executing agency will advise the Bank of the
      disbursement dollar-denominated account in which program disbursements are to
      management be deposited. Payments will be made in local funds through the
                    DGPEyCI, after which disbursements will be arranged for as results
                    are achieved. The executing agency may also open a dollar-
                    denominated account for the exclusive use of the program in the
                    event that the initial disbursement is requested in accordance with
                    the applicable policy provisions (document GN-2869-10).
                     Financial plan. A financial plan for disbursement management under
                     this program is not required except for the initial disbursement request.
                     (Disbursements will be issued in accordance with the results matrix
                     based on the disbursement indicators agreed upon with the Bank.) If
                     such a request is made, a financial plan covering the specific financing
                     required to obtain given outputs will need to be submitted.
                     Disbursement methods. Because this is an LBR operation, the Bank
                     will issue disbursements in the form of repayments, provided that an
                     independent firm, agency, or individual specialist has independently
                     verified the corresponding results. The advance of funds method may,
                     however, be used for the initial disbursement provided for in the loan
                     contract. The executing agency will use the online disbursement
                     platform for Bank disbursements.
      Accounting,    National accounting systems must be such as to permit program
      information    receipts and expenditures to be tracked. The executing agency may
      systems, and   use the Financial Accounting System for Externally Funded Projects
      reporting      (UEPEX) module for financial management purposes. This system
                     permits the identification of program funds and sources of financing.
                     It also identifies program investments by cost component according
                     to the Bank-approved chart of accounts. Cash basis accounting
                     methods will be used, and the International Financial Reporting
                     Standards will be followed where applicable, in accordance with
                     national guidelines.
      External       External control will be exercised by the Office of the Auditor General
      controls and   of Argentina (AGN). The AGN, which advises and reports to the
      financial      Argentine Congress, is the lead agency for external oversight of
      reports        public sector accounts. Its establishment and operations are
                     governed by Title VII, Chapter I, of the Financial Management and
                     External Control Systems Act 24.156.
                     The program’s annual financial reports, based on the terms of
                     reference previously agreed upon with the Bank, are to be audited
                     by an independent auditor acceptable to the Bank, which may be the
                     AGN or an independent auditing firm. As part of the financial reports
                     it will submit annually and at the conclusion of the disbursement
                                                                            Annex III
                                                                          Page 5 of 5


              period, the executing agency will inform the Bank of the differential
              between the total expenditures incurred in the course of the
              achievement of program results and the total disbursements made
              by the Bank.
Financial     The financial supervision plan will be based on the evaluations of the
supervision   executing agency’s risk exposure and fiduciary capacity and will
              include in situ supervisory inspections, desk reviews, and the
              monitoring of the findings and recommendations included in the
              auditors’ reports on the program’s annual financial reports.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/23



                 Argentina. Loan ____/OC-AR to the Argentine Republic. Urban
                     Social Integration and Housing Improvement Program



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

       That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Argentine Republic, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing
aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Urban Social Integration and Housing Improvement
Program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$150,000,000, from the resources of
the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                                  (Adopted on __ _______ 2023)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1044359933-20646
AR-L1361
