Posted on: 12/5/2024 9:37:08 AM

DB Reference N°: IDB-P2156948-12/24

Country: Spain, Latin America and The Caribbean, Regional - Latin America and The Caribbean

Institution: Inter-American Development Bank

Sector: General - Rural and Urban Development

DeadLine: 2024-12-11

Status: Published

Loan N°./Financing: 5877/OC-BL

Project: Programa de Desarrollo Urbano Sostenible e Inclusivo

Title: Request for Application - Project Manager and Procurement Specialist


Borrower / Bid No: No. 5577/OC-BL


REQUEST FOR APPLICATIONS FOR (1) PROJECT MANAGER AND

(2) PROCUREMENT SPECIALIST

(INDIVIDUALS)

Institution:               Ministry of Finance

Country:                   Belize

Type of Engagement:          Individual Consultant (IC)

Deadline:                  Wednesday, December 11th, 2024; 10:00 a.m. (Local Belize Time)



The Government of Belize (GOB), with support from the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), has established a Central
Executing Unit (CEU) within the Ministry of Finance as a structure to contribute to the effective delivery of the development goals
outlined in Belize’s Medium-Term Development Strategy, 2022-2026 (MTDS). The CEU is responsible for the coordination and
implementation of various loan and grant projects and serves as the primary point of contact for all stakeholders involved in each
project assigned to the CEU. This centralized unit provides an efficient and effective way to facilitate the management of the projects,
ensuring that all phases are completed on time and on budget. Through the CEU it is envisaged that there will be enhanced multi-
sectoral collaboration among stakeholders during project design and implementation. Furthermore, with the in-house procurement,
financial, monitoring, evaluation and reporting expertise, the CEU should minimize project start up and learning curve delays in
procedures and reporting requirements previously experienced due to lack of expertise in these areas.



The Ministry of Finance is now launching the process to fill contractual positions for the following:


 Vacant Posts


   1. Project Manager
   2. Procurement Specialist (2)




The Ministry of Finance invites eligible individuals to apply for the above-mentioned positions. Further details, including the required
application template and full Terms of Reference, can be obtained by emailing rpascascio.ceu@cpu.mof.gov.bz between 8:00 am-
4:00 pm Mon- Friday. Interested individuals must provide information demonstrating that they have met the required qualifications and
possess relevant experience to perform the Services.



The selection for this contractual position will be in accordance with the procedures set out in the Inter-American Development
Bank: Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants financed by the Inter-American Development Bank GN-2350-15 and
the Government of Belize policies and best practices and is open to all eligible candidates as defined in the policies. The Consultants
will be selected based on qualifications.



Qualified individuals should submit one (1) pdf file in English via e-mail to rpascascio.ceu@cpu.mof.gov.bz and/or two (2) hardcopies
of their application to the address below clearly indicating the positions you are applying for and name of consultant.




The Deadline for submission is no later than Wednesday, December 11th, 2024, by 10:00 a.m. (Local Belize Time) No
late submissions will be accepted. Hard copies of the application should be submitted to the following address:



Ruby Pascascio

Senior Procurement Specialist

Central Executing Unit

Ministry of Finance

Sir Edney Cain Building, 2nd Floor

Belmopan City, Belize, Central America

Tel: 501-822-2152/2158

Email: rpascascio.ceu@cpu.mof.gov.bz



Ref: Project Manager/ Procurement Specialist - Your name
