                                                                                                PUBLIC
                                                                              SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                    DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                                BRAZIL



CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) “PROMORAR”
                                             (BR-O0014)

                                                   AND

             FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CCLIP
        “PROMORAR BRASIL –PROMOTING NEW HOUSING STRATEGIES
              IN BRAZIL FOR THE LOW-INCOME POPULATION”
                                              (BR-L1596)



                                           LOAN PROPOSAL




  This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Clementine Tribouillard
  (CSD/HUD), Project Team Leader; Paloma Silva (CSD/HUD) and Rafael Cavazzoni Lima
  (IFD/CMF), Alternate Project Team Leaders; Verónica Adler, Alejandro López-Lamia,
  Ana Cristina García, Sofía Del Castillo, María Alejandra Villota, Dianela Ávila, and
  Silvia Pérez (CSD/HUD); Juan Parodi (INO/SMC); Luana Moraes (DIS/CBR);
  Guillermo Eschoyez    (LEG/SGO);      Ana     María     Cuesta,    Laisa  Rachter    and
  María Fernanda Merino (SPD/SDV); Leise Estevanato and David Salazar (VPC/FMP);
  Alexandra Alvear (INE/INE); Wesney Bazilio (CSC/CBR); and Claudia Magalhães,
  Eloy Luis Mendes, Rodrigo Speziali, Roberta Faria, and Cid Blanco (HUD/CBR consultants).



  This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors
  simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the
  document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding
  and replacing the original version.
                                                      CONTENTS



PROGRAM SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 1

       A.     Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.     Objectives, components, and cost ............................................................... 12
       C.     Key performance indicators ......................................................................... 16

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 17

       A.     Financing instruments .................................................................................. 17
       B.     Environmental and social risks..................................................................... 20
       C.     Fiduciary risks .............................................................................................. 20
       D.     Other risks and key issues ........................................................................... 20

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................. 21

       A.     Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................. 21
       B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ........................................ 24

IV.    ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA .............................................................................................. 24
                                                  - ii -



                                               ANNEXES
Annex I      Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix
Annex II     Results Matrix
Annex III    Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                 LINKS
REQUIRED

  1.   Monitoring and evaluation plan
OPTIONAL
  1.   Gender and diversity

  2.   Climate change

  3.   Theory of change

  4.   Integration into the Minha Cada Minha Vida program

  5.   ProMorar CCLIP reference framework

  6.   Details of the home improvement guarantees mechanism

  7.   Program Operating Regulations

  8.   Program economic feasibility analysis

  9.   Simplified summary of the environmental and social review

 10. References

 11. Environmental and Social Screening Filter
                                  - iii -


                            ABBREVIATIONS


CCLIP   Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects
CEF     Caixa Econômica Federal [Federal Savings Bank]
CGU     Controladuria Geral da União [Office of the Comptroller General]
CRF     Corporate Results Framework
FDS     Fundo de Desenvolvimento Social [Social Development Fund]
FNHIS   Fundo Nacional de Habitação de Interesse Social [National Fund for
        Social Housing Fund]
HIG     Garantias para Microfinanciamento de Melhorias Habitacionais [home
        improvement guarantees]
IBGE    Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística [Brazilian Institute of
        Geography and Statistics]
ICAP    Institutional Capacity Analysis Platform
IRR     Internal rate of return
IVA     Independent verification agency
LBR     Loan Based on Results
MCID    Ministry of Cities
NDC     Nationally determined contribution
PAIA    Paris Alignment Implementation Approach
PMCMV   Programa Minha Casa Minha Vida [low-income housing program]
PMU     Program management unit
SEAID   International Affairs and Development Department of the Ministry of
        Planning and Budget
SIAFI   Sistema Integrado de Administração Financeira [Integrated financial
        management system]
SNH     Secretaria Nacional de Habitação [National Housing Secretariat]
SNHIS   Fundo Nacional de Habitação de Interesse Social [National Social
        Housing System]
SOFR    Secured Overnight Financing Rate
                                                            PROGRAM SUMMARY
                                                  BRAZIL
                  CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) “PROMORAR”
                                                (BR O0014)
                                                                        AND
                              FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CCLIP
                     “PROMORAR BRASIL” – PROMOTING NEW HOUSING STRATEGIES IN BRAZIL
                                     FOR THE LOW-INCOME POPULATION
                                               (BR L1596)
                                                      Financial Terms and Conditions
Borrower:                                                                                          Flexible Financing Facility (a)
                                                                                    Amortization period:                 25 years
Federative Republic of Brazil
                                                                                    Disbursement period:                 5 years
Executing agency:                                                                   Grace period:                        6 years (b)
                                                                                    Interest rate:                       SOFR-based
Ministry of Cities (MCID) through the National Housing Department                                                        (c)
                                                                                    Credit fee:
                         BR-O0014              BR-L1596
      Source                                                              %
                        Amount (US$)          Amount (US$)                          Inspection and                       (c)
IDB (Ordinary                                                                       supervision fee:
                          600,000,000              54,055,925             99%
Capital):
Local:                                   -             500,000              1%      Weighted average life:               15.25 years

Total:                    600,000,000              54,555,925            100%       Approval currency:                   U.S. dollar

                                                              Program at a Glance
General objective of the CCLIP: The CCLIP’s general objective is to promote new strategies for housing and habitat
improvement in Brazil, with a focus on the low-income population, thereby helping to speed up economic development and
narrow social inequalities in the country (paragraph 1.16).
Objective of the first individual operation under the CCLIP: From the federal level, the objective of the first operation
under the CCLIP is to provide public, private, and civil society actors with new tools to facilitate and diversify access to low-
income housing solutions, with the aim of expanding access to decent housing. The operation’s specific objectives are to:
(i) connect housing supply with demand, with the aim of facilitating access to decent housing; (ii) develop and implement a
national microfinance program for sustainable home improvement, targeting low-income families with the aim of narrowing
the qualitative (substandard) housing deficit; and (iii) strengthen the National Housing Plan and National Housing Policy by
promoting socioenvironmental sustainability; providing training to civil servants, engineers, and technicians at the subnational
level; and diversifying social housing programs (paragraph 1.18).
Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the program management unit (PMU)
will have been formally established; and (ii) the program Operating Regulations, previously agreed upon with the Bank, will
have been approved (paragraph 3.7).
Special contractual condition for execution: an independent verification agency will have been hired, pursuant to the
terms of reference previously agreed upon with the Bank, within 90 days of the loan contract signature date (paragraph 3.8).
Exceptions to the Bank’s policies: None
                                                               Strategic Alignment
Challenges:(d)                                        SI   ☒                             PI    ☒                               EI   ☐
Crosscutting themes:(e)                         GE ☒ and DI ☒                          CC ☒ and ES ☒                           IC   ☒
(a)
    Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization
    schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, catastrophe protection, and commodity conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk
    management considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)
    Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail
    any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)
    The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of
    the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies.
(d)
    SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(e)
    GE (Gender Equality) and DI (Diversity); CC (Climate Change) and ES (Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and
    Rule of Law).
                           I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Background and general rationale. The Brazilian government, through the
          National Housing Secretariat, a subagency of the Ministry of Cities (MCID), the
          sector’s lead agency, requested support from the Inter-American Development
          Bank [1]1 to explore new models of housing and habitat provision, and to
          formulate policy strategies for the sector, particularly targeting the most
          vulnerable low-income groups. To meet this demand from the authorities and
          support its continuity, this proposal envisages the creation of a Conditional Credit
          Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) with a 10-year availability period, under
          which individual investment operations could be approved for a total of up to
          US$600 million. The first individual operation under the CCLIP will be a
          US$54.5 million loan under the LBR modality.
1.2       Quantitative housing shortage in the country. One of the main socioeconomic
          challenges facing Brazil is the lack of access to housing, as shown by housing
          deficit indicators (quantitative deficit, or insufficient production of new housing
          units). In 2019, the housing deficit stood at approximately 5.9 million units [2];
          and demand is expected to grow by an additional 1.2 million units each year
          through 2030.2 The quantitative housing deficit is defined as follows: (i) families
          living in precarious housing (makeshift and rustic dwellings), totaling 1.5 million
          households or 25.2% of the total deficit; (ii) those living in a cohabitation
          arrangement (families living together in the same dwelling and those living in
          loaned and rented housing), totaling 1.4 million households (23.1%); and
          (iii) those facing an excessive rent burden (families with incomes of less than
          three times the minimum wage and who spend more than 30% of their income on
          rent), this being the largest component, encompassing more than 3 million
          dwellings (51.7%). There is also a clear relationship between the quantitative
          housing deficit and households’ socioeconomic profile: 72% of precarious
          housing units are occupied by families with monthly incomes of up to 1 minimum
          wage (R$1,212, equivalent to approximately US$230).
1.3       Qualitative housing deficit in Brazil (substandard housing). The lack of
          quality housing and services in urban areas (substandard housing) is associated
          with the need to improve housing, rather than replace it. In 2019, there were
          more than 24 million substandard urban dwellings in Brazil. Of these, 14 million
          had no access to water and/or electricity, and/or sanitation, and/or solid waste
          management services; 11.25 million had structural defects and deficient
          construction materials (substandard construction); and 3.5 million had land
          tenure problems [2]. The infrastructure and construction deficiencies in dwellings
          correspond to a variety of needs (Figure 1). Some dwellings may be impacted by
          more than one type of deficiency. Problems of legal land tenure, for example,
          have a negative impact on property values. It is estimated that land titling in

1    Optional link 10 contains the full list of references, each of which is identified by a number in square
     brackets [#].
2
     These are the most recent statistics available. The country’s census is under way, and, consequently,
     updated census data will be available in late 2023.
                                              -2-



      Brazil has doubled land values [3]. Studies show that land titling programs can
      generate an increase of between 20% and 32% in household income once the
      final deeds have been delivered [4]. The qualitative housing deficiencies in Brazil
      are closely related to: (i) urban segregation, which was estimated to affect more
      than 5 million dwellings in shanty towns (favelas) in 2019 [5] (i.e. 7.8% of the
      national total and 60% higher than the 2010 estimates); and (ii) exposure to
      disaster risk, since, according to the Brazilian Institute of Geography and
      Statistics (IBGE) and the National Center for Natural Disaster Monitoring and
      Warning (CEMADEN), 8.2 million people in Brazil were living in risk areas in
      2010, including 2.4 million in permanent dwellings.

                      Figure 1. Subcomponents of housing deficiencies (2019)




      Source: Fundação João Pinheiro, 2021.


1.4   National strategies for the housing sector. The right to decent housing is
      guaranteed in Brazil’s Federal Constitution. In 2023, the Minha Casa Minha Vida
      low-income housing program (PMCMV) was launched through Provisional
      Executive Order 1,162 of 2023. The program aims to: (i) increase the housing
      supply for low-income families to meet preexisting needs; (ii) promote
      improvements to the existing housing stock in order to address its deficiencies;
      and (iii) stimulate modernization of the construction sector and technological
      innovation. Implementation of the PMCMV is possible thanks to the Multiyear
      Plan 2020-2023, linked to the Moradia Digna (decent housing) thematic program.
      Figure 2 summarizes the type of strategy that currently exists for each challenge
      identified.
                                                 -3-



                Figure 2. Categorization of responses to the housing challenges program




      Source: National Housing Secretariat, 2021. Under the federal government’s new structure,
      programs addressing the urbanization of precarious settlements and land tenure regularization,
      while serving as pillars of the national housing policy, are under the management of the National
      Secretariat for Periurban Areas and no longer the National Housing Secretariat.


1.5   Gender challenges in the housing sector. Women account for more than 52%
      of Brazil’s total population. Between 2001 and 2015, the number of households
      headed by women grew by 105%, while those headed by men increased by just
      13%; and the number of single-parent households headed by women grew by
      28.3% over the same period, from 9 million to 11.6 million [6]. Recent housing
      deficit statistics point to gender inequality among poor households: 60% of
      households with deficient housing are headed by women and, of the 3 million
      rent-burdened families, 62.2% are headed by women [7] (Figure 3, left panel).
      There are also gender disparities in Brazil’s housing finance market: data from
      the country’s Central Bank and Caixa Econômica Federal (CEF) show that
      women account for only 38% of mortgage loans in the market, whereas men
      account for 62% [8]. Record unemployment estimates reveal that women have
      been hardest hit by the economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, with
      an unemployment rate of 16.8% compared to 12.8% for men, suggesting that
      gender inequality may be worsening in the country (optional link 1).
1.6   Diversity-related challenges in the housing sector. The concept of
      intersectionality, in which an individual suffers oppression because he or she
      belongs to multiple categories of social identity (e.g., race, ethnicity, disability,
      and sexual orientation) [9], is relevant to Brazil’s housing sector. This is because
      there are population groups that fall into more than one category of identity and
      are therefore overrepresented among the population impacted by the housing
                                                     -4-



          deficit. Estimates based on recent data found that more than 52.6% of these
          households are headed by Afro-descendant women (PNAD/IBGE), 63% of which
          are living below the poverty line3 without access to urban services (compared to
          39.6% of households headed by women who are not) [10] (Figure 3, right panel).
          In addition, the 2019 National Health Survey (PNS), reports a total of 17.3 million
          persons with disabilities (8.4% of the population) [11]. Of these, 14.4 million were
          living in urban households and 2.9 million in rural areas; 10.5 million were
          women, and 6.7 million were men. The 2019 survey also found that
          approximately 2.9 million people in Brazil (i.e., 1.8% of the adult population)
          reported being gay or bisexual. Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
          transgender, transsexual, and queer (LGBTQ+) communities in Brazil usually live
          in rented dwellings [12] or are unsheltered [13]. The data also point to a 140%
          increase in homelessness since 2012, for a total of nearly 222,000 persons in
          2020 [14] (optional link 1).

       Figure 3. Gender of the head of household impacted by the housing deficit (left panel) and
                   Differences in access to household services by race (right panel)




      Source: Fundação João Pinheiro, 2021.             Source: IBGE, 2019.


1.7       Environmental sustainability and climate change in the housing sector.
          Brazil’s greenhouse gas emissions totaled 1,467 Gigatons of CO2 equivalent in
          2016, of which approximately 1% are attributable to the residential sector [15].
          The challenges of rapid growth and transformations of the urban landscape are
          exacerbated by the effects of climate change and have impact on housing and
          people’s quality of life. In particular, the impacts of global warming that are
          evident in Brazil include: (i) a 2.5ºC increase in the average temperature in
          coastal zones between 1901 and 2012; (ii) an increase in the number of days per
          year with more than 30 millimeters of precipitation in southeastern Brazil;
          (iii) changes in the temperature and salinity of the South Atlantic; and (iv) an
          increase in the frequency and intensity of El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
          events, and their influence on the continental climate [16]. In response to this

3   According to the latest IBGE synthesis of social indicators, a person is considered to be below the poverty
    line when he or she lives on less than US$1.90 per day.
                                                      -5-



         challenge, in its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) [17], Brazil is
         committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 37% in 2025 compared
         to the 2005 baseline; and it aims to reduce them by 50% by 2030 and achieve
         carbon neutrality by 2050. Brazil’s NDC also recognizes the need to improve
         development indicators in the areas of housing and social inclusion, while
         contributing to global efforts to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. The use of
         environmental sustainability criteria in social housing improvement highlights its
         importance in promoting the efficient and rational use of natural resources,
         improving living conditions, reducing household expenses on basic services, and
         contributing to a reduction in local pollution, among other collateral benefits
         (optional link 2).4
              First individual operation under the “ProMorar Brasil” CCLIP
1.8      General problem. The large quantitative (insufficient) and qualitative
         (substandard) housing deficits in Brazil affect low-income families. In 2019, the
         quantitative deficit amounted to 5.8 million units (paragraph 1.2), and the
         qualitative deficit affected more than 24 million households (paragraph 1.3) [18].
1.9      Determining factors. Although these large deficits are attributable to multiple
         factors, this operation focuses on the following: (i) the dispersion and lack of
         transparency of information on the production and supply of housing built with
         federal funding, which limits participation by the private sector and citizens in
         resolving access to decent housing for low-income families; (ii) the scarcity and
         high cost of microfinance for housing to combat the qualitative deficit, the market
         for which is just beginning to emerge in Brazil (in most cases, microfinance is
         obtained through direct consumer credit issued by large banks and without
         technical assistance); and (iii) the complexity of the housing agenda, considering
         that the scale of the problem and existing disparities associated with the
         institutional framework and administrative capacity hinder medium and long-term
         planning, the diversification of service channels, and the inclusion of
         socioenvironmental sustainability considerations [19].
         a. Determining factor 1. The dispersion and lack of transparency of information
            on the production, supply of, and demand for housing built with federal
            funding limit private sector and citizen participation in resolving access to
            decent housing for low-income families. Today there are more than five
            federal systems and numerous local systems in inventory: the register of
            benefits and loans issued (CADMUT), social programs (CadÚnico),
            administrative databases for consultation to identify beneficiaries (RAIS,
            CADIN, SIACI), register of housing demand (subnational databases), among
            others. Each sector-level institution has its own information system for the
            part of the process that it administers and operates; but these systems are
            not integrated into a digital platform at the federal level, nor do they cover all
            elements of the process. Thus, sector actors (the construction industry,
            developers, financial institutions and agents, subnational entities, organized

4   Optional link 2 includes mitigation and adaptation measures that promote the reduction of energy demand
    through energy efficiency strategies and efficient water consumption. In addition, construction materials will
    be aligned with Brazil’s Habitat Quality and Productivity Program, which seeks to improve the quality and
    durability of works and to modernize the construction sector.
                                                       -6-



              civil society, and low-income families) do not have access to transparent,
              expeditious, and clear information on existing housing supply and demand.
              Moreover, families do not have information on available lending support
              (e.g., in terms of amounts and financing conditions), particularly for
              vulnerable families [20], nor on the complete portfolio of housing solutions
              available in the real estate market in each locality. On the one hand, the
              multiplicity and complexity of beneficiary selection systems prevent families
              from transparently estimating their chances of accessing a housing solution,
              let alone being able to choose among the alternatives. On the other hand,
              developers do not have a consolidated view of demand and thus tend to
              make very conservative investment decisions [21].
         b. Determining factor 2. Although there is strong demand for improvements
            among the 11.3 million housing units with substandard construction (a survey
            noted that 82% of the lowest-income population in groups D/E [22] stated that
            they needed to improve their homes, while less than half spend money on
            construction materials and improvement services [23]). This demand is
            repressed5 because housing microfinance for home improvements and for
            overcoming construction deficiencies is scarce and expensive [24]. This is
            explained by the following: (i) nearly all improvements are currently financed
            through direct consumer credit with commercial banks at high interest rates
            (starting at 3% per month). Recently, more than 100 small home
            improvement enterprises have emerged that offer technical assistance,
            sometimes combined with microloans; but they have difficulty in accessing
            affordable funding and thus far do not have collateral instruments; (ii) credit is
            expensive, owing to a high funding cost associated with inappropriate
            regulations (which require a 100% risk weighting factor); (iii) the impossibility
            of pledging the dwelling as collateral and the absence of accessory
            guarantees elevates the credit risk assumed by the financial institution and,
            consequently, raises the costs associated with the loan; and (iv) the lack of
            technical assistance, owing to scant supply (few technical assistance firms in
            the market), makes it impossible to reduce the risk.6 It is, therefore,
5   According to data from Fundação João Pinheiro, the prevalence of substandard housing increased by 9.2%,
    from 10.3 million housing units in 2016 to 11.3 million in 2019. Assuming improvements with an average cost
    of R$12,000, approximately R$135 billion would be needed to address the deficiencies existing in 2019.
    Between 2016 and 2019, there was no policy to address substandard housing, since it was only in 2020
    (Law 13,465/2017) that the Land Regularization and Housing Improvement Program (RegMel) was created,
    which initially provided direct subsidies to families that could not pay (financing). Between 2016 and 2019,
    housing microfinance issued for renovation, expansion, or the purchase of construction materials was
    channeled through consumer credit lines, or else financed from savings totaling approximately R$600 million.
    Interest rates are significantly higher than those charged in the housing financial system and, consequently,
    serve families that are better able to pay. In the years in question, there was no financing for the purchase of
    construction materials using resources from the Length of Service Guarantee Fund (Fundo de Garantia do
    Tempo de Serviço, FGTS). Low-income families were served by a few home improvement microfinance
    initiatives promoted by firms with a social focus, such as Ceape, Banco do Povo, and Nova Vivenda. This
    active portfolio amounted to only some R$2 million as of April 2020, according to partial data obtained from
    some of these actors [24].
6   A 2015 survey of the economically active population between 18 and 75 years of age by the Brazilian
    Architecture and Urban Development Council and the Datafolha Institute revealed that 54% of respondents
    had already undertaken renovations and construction work. Of these, 85.4% did not engage an architect or
    engineer in their projects.
                                           -7-



          necessary and urgent to nurture the affordable microfinance market and thus
          make it possible to enhance the quality of low-income housing in Brazil.
       c. Determining factor 3. The complexity of the housing agenda, the magnitude
          of the problem, and disparities associated with the institutional framework and
          administrative capacity hinder medium- and long-term planning, the
          diversification of service lines, and the inclusion of socioenvironmental
          sustainability considerations. Launched in 2009, the National Housing Plan has
          not been revised as planned and is nearing the end of its term. Moreover,
          programmatic and thematic gaps can be identified that could be better
          explored for implementation. One issue that needs sharper focus is
          environmental sustainability: there are few incentives for sustainable
          construction and in consolidated urban areas, while the sector is one of the
          largest generators of environmental impacts. Although there are no specific
          data for the housing sector, the International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates
          that in 2019 the construction sector value chain, as a whole, accounted for
          35% of global energy consumed and 38% of CO2 emissions [25]. Another
          issue that needs to be targeted in housing policy is housing that does not
          involve the transfer of ownership, and for specific population groups, such as
          the homeless. An example of this is the absence of a federal low-income rental
          program, while over 3 million households struggle with an excessive urban rent
          burden, this being the main component of the housing deficit [26]. Similarly, the
          homeless population, which has grown rapidly (especially in recent years in the
          wake of the COVID-19 pandemic), is a segment that is not considered in
          PlanHab 2009-2023, nor in housing policies generally. The qualitative
          diagnostic assessments performed for the review of PlanHab identify the
          constraints imposed by the fragility of coordination and cooperation
          agreements between federal and subnational governments in the
          implementation of housing policy. This is due partly to the absence or fragility
          of institutions, administrative structures, and human resources for policy
          management at the local and regional levels; and it is compounded by a failure
          to target the most vulnerable households, such as those headed by women, or
          those that include persons with disabilities, among others. In fact, the proximity
          of the end of its validity and the changes that have occurred since 2009—e.g.
          in the housing market, in the financial/credit sector, in the socioeconomic
          situation of families, in macroeconomic and demographic scenarios, in the
          environmental and technological context, among others—make it necessary to
          revise PlanHab and formulate new long-term strategies, action plans, and new
          deadlines [27].
1.10   Lessons learned from Bank projects. In thematic terms, the program builds on
       capacities developed in previous housing improvement programs in Brazil and
       elsewhere in the region. The “Habitar Brasil” Low-income Neighborhood
       Improvement Program (loan 1126/OC-BR), the Low-income neighborhood urban
       development programs in Rio de Janeiro (Favela Bairro I, loan 898/OC-BR,
       1995-2001; Favela Bairro II, loan 1241/OC-BR, 2000-2006; Favela Bairro III, loan
       2482/OC-BR, 2010-2019); the Niterói Urban Development and Social Inclusion
       Program (2941/OC-BR); the Integrated and Sustainable Urban Development
       Program of the Municipality of João Pessoa (loan 4444/OC-BR); and the Urban
       Upgrade Program in the Western Area of Aracaju – Building for the Future (loan
                                            -8-



       4736/OC-BR), among others. The main lesson learned from these programs is that
       designing comprehensive programs is essential, in other words: (i) interventions
       that focus on the habitat continuum, e.g. simultaneously supporting urban
       infrastructure, land tenure regularization, and housing improvement (both outside
       and inside the home); (ii) striking a balance between hardware (infrastructure
       works) and software (people’s quality of life): a focus on access to social services,
       community facilities, employment and income opportunities, mechanisms to
       protect against discrimination and promote socioeconomic integration, etc.; and
       (iii) coordination with sector actors to maximize the impact of interventions and
       leverage resources. Regarding the program’s conception, it was inspired by the
       most recent Housing and Urban Development Division intervention (CSD/HUD) in
       Chile, the Program for the Urban Integration of Informal Settlements
       (5313/OC-CH), for which CSD/HUD designed a support format drawing on an
       existing public sector dynamic with the aim of strengthening and maximizing the
       program’s results. From the perspective of designing new financial projects, the
       team tasked with the program was aware that providing lines of finance to
       underserved population segments does not in itself guarantee the effect on the
       potential beneficiaries if the main problem is risk tolerance on the part of the
       lending financial institutions. The IDB has extensive experience structuring credit
       guarantee products to mobilize private-sector lending. With specific regard to the
       design of credit risk mitigation mechanisms, the program has benefited from recent
       experiences of the Connectivity, Markets, and Finance Division (IFD/CMF) in Brazil
       (5130/OC-BR, 5452/OC-BR, 5453/TC-BR, and GRC/TC-19109-BR) that supported
       the Emergency Global Credit Program for Access to Credit (PEAC) of the
       Investment Guarantee Fund (FGI) and the Energy Efficiency Guarantee Fund
       (FGEnergia), respectively. Lastly, as a financial innovation, the model of
       intervention proposed for this operation generates lessons learned for future
       programs of the country and the region.
1.11   Vertical logic. The program’s vertical logic is set out in detail in Figure 4. Details
       of the vertical logic and theory of change can be consulted in optional link 3.
                     -9-



Figure 4. Vertical logic of the first operation
                                                  - 10 -



                              Figure 4. Vertical logic of the first operation




Source: IDB, 2022.


1.12     Strategic alignment of the country. In terms of the country priorities, the Moradia
         Digna decent housing program of Brazil’s Multiyear Plan for 2020-20237 aims to
         enhance housing access and improve housing conditions, and includes more
         private-sector investment as a basic guideline. The housing policy embodied in the
         PMCMV seeks to innovate and diversify the different types of housing assistance
         with solutions that are more in tune with the diverse realities that exist in the
         country.8 The PMCMV’s three objectives are: (i) housing supply; (ii) improvement
         of the existing housing stick to address deficiencies; and (iii) the quality and
         modernization of civil construction production. The components of ProMorar Brasil
         are fully aligned with these three objectives: (i) better access to housing is the
         expected result of Component 1, where the housing platform, by connecting
         demand and supply more effectively, increases housing assistance, especially in
         the housing purchase and rental modalities; (ii) promotion of home improvement is
         the expected result in Component 2, where the home improvement program,
         through a guarantee, will expand the home improvement microfinance market; and
7   The new Multiyear Plan 2024-2027 is being discussed in the federal government, including the proposed
    continuity of the Moradia Digna program and the expansion of investments and targets.
8   Pursuant to Law 13,971 of 27 December 2019; Provisional Executive Order 1,162 of 14 February 2023,
    and Federal Decree 11,439 of 17 March 2023.
                                                   - 11 -



         (iii) better quality housing, especially in terms of environmental sustainability, is one
         of the expected results of Component 3, where the new PlanHab and its
         environmental studies enhance the sector’s efforts to foster urban densification,
         and where stakeholder capacity building aims to promote sustainable construction
         in the housing sector, with a focus on improvements (optional link 4).
1.13     Strategic alignment of the Bank. In terms of institutional priorities, the program
         is consistent with the second Update to the Institutional Strategy (document
         AB-3190-2) and is expected to contribute to the IDB Group’s Corporate Results
         Framework (CRF) 2020-2023 (document GN-2727-12), as it addresses the
         following development challenges: (i) social inclusion and equality, by improving
         access to and the quality of social housing for low-income populations; and
         (ii) productivity and innovation, by improving the allocation of public subsidies to
         enhance resource efficiency. It is also aligned with the following crosscutting
         themes: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, by promoting an
         environmental policy, urban densification, and green and resilient construction in
         housing improvement. As much as 45.51% of the Bank’s funding is invested in
         climate finance for the aforementioned activities, according to the joint
         methodology of the multilateral development banks on climate finance (optional
         link 2); and (ii) gender equality and diversity, by: (a) strengthening the capacity of
         public actors to address gender and diversity gaps in housing; (b) improving the
         culture of disaggregated data on gender, ethnicity, race, and disability, which will
         strengthen future targeted housing programs for women, persons with
         disabilities, Afro-descendants, and indigenous people; and (c) creating a
         technical study with a diagnostic assessment and policy proposal to facilitate
         women’s access to housing microfinance with an intersectional approach; and
         (iii) institutional capacity and rule of law, by creating digital management tools for
         the housing sector (an integrated data management platform that improves the
         efficiency and planning of subsidies and facilitates citizen access to information
         and benefits) and structuring a sector training system for all public-sector
         managers involved in the new housing policy. The program will contribute to CRF
         Indicator 2.3: Beneficiaries of targeted anti-poverty programs. Lastly, the program
         is consistent with the Bank’s Housing and Urban Development Sector
         Framework document, in its Line of Action 1 “Overcoming Structural Social
         Exclusion,” which aims to: (i) upgrade underserved and informal neighborhoods;
         and (ii) increase access to adequate housing.
1.14     Based on its registration/eligibility date, this operation does not fall within the time
         frame defined by the Paris Alignment Implementation Approach (PAIA)
         (document GN-3142-1);9 therefore, the loan proposal does not contain
         information related to its analysis for alignment with the Paris Agreement
         mitigation and adaptation targets.


9   The PAIA applied to all operations that have reached eligibility as of 1 January 2023. The scope of
    application includes investment loans, policy-based loans, equity investments, long-term corporate
    finance, and investment subsidies with approved amount greater than US$3 million. (…) “The PAIA will
    not be applied retroactively in operations that reached eligibility before the year of 2023.” IDB Group
    Paris Alignment Implementation Approach: Principles, Methodology, and Technical Guidance;
    paragraph 2.10.
                                                     - 12 -



1.15      The Bank’s country strategy with Brazil. The operation is aligned with the
          IDB Group’s Country Strategy with Brazil 2019-2022 (document GN-2973), in
          priority area (iv) “Reduce social inequality and inequality of opportunity by
          enhancing public policy efficiency,” which targets strategic objective
          (v) “Implement efficient policies to increase access to housing” (paragraph 3.37).
          The strategy supports the following crosscutting challenges that will be crucial in
          the operation: (a) gender and diversity; (b) environmental sustainability and
          climate change (paragraph 1.13); and (c) Innovation and digital transformation
          (mainly through the housing platform for digitalization and optimization of sector
          data).
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
               “ProMorar” CCLIP
1.16      General objective of the CCLIP. The general objective of the CCLIP is to
          promote new strategies for housing and habitat improvement in Brazil, with focus
          on the low-income population, thereby helping to speed up economic
          development and reduce social inequalities in the country (optional link 5).
1.17      Beneficiaries. The CCLIP will benefit all stakeholders in the housing and habitat
          sector. The end beneficiaries will be: (i) low-income families, promoting social
          housing10 and the low-cost housing market segments;11 (ii) subnational
          governments (states and municípios); (iii) private sector agents (e.g.
          construction, financing, and condominium and rental property management),
          and; (iv) the third sector (e.g. organized civil society and popular movements);
          (v) the academic community; and (vi) citizens at large, who will have access
          through the information platform to Brazil’s housing supply and demand for
          decision-making.
               First individual operation under the “ProMorar Brasil” CCLIP
1.18      Objective of the individual operation. Within the CCLIP’s general objective of
          promoting new strategies for housing and habitat improvement, the first operation
          seeks, from the federal level, to provide public, private, and civil society actors
          with new tools to facilitate and diversify access to social housing solutions, with
          the aim of expanding access to decent housing. The specific objectives of the
          operation are to: (i) connect housing supply with demand and thus make
          adequate housing more accessible; (ii) develop and implement a sustainable
          national microfinance program for home improvement targeting low-income
          families, with the aim of reducing the problem of substandard housing; and
          (iii) strengthen the National Housing Plan and the National Housing Policy by


10   Article 1 of Law 14,118/2021 defines the following family income ceilings for social housing eligibility
     funded by the federal government of Brazil: in urban areas, families with gross monthly family income of up
     to R$7,000.00; and, in rural areas, those with gross annual family income of up to R$84,000.00. These
     ceilings and groups are specified in Article 2 of Decree 10,600/2021.
11   The federal government has not adopted the low-cost market category (mercado popular), but only the
     assistance groups and the income thresholds described above. However, municípios such as São Paulo
     provide assistance modalities with higher income thresholds for families who still need help in obtaining
     housing. This is considered as the low-cost housing market (mercado popular).
                                                       - 13 -



          promoting socioenvironmental sustainability; providing training to subnational civil
          servants, engineers, and technicians; and diversifying social housing programs.
1.19      Component 1. Housing supply and demand management platform
          (IDB US$2,855,925). This component will deliver the following key outputs:
          (i) implementation of a business intelligence solution; (ii) preparation of a platform
          governance plan; and (iii) implementation of housing demand and supply
          management system services (paragraph 4 of optional link 3). These outputs,
          through digitalization, will help connect housing supply with demand and upgrade
          its management, thereby improving access to decent housing. This will contribute
          to creating a culture of disaggregated and geo-referenced data through
          intersectional demographic segmentation (gender, race, ethnicity, family income,
          disability). It will also contribute to the measurement of baselines for potentially
          differentiated assistance; and, if assistance gaps are identified, it could form the
          basis for the development of differentiated policies in the future. This component
          will also contribute to systemizing the collection and analysis of environmental
          data to document the climate impact of housing investments (at the individual
          property scale, in terms of green building, but potentially also at the urban scale,
          to encourage urban densification).
1.20      Component 2. Home improvement financing program (IDB US$48.4 million).
          This component will deliver the following key outputs: (i) development of a
          mechanism for providing home improvement guarantees (HIG mechanism);
          (ii) creation of a home improvement control and monitoring system (technological
          platform and financial agent rules); (iii) promotion of the gradual diversification of
          financial agents operating in this market; and (iv) creation of a system of statistics
          on green home improvement (with environmental impact and climate change
          attributes). The delivery of these outputs will make it possible to develop and
          implement an improvement market driven initially by a national microfinance
          program to facilitate sustainable home improvement12 for low-income families,
          with the aim of reducing the qualitative deficit (for further details on these outputs,
          see paragraph 5 of optional link 3; and for further information on the
          HIG mechanism, see optional link 6). The HIG mechanism, which is illustrated in
          the figure below, will be operated by the Federal Savings Bank (Caixa
          Econômica Federal – CEF), which is the operating agent of the Social
          Development Fund (FDS). The aforementioned guarantee will be used to
          promote additional and more affordable financing for housing improvements, by
          attracting new financial agents (e.g., banks, credit unions, fintechs, and NGOs)
          starting with the CEF and subsequently including other additional financial
          agents. Since this guarantee will help mitigate the financial agents’ risk, a greater
          supply of credit and/or a lower interest rate is expected, which will make many
          more improvements feasible and thus contribute toward reducing the qualitative
          deficit. The eligibility criteria for the HIG mechanism, which the program
          Operating Regulations describe in detail, include a maximum level of family
          income, beneficiaries must reside in formal urban areas or those in the process
          of being formalized (excludes areas at risk for disasters and under environmental
12   Optional link 2 provides detailed information on home improvement strategies with environmental
     sustainability criteria, encouraging the inclusion of energy efficiency measures, efficient water consumption,
     and good-quality building materials.
                                                        - 14 -



           projection), and types of repairs,13 as well as the guiding aspects for the
           structuring of the guarantee mechanism, among others.

                  Figure 5. Mechanism for providing home improvement microfinance guarantees




           Source: IDB, 2022.


1.21       Component 3. Studies, tools, and capacity development for the review of
           planning,      promotion      of    socioenvironmental      sustainability,  and
           diversification of social housing programs (IDB US$2.4 million,
           Local US$500,000). This component will deliver the following key outputs:
           (i) preparation of studies to subsidize the reformulation of the National Housing
           Plan and the National Housing Policy in the medium and long terms; (ii) training
           for architecture and engineering professionals in housing improvement with
           socioenvironmental and climate sustainability criteria; (iii) preparation of a
           technical study with a diagnostic assessment and policy proposal to facilitate
           women’s access to housing microfinance with an intersectional approach;
           (iv) training for subnational civil servants on socioenvironmental sustainability
           and climate change issues applied to housing policy; and (v) training for
           subnational civil servants on gender and diversity issues applied to housing




13   Works and services that ensure health, safety, and minimum building and habitability standards defined
     by local ordinances, and the adaptation of dwelling size to the number of family members living in them,
     or the functionality of the family, as well as the adaptability of housing for accessibility, the installation of
     solar heating, energy efficiency, or water-savings equipment.
                                                          - 15 -



           policy (paragraph 6 of optional link 3).14 The delivery of these outputs will
           strengthen the National Housing Plan and Housing Policy, promoting
           socioenvironmental sustainability, the training of housing policy actors, and
           diversification of social housing programs. In terms of mainstreaming gender,
           diversity, environmental sustainability, and climate change, this outcome will
           enable a paradigm shift in the sector by providing training for key agents in public
           housing policy, particularly municipal and state teams, and architecture and
           urban planning professionals. This knowledge management and cultural shift will
           be considered as a basis for change of practices and practical implementation in
           housing programs (optional link 3).
1.22       Program administration and management (IDB US$400,000). The program
           will cover the costs of independent monitoring of the achievement of results in
           each of the disbursement tranches, as well as program administration and
           evaluation costs. An ex post economic evaluation, a final program evaluation,
           and an impact evaluation are also planned.
1.23       Beneficiaries. The housing platform aims to serve the 26 states, the Federal
           District, and Brazil’s 5,570 municípios, along with developers, construction
           companies, technical assistance professionals, works executing agencies, the
           sector’s financial agents, and housing subsidy and home improvement loan
           applicants. The home improvement guarantee mechanism (HIG mechanism) will
           directly benefit low-income households whose dwellings are impacted by
           substandard construction, reaching 152,000 low-income households
           (approximately 470,000 people) in the first round of guarantees. Component 3
           will benefit housing policy actors, and in particular the National Social Housing
           System (SNHIS).15
1.24       Gender and diversity actions. As the primary intervention, and considering the
           lack of, and need for, awareness-raising on gender and diversity biases and
           challenges in the housing sector, this program will provide training on a massive
           scale to agents from the public sector (officials from state and municipal housing
           secretariats) and private sector (financial agents and professional architects and

14   The training addresses issues such as urban governance (participation, representativeness, and symbolic
     presence); functionality (accessibility, walkability, inclusive residential architecture, etc.); and safety in public
     spaces and condominium areas (security design, legal and institutional provisions, etc.). These are tailored
     to the needs of different groups—women and men, older persons (elderly) and children, persons with
     disabilities, people of different races and ethnicities, LGBTQ+, migrants and refugees, homeless persons,
     among others. This training will be based on the IDB Academy course “Cidades para Todes – gênero e
     diversidade nos espaços urbanos” [Cities for All: Gender and Diversity in Urban Spaces].
15   Instituted by Law 11,124 of 16 June 2005, Article 5 of which stipulates the following agencies and entities
     as part of the National Social Housing System: (i) the Ministry of Cities, the lead agency of the National
     Social Housing System; (ii) the management board of the National Fund for Social Housing (FNHIS);
     (iii) the Federal Savings Bank (CEF), the operating agency of FNHIS; (iv) the Council of Cities; (v) councils
     at the state, federal district, and municipal levels, with specific responsibilities for urban and housing issues;
     (vi) agencies and institutions that form part of public administration, either directly or indirectly, at the
     federal, state, federal district, and municipal levels; and regional or metropolitan institutions that perform
     complementary or housing-related functions; (vii) foundations, companies, unions, community associations,
     housing cooperatives, and any other private entity that engages in housing activities, whether similar or
     complementary, all as agents promoting actions within the domain of the National Social Housing System;
     and (viii) financial agents authorized by the National Monetary Council to operate in the Housing Finance
     System (SFH).
                                          - 16 -



       engineers of the improvement program) on barriers and biases towards women,
       persons with disabilities, LGBTQ+ people, Afro-descendants, and indigenous
       people (paragraph 1.20). Considering that disaggregated data on gender,
       disability, race, and ethnicity in the housing sector are scarce, the program will
       contribute to improving the management of disaggregated housing data within
       the housing platform, by cross-referencing data that is scattered among various
       databases and refining their statistical treatment (paragraph 1.18). This
       methodology will be developed as a priority in the improvement program’s data
       universe (Component 2) and will be analyzed in the impact assessment to be
       performed at the end of the program. Lastly, this program will design a technical
       study, including a diagnostic assessment and policy recommendations to
       facilitate women’s access to housing microfinance, with an intersectional
       approach (paragraph 1.20) (optional link 1).
C.     Key performance indicators
1.25   Outcome 1. The following indicators will be used to verify the achievement of
       results related to the specific objective of connecting housing supply and
       demand: (i) Housing units registered in the housing platform; (ii) Housing units
       registered in the housing platform with environmental information established;
       (iii) Families registered in the housing platform; and (iv) Heads of households
       registered in the housing platform with information on gender, disability, race,
       and ethnicity.
1.26   Outcome 2. The following indicators will be used to verify the achievement of
       results associated with the specific objective of developing and implementing a
       sustainable national microfinance program for home improvement that targets
       low-income families: (i) Number of microfinance guarantee contracts for home
       improvement signed; and (ii) Number of housing units with improvements
       completed.
1.27   Outcome 3. The following indicators will be used to verify the achievement of
       results related to the specific objective of strengthening the National Housing
       Plan and the National Housing Policy: (i) First cycle of PlanHab evaluated as
       successful; (ii) Percentage of professionals trained issuing the Annotation of
       Technical Responsibility (ART) and/or Technical Responsibility Register (RRT) of
       improvement works contracted with guarantees; and (iii) Percentage of
       subnational governments with executive staff that have received training in
       gender, diversity, environmental sustainability, and climate change.
1.28   The program’s impact indicator, associated with the operation’s general
       objective, is “Increase in property value after the interventions.”
1.29   The disbursement-linked indicators by component are as follows: (i) Number of
       families registered in the housing platform; (ii) Number of home improvement
       microfinance guarantee contracts signed; (iii) Mechanism for providing home
       improvement guarantees instituted in accordance with local legislation; (iv) First
       cycle of PlanHab 2040 evaluated as successful; and (v) Studies performed to
       support the reformulation of the National Housing Policy (Annex II).
1.30   Economic analysis. The ex ante economic analysis of the program indicates
       that, with an annual discount rate of 12% over a 10-year horizon: (i) the net
       present value of the program is US$21.4 million and its internal rate of return
                                                    - 17 -



          (IRR) is 36.7% considering the input-output matrix with a multiplier of 30% (this
          multiplier is conservative since in Brazil it is 46%); (ii) the leverage to be achieved
          by the guarantee will represent potential financing of US$415 million for
          152,000 home improvement projects; (iii) the sensitivity analysis shows that even
          if costs rise by more than 52%, the IRR would still remain viable; and
          (iv) similarly, if the program’s benefits are reduced by more than 33%, the
          program would still remain viable (with an IRR of 12%).
1.31      The program’s economic feasibility assessment (optional link 8) was prepared
          using an input-output matrix prepared by Fundação Getúlio Vargas, which
          estimated values of the Keynesian multiplier for the civil construction sector. This
          model was chosen because the program does not have a sample for evaluation.
          The cost considered is the total cost of the program, plus incremental costs.16 The
          loans issued for housing renovation will generate positive impacts on the growth of
          economic activity and productivity in the program’s area of influence. Based on the
          concept of attraction, public investment in private capital induces real private sector
          investment in the economy, triggering changes in potential GDP.

                           II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
              “ProMorar” CCLIP
2.1       Type and modality. The CCLIP will support elements of the National Housing
          Plan. In this first operation, the qualitative deficit will be addressed predominantly
          through home improvement. The operation is designed to allow for more than
          one executing agency, which is why the CCLIP will be structured under
          Multisector modality II (pursuant to documents GN-2246-13 and OP-1622-3). The
          liaison agency will be the International Affairs and Development Department of
          the Ministry of Planning and Budget (SEAID), which is empowered to perform
          this function.
2.2       Sectors. The CCLIP will address the following sectors: the provision of housing
          solutions (which may encompass construction, improvement, and regulatory or
          financial arrangements, among others, and may include ownership, rental,
          leasing, or other forms of housing such as retrofit, co-living, senior living, and
          innovations in housing solutions); neighborhood and habitat improvement (which
          may include infrastructure, risk management and disaster prevention, land
          regularization, housing improvement, among other issues); and sector
          strengthening (which may include data management, capacity building, and
          legal, institutional, and financial modernization, among other aspects).
2.3       The following crosscutting themes will be addressed: gender and diversity
          (assistance to populations with diverse profiles, creation of disaggregated sector-
          level data, specific incentives); climate change and environmental sustainability


16   The benefits were estimated assuming that the program’s investments to establish a loan guarantee fund
     for families—which will be channeled through the private credit and support systems development actions
     and technical training for management—will leverage private funding under conditions that are accessible
     to the low-income population.
                                                   - 18 -



      (urban densification, sustainable infrastructure, green construction); and
      digitalization (modernization of sector management, smart cities).
2.4   Institutional arrangements. The following are eligible as borrowers in individual
      loans or guarantees financed under the CCLIP: (i) the Federative Republic of
      Brazil; (ii) Brazilian states, municípios, and the Federal District; and (iii) public
      development banks (at the federal, regional, or state level) that onlend to third
      parties (e.g. subnational governments, firms, or individuals) for specific
      investments that contribute to habitat improvement in Brazil.
2.5   Amount and term. The CCLIP will have funds of up to US$600 million to be
      deployed over a 10-year availability period, through approximately five individual
      investment loan operations or guarantees that support investment projects, under
      the terms of documents GN-2246-13 and OP-1622-3. The timeframe of the
      CCLIP is justified since it aligns with the ten-year period of PlanHab; and the
      consolidation of an evidence-based policy model requires a medium-term vision
      that transcends government terms of office and incorporates an increasing
      number of subnational governments to achieve outcomes and impacts on a
      larger scale.
          The first individual operation under the “ProMorar Brasil” CCLIP
2.6   Modality, amount, and term. The first individual operation to be financed under
      the CCLIP will be an LBR with a five-year disbursement period. The program will
      cost U$54,555,925, of which U$54,055,925 will be financed by a loan from the
      Bank’s Ordinary Capital; and US$500,000 will be provided in local counterpart
      funding.

                                    Table 1. Estimated program costs (US$)

                      Component                              IDB        Local        Total       %
       Component 1: Housing supply and                      2,855,925           0    2,855,925    5.2
       demand management platform
       Component 2. Home improvement                    48,400,000              0   48,400,000   88.7
       financing program
       Component 3. Studies, tools, and capacity            2,400,000   500,000      2,900,000    5.3
       building for the revision of planning,
       promotion of socioenvironmental
       sustainability, and diversification of social
       housing programs
       Program administration and management                 400,000            0     400,000     0.7
       Total                                            54,055,925      500,000     54,555,925   100


2.7   Rationale for using the LBR instrument. The Loan Based on Results is the
      most appropriate instrument for carrying out this program, inasmuch as (i) it aims
      to support an existing government program (Moradia Digna decent housing
      program/PMCMV) in achieving results (Figure 6 and optional link 4), through the
      creation of structural tools integrated into national policy (rather than one-off
      investments). For example, with the HIG mechanism, LBR investments will
      leverage private funds and make it possible to extend coverage of the existing
      program (which today serves only 20% of the poorest households in each
                                                  - 19 -



          intervention polygon through subsidized improvement), by creating financing
          instruments that do not currently exist. The program will also (ii) promote the use
          of the executing agency’s fiduciary systems, validated through the Institutional
          Capacity Analysis Platform (ICAP), and thereby provide full management
          autonomy, since all outputs will persist beyond the program. Hence, the use of
          country systems makes it possible to guarantee the sustainability of results; and
          (iii) ensure an expeditious operation during the execution phase, based on
          achieving targets17 for pre-agreed upon indicators, with low transaction costs.
          The proposal meets the requirements for an LBR (document GN-2869-10) and
          those of the “Proposal to Establish the Bank’s Sovereign Guaranteed Loan
          Based on Results” (document GN-2869-3)

                    Figure 6. Introduction of the operation’s objectives (elements in orange)
                                 in the Federal National Policy (elements in blue)




              Source: SNH, 2023.

2.8       Disbursement schedule. The loan proceeds will be disbursed over a five-year
          period as shown in Table 2. The execution period is based on the estimated time
          needed to achieve the results proposed in the program and, in particular, owing
          to its innovative nature. An indicative analysis on the planning and itemized and
          specific cost of the outputs necessary to fulfill the outcomes is included in
          chapter 9 of optional link 3.




17
     Chapter 9 of optional link 3 shows how expenditures associated with midterm outputs and outcomes are
     planned, enabling the achievement of the final outcomes.
                                                        - 20 -



                                  Table 2. Tentative disbursement schedule (US$)

                Source      Year 118       Year 2            Year 3        Year 4      Year 5         Total
            IDB            23,800,000    16,600,000         7,100,000      5,870,925   685,00019    54,055,925
            Local             250,000               0            125,000    125,000             0     500,000
            Total          24,050,000    16,600,000         7,225,000      5,995,925    685,000     54,555,925
            %                    44.1           30.4                13.3        11.0         1.3          100


B.        Environmental and social risks
2.9       In accordance with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework, the
          operation is classified under the Financial Intermediation (FI) category because of
          its low socioenvironmental risk, inasmuch as the works supported by the
          program—through the microlending guarantee issued under Component 2—will
          have a maximum value of US$10,000. The program’s environmental and social
          management system is described in paragraph 4.2 of optional link 7. Financial
          intermediaries will provide guaranteed microloans to finance housing improvement
          projects with a Category “C” classification but will exclude projects classified as
          Category “A” and “B” under the Bank’s classification system. These eligibility
          criteria are presented in the program Operating Regulations (optional link 7).
C.        Fiduciary risks
2.10      The institutional capacity assessment of the National Housing Secretariat, which
          was conducted during program preparation, identified the following fiduciary
          risks: (i) if an adequate budget is not provided in the Annual Budget Law for the
          first year of implementation, the start of program activities could be delayed,
          thereby compromising the achievement of results and, consequently, the
          disbursement schedule. This risk is mitigated by proper coordination with the
          budget team; and (ii) if the executing agency is not strengthened in terms of its
          knowledge of the program’s specific financial issues, there could be delays in
          preparing financial reports and in collecting the data needed to prepare the
          audited annual financial statements. This risk is mitigated by appointing a full-
          time administrative-financial specialist for the program, who should be
          adequately trained in fiduciary matters; and the details of the financial
          requirements will be included in the program Operating Regulations.
D.        Other risks and key issues
2.11      In accordance with the Framework for Risk Management in Projects with
          Sovereign Guarantees (document OP-1519-5) and its guidelines (document
          OP-1699-3), the risks of the operation were analyzed, and the following medium-
          high and high-level risks were identified:
          a. If there is poor institutional coordination between the National Housing
             Secretariat and other entities, such as the Federal Savings Bank (CEF), FDS,

18   The amounts specified for the initial advance of funds and retroactive financing are included in the loan
     proceeds earmarked for disbursement in Year 1 of the program.
19
     The US$8 million advance is being deducted from this final disbursement. Although it is not a
     disbursement, the borrower must submit the independent verification report on the results.
                                         - 21 -



         and others involved in the implementation of Component 2, there could be
         delays in setting up the guarantee mechanism and in starting to issue
         microloans. This would cause delays in meeting the program’s disbursement
         targets. This risk is mitigated by approval of the FDS resolution by its board of
         trustees, which is currently under discussion at the highest levels of the
         National Housing Secretariat and CEF.
      b. If the HIG mechanism fails to attract financial agents, the pace and volume of
         operations could be less than estimated, which would have an impact on the
         program’s housing improvement objectives. This risk is mitigated by: (i) prior
         negotiations with the CEF, with the aim of including other agents and
         discussions with them to make sure that the guarantee mechanism
         envisaged in the program is attractive; (ii) the work under way to institute a
         legal framework for housing microfinance; and (iii) the search for affordable
         funding from sources such as the Length of Service Guarantee Fund (FGTS)
         and/or international funding.
      c. If there are few attractive conditions for financial agents (premiums and stop-
         loss level versus default and loss rates) and, as a result, the HIG mechanism
         does not have the expected cost, the latter may not be financially self-
         sustainable. Mitigation of this risk might involve government subsidies and/or
         the search for other domestic or international funding. This could include
         environmental funds, linking the improvements with energy efficiency
         components, for example.
      d. If the program management unit (PMU) is formed with a team that already
         has a heavy workload in other functions, there could be delays in fulfilling the
         terms of the loan contract, which could affect the program’s disbursement
         schedule. This risk is mitigated by the appointment of National Housing
         Secretariat professionals with high-level positions and functions in the PMU
         to ensure the level of decision-making that is crucial for proper execution of
         the program; and by the hiring of consultants, provided by the Bank, to
         support the management team of the National Housing Secretariat at the
         start of program execution.

                   III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1   Borrower and executing agency. For the first operation under the CCLIP, the
      borrower will be the Federative Republic of Brazil, and the executing agency will
      be the Ministry of Cities, acting through the National Housing Secretariat. The
      ICAP results show that the National Housing Secretariat has the requisite
      capacity to manage the actions to be carried out in the individual operation.
      Nonetheless, it was determined that the executing agency’s operational and
      fiduciary management capacity needs to be strengthened. To that end, a PMU
      will be created within the National Housing Secretariat structure, consisting of
      staff with high-level positions and functions (primarily in senior management and
      general coordination) to underpin the program’s decision-making level. The
      minimum positions are: (i) a general coordinator; (ii) three component
      coordinators; and (iii) an administrative and financial coordinator. Furthermore, to
                                                    - 22 -



          ensure efficient management, individual consultants with experience in
          international project implementation and management may be hired (see detailed
          description of the PMU in optional link 7).
3.2       Program execution, administration, and coordination mechanisms. The
          PMU will report directly to the Secretary of the National Housing Secretariat; it
          will be headed by a director or coordinator and Secretariat officials will be tasked
          with responsibility for the components. The PMU will be in charge of the following
          functions and tasks: maintaining formal communication with the Bank; preparing
          the operational planning documents; submitting progress reports and audited
          financial statements to the Bank; submitting disbursement requests to the Bank;
          and coordinating the management, evaluation, and supervision of the program’s
          activities and other implementation actions.
3.3       Operational issues for the implementation of Component 2. The
          HIG mechanism established in Component 2 does not necessitate the creation of
          a new fund. It will be hosted by the FDS, which already has legal authority to
          operate guarantee mechanisms for the housing sector. By law, the FDS is
          operated by the CEF, which will also serve as the operating agent of the
          HIG mechanism. Accordingly, the CEF will accredit the financial agents (e.g.,
          private or development banks, which could include the CEF itself as the financial
          agent,20 and cooperatives) capable of contracting the program’s guarantees. The
          latter will be associated with the home improvement microfinancing that these
          financial agents will provide to low-income families. The details of these
          implementation mechanisms are described in the program Operating Regulations
          (optional link 7).
3.4       Disbursements. The program provides for a total of five disbursement tranches,
          to be released during the program’s five-year disbursement period. Each
          disbursement will be made when fulfillment of the targets for each of the five
          indicators has been verified (Annex II, Results Matrix, Disbursement Indicators)
          by a firm or consultant designated as the independent verification agency (IVA).
          The IVA will: (i) issue a technical opinion on the accuracy, reliability, and
          consistency of the results data; and (ii) determine the value of the result
          indicators established in each disbursement tranche, performing the calculation
          in cases where there are no automatic independent reports. Each disbursement
          will be subject to this independent verification, pursuant to the Policies for the
          Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American
          Development Bank (document GN-2350-15).
3.5       The disbursement procedure will be as follows: (i) the PMU will prepare a
          progress report on program execution and the status of the results indicators to
          be used for disbursements, as mentioned in the previous paragraph; (ii) the PMU
          will submit that report for external verification of results by the IVA, which will
          analyze their fulfillment based on the protocols specified in the monitoring and
          evaluation plan (required link 1); (iii) the IVA will confirm achievement of the

20   Pursuant to local legislation and its bylaws, the CEF has an organizational structure that separates the
     management of funds established by the federal government (including the FDS fund, in which the
     guarantee mechanism supported by the program will operate) from the areas that carry out its regular
     banking operations.
                                          - 23 -



       results, according to the objectives mentioned in the previous paragraph and
       within the time frame agreed upon in its terms of reference; and (iv) once
       fulfillment of the disbursement results has been verified, the PMU will submit the
       corresponding disbursement request to the Bank. The Bank will disburse funds to
       the account indicated by the borrower, provided that the external verification
       calculates that the corresponding indicators are equal to or above the established
       target. If lower, disbursements may be made in proportion to the degree to which
       the target has been achieved. Undisbursed balances may be reprogrammed in
       subsequent disbursements.
3.6    Requirements to serve as independent verification agency. The contracted
       firm or professional will have experience in evaluating and monitoring projects,
       managing performance indicators, and assessing the reliability of their data
       sources and the methods used to produce them. The terms of reference for this
       contracting will be agreed upon previously with the Bank and the corresponding
       funds will be drawn either from the operation itself, from customer-support
       technical cooperation resources (operation ATN/OC-17800-BR, or later), or from
       the Bank’s supervision resources for the operation.
3.7    Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the
       loan. The following will be special contractual conditions precedent to the
       first disbursement of the loan: (i) the program management unit (PMU) will
       have been formally established; and (ii) the program Operating
       Regulations, previously agreed upon with the Bank, will have been
       approved.
3.8    Special contractual condition for execution. The following will be a special
       contractual condition for execution: an independent verification agency will have
       been engaged, pursuant to the terms of reference previously agreed upon with
       the Bank, within 180 days of the signature date of the loan contract.
3.9    Program Operating Regulations. The program Operating Regulations (optional
       link 7) provide the details of the operation’s execution strategy and include the
       following: (i) the program’s organizational arrangement; (ii) the functions of the
       PMU; (iii) the program’s coordination and execution mechanisms; (iv) the
       accountability, monitoring, and results evaluation arrangements; (v) guidelines for
       financial, auditing, and procurement processes; and (vi) the program’s
       socioenvironmental and integrity risk management.
3.10   Retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively finance, against the loan
       proceeds, up to US$5.4 million (10% of the loan amount) in expenses associated
       with the results attributable to the program, achieved by the executing agency
       between the project profile approval date (21 March 2022) and the loan eligibility
       date. The expenses in question must be eligible under the program and
       attributable to the achievement of the corresponding development results. The
       disbursement will be subject to independent verification. The fact that the
       executing agency endeavors to achieve certain program outcomes in advance is
                                                        - 24 -



          because they are necessary for the achievement of the other program
          outcomes.21
3.11      Initial disbursement. In the first disbursement tranche, the executing agency
          requested US$8 million from the Bank (14.8% of the proposed loan amount) to
          finance the program’s initial actions. These include setting up the guarantee fund,
          which requires a robust contribution of funds to demonstrate to the market a
          consistent flow of resources capable of meeting the demands presented, thus
          transmitting a sense of security in what is an innovative operation.
3.12      Audits. The program’s financial statements will be audited annually by the Office
          of the Comptroller General (CGU) or by an independent firm of external auditors
          acceptable to the Bank. The audited financial statements will be submitted to the
          Bank annually within 120 days following the executing agency’ fiscal year end,
          pursuant to procedures and terms of reference previously agreed upon with
          the Bank.
B.        Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.13      Monitoring. The Ministry of Cities will be responsible for data collection and
          results monitoring, which will be based on: (i) the results matrix (Annex II); (ii) the
          monitoring and evaluation plan (required link 1); (iii) the program risk
          management matrix (Annex I); (iv) semiannual progress reports, prepared by the
          PMU during the life of the program. The latter will consolidate progress for review
          by the Bank, to be submitted within 60 days after the end of each six-month
          period; and (v) the program’s audited financial statements.
3.14      Evaluation. The program will be evaluated against the results matrix and the
          monitoring and evaluation plan and will include the drafting of the program
          completion report (PCR). A final evaluation will be carried out covering technical,
          administrative, and financial aspects, as well as an ex post cost-benefit analysis.
          The final evaluation will be performed when at least 90% of the loan proceeds
          have been disbursed. Its objective will be to verify progress in achieving the
          targets set for each of the expected outcomes and in generating the outputs of
          each component. The final evaluation will also contain an ex post economic
          (cost-effectiveness) analysis and an impact analysis of the program. This will be
          performed using the difference-in-difference methodology, to identify the increase
          in market value of the properties benefited by the home improvement financing
          activities. For this purpose, a control group and a program group (with home
          improvement actions) will be created, forming statistically representative samples
          (required link 1).

                                          IV. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

4.1       CCLIP eligibility criteria. The CCLIP satisfies the eligibility requirements
          applicable to Multisector Modality II CCLIPs under policy GN-2246-13 and its
          operational guidelines (document OP-1622-3), since: (i) its objectives are among

21   It is important to note that several activities were already under way prior to eligibility, including thanks to
     the ongoing monitoring by the Bank’s team and the support of the technical cooperation operation
     ProMorar (ATN/OC-17800-BR).
                                         - 25 -



      the priorities defined in the IDB Group Country Strategy with Brazil 2019-2022
      (document GN-2973), in its fourth priority issue of reduc[ing] social inequality and
      inequality of opportunity by enhancing public policy efficiency, in particular
      implementing efficient policies to increase access to housing (paragraph 1.12);
      and (ii) the International Affairs and Development Department of the Ministry of
      Planning and Budget (SEAID) will act as the liaison agency responsible for
      coordinating and supervising the flow of operations of each sector of the CCLIP
      (paragraph 2.1).
4.2   Eligibility of the first individual operation under the CCLIP. The first
      operation satisfies the applicable requirements of policy GN-2246-13, since:
      (i) a comprehensive analysis of the institutional capacity of the executing agency,
      the Ministry of Cities/National Housing Secretariat, was performed using the
      ICAP, and it was found to have the necessary execution capacity but also areas
      for improvement and potential risks (paragraph 3.1); (ii) the operation’s objective
      contributes to achievement of the CCLIP’s sector objectives by promoting new
      strategies to address the housing deficit for low-income families
      (paragraph 1.15); (iii) the operation is included in the CCLIP’s three sectors
      (incentives for housing production, housing improvement, and sector
      strengthening/skills/digitalization) (paragraph 2.2); and (iv) it provides for
      improvement actions in the areas identified in the institutional capacity
      assessment (paragraph 3.1).
                                                                                                                                                                                     Annex I -BR-L1596
                                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 1




                                                                           Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                     Summary             BR-L1596
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Strategic Priorities and CRF Indicators

                                                                                                  -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                  -Productivity and Innovation
                                                                                                  -Gender Equality and Diversity
  Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Issues
                                                                                                  -Climate Change
                                                                                                  -Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law




                                                                                                  -Beneficiaries of targeted anti-poverty programs (#)
  CRF Level 2 Indicators: IDB Group Contributions to Development Results




2. Country Development Objectives


  Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                         GN-2973           Implement efficient policies to increase access to housing



                                                                                                                            The intervention is included in the 2023 Operational
  Country Program Results Matrix                                                                         GN-3154-1
                                                                                                                            Program.


   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                               Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                     10.0
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                  2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                                3.5
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                             4.0
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                                10.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                         1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                       3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                             2.5
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                               2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                    1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                9.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                              4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                    5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                          Low
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                   FI
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                            Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and
                                                                                                                            Reporting, External Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                   Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)             Yes
                                                                                                                            Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison,
                                                                                                                            Contracting Individual Consultant, National Public Bidding.



                                                                                 Non-Fiduciary              Yes             Monitoring and Evaluation National System.



The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:


Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                            Yes                                          BR-T1436
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




Evaluability Assessment Note: The general objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to new housing strategies and housing improvements in Brazil, focusing on low-income families
and contributing to accelerating economic development and reducing social inequalities in the country. The objective of the first program under the CCLIP is, from the federal
sphere, to allow public and private actors and civil society to develop new tools to facilitate and diversify access to social housing solutions. The specific objectives of the operation
are: (i) connecting housing supply and demand to facilitate access to adequate housing conditions; (ii) developing and implementing a sustainable National Housing Improvement
Microfinance Program for low-income families and thus reducing the qualitative housing deficit; (iii) strengthen the National Housing Plan and the National Housing Policy,
promoting socio-environmental sustainability as well as the training of subnational public government officials, engineers, technicians and the diversification of the Housing of
Social Interest programs.

The project presents a complete diagnosis, with a detailed description of the country's quantitative and qualitative housing deficit, the existing national strategies for the housing
sector, and the developing problem's determinants. The results matrix includes indicators measuring the achievement of the general and specific objectives. The indicators are
SMART and have means of verification.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through a cost-benefit analysis (CBA). The analysis concentrates on the benefits generated by the added value of investments
in housing. The CBA has reasonable assumptions and has an adequate sensitivity analysis. The project is economically viable, with an IRR of 36.7%, using a discount rate of 12%.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that aligns with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured using a differences-in-
differences approach for the impact indicator and a before and after methodology for the outcomes, and ex-post efficiency will be assessed using a CBA.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                      Page 1 of 7


                                                                                      RESULTS MATRIX


                                The specific objectives of the operation are to: (i) connect housing supply with demand, with the aim of expanding access to decent housing; (ii) develop and
                                implement a national microfinance program for sustainable home improvement, targeting low-income families with the aim of narrowing the qualitative
   PROGRAM OBJECTIVE:
                                (substandard) housing deficit; and (iii) strengthen the National Housing Plan and National Housing Policy by promoting socioenvironmental sustainability;
                                providing training to civil servants, engineers, and technicians at the subnational level; and diversifying social housing programs.



                                                                           GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

                                                                                         Expected year
                   Indicator                       Unit of measure        Baseline                               Target           Means of verification                    Comments
                                                                                           achieved
General development objective: From the federal level, to provide public, private, and civil society actors with new tools to facilitate and diversify access to social housing solutions,
and thus make obtaining a decent home more achievable.
Indicator 1          Increase in property              Percentage             0               2027                 10           Report of the field              At the start and end of the
                     values once the                increase in value                                                           investigation carried out by     program, field research will
                     interventions are                                                                                          the National Housing             be conducted using the
                     completed                                                                                                  Secretariat (SNH)                hedonic pricing methodology.


                                                                           SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                                                                                                                                           Disbursement
                            Unit of                                                                         End of         Means of
       Indicator                         Baseline     Year 1     Year 2    Year 3    Year 4      Year 5                                      indicator                    Comments
                           Measure                                                                         program        verification
                                                                                                                                              (yes/no)
SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 1. Connect housing supply with demand, with the aim of facilitating access to decent housing
Indicator 1.1. Housing         Units         0         1,000     90,000   150,000 180,000       194,000     615,000       System report          No
units registered in the
platform
Indicator 1.2. Housing         Units         0         7,000     25,000    40,000    50,000     30,000      152,000       System report          No            Environmental data defined as
units registered in the                                                                                                                                        those included in the green list
platform with                                                                                                                                                  developed for this operation
environmental data                                                                                                                                             (natural ventilation and lighting,
established                                                                                                                                                    efficient lighting, and water
                                                                                                                                                               saving devices).
Indicator 1.3. Families    Families          0           0       1,000    279,491 239,850       279,159     799,500       System report          Yes           This indicator represents the
registered in the                                                                                                                                              universe of families registered in
platform                                                                                                                                                       the platform.
                                                                                                                                                                      Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 7


                                                                                                                              Disbursement
                             Unit of                                                             End of      Means of
       Indicator                        Baseline   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                   indicator               Comments
                            Measure                                                             program     verification
                                                                                                                                 (yes/no)
Indicator 1.4. Heads of      Heads of      0       7,000    25,000   40,000   50,000   30,000   152,000    System report          No         Pro-gender -and pro-ethnicity
household registered in     household                                                                                                        indicator.
the platform, with                                                                                                                           This indicator registers a
information on gender,                                                                                                                       subuniverse of the previous
disability, race, and                                                                                                                        indicator, representing the total
ethnicity                                                                                                                                    number of families joining the
                                                                                                                                             new improvement program of
                                                                                                                                             Component 2. Importantly: (i) the
                                                                                                                                             data will be presented in
                                                                                                                                             disaggregated form, as the
                                                                                                                                             database allows this type of
                                                                                                                                             control (data will be available on
                                                                                                                                             individuals and it will also be
                                                                                                                                             possible to generate statistics on
                                                                                                                                             all family members); and (ii) the
                                                                                                                                             indicator will facilitate the
                                                                                                                                             production of national statistics,
                                                                                                                                             which will serve as input for
                                                                                                                                             formulating inclusive public
                                                                                                                                             housing policies, since it is linked
                                                                                                                                             to output indicator 3.5.
SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 2. Develop and implement a national microfinance program for sustainable home improvement, targeting low-income families with the aim of
narrowing the qualitative (substandard) housing deficit.
 Indicator 2.1. Number of    Number        0       7,000    25,000   40,000   50,000   30,000   152,000     Report for the        Yes        Disbursement indicator +
microfinance guarantee                                                                                     SNH issued by                     Corporate Results Framework
contracts for home                                                                                        Caixa Econômica                    (CRF) indicator 2.3. Beneficiaries
improvement signed                                                                                          Federal (CEF)                    of targeted anti-poverty programs
                                                                                                          (operating agent)                  (#)
Indicator 2.2. Housing        Units        0         0      5,000    15,000   30,000   55,000   105,000     Report for the        No         Improvement is understood to
units with improvements                                                                                    SNH issued by                     mean minor renovations to low-
completed                                                                                                     the CEF                        income housing that are intended
                                                                                                          (operating agent)                  to address problems related to
                                                                                                                                             substandard construction.
                                                                                                                                                                           Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 7


                                                                                                                                    Disbursement
                               Unit of                                                                End of      Means of
       Indicator                             Baseline   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                    indicator               Comments
                              Measure                                                                program     verification
                                                                                                                                       (yes/no)
SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 3. Strengthen the National Housing Plan and National Housing Policy by promoting socioenvironmental sustainability; providing training to
civil servants, engineers, and technicians at the subnational level; and diversifying social housing programs
Indicator 3.1. First cycle    Evaluation        0         0        0        0        0        1         1          PlanHab              Yes        Disbursement indicator.
of PlanHab 2040                                                                                                 monitoring and                     The evaluation will measure
evaluated as                                                                                                   evaluation system                   qualitative progress made on the
satisfactory                                                                                                         report                        plan’s implementation.
                                                                                                                                                   This indicator will consider
                                                                                                                                                   mainstreaming climate change.
 Indicator 3.2.              Number of         0%        0%      2.96%    5.92%    5.92%    4.94%    19.74%       Program               No
Percentage of trained        professional                                                                      management unit
professionals who            s registered/                                                                      (PMU) report
issued Technical             total
Responsibility               number
Annotation (ART)             trained
and/or Technical
Responsibility
Registration (RRT) for
improvement works
contracted with
guarantees
 Indicator 3.3.              Number of         0%        0%      15%      15%       0%       0%       30%      Certificate issued       No         Pro-gender and pro-ethnicity
Percentage of                subnational                                                                         by the SNH                        indicator.
subnational                  government                                                                                                            Certificates may be issued in
governments with             s with                                                                                                                collaboration with an academic
executive staff trained      trained                                                                                                               institution yet to be specified.
in gender, diversity,        executive
socioenvironmental           staff/ total
sustainability, and          subnational
climate change               government
                             s
                                                                                                                                                                                                Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 7


                                                                     DISBURSEMENT INDICATOR MATRIX (US$ thousands)
                                                          Year 1                             Year 2                  Year 3                 Year 4                  Year 5            End of program
                                   Base-      Initial
           Indicator
                                    line disbursement/      Target
                                                                     Associated
                                                                                Target
                                                                                       Associated
                                                                                                            Target
                                                                                                                       Associated
                                                                                                                                  Target
                                                                                                                                         Associated
                                                                                                                                                           Target
                                                                                                                                                                      Associated
                                                                                                                                                                                    Target
                                                                                                                                                                                              Associated
                                           retroactive                amount            amount                          amount            amount                       amount                  amount
                                             funding
Initial disbursement                0         8,0001         N/A           0         N/A              0      N/A              0      N/A             0       N/A             0        N/A        8,000
Indicator 1. Families registered    0            0             0           0        1,000        1,000     279,491       1,000     239,850       5702      279,159       2853       799,500      2,855
in the platform
Indicator 2. Number of              0            0          7,000       10,400      25,000       15,000     40,000       5,100     50,000       4,600      30,000            04     152,000     35,100
microfinance guarantee contracts
for home improvement signed
Indicator 3.5 Mechanism for         0          5,300           1           0          0               0       0               0       0              0        0              0         1         5,300
providing home improvement
guarantees instituted in
accordance with local
legislation
Indicator 4. First cycle of         0            0             0           0          0               0       0               0       0              0        1          400           1          400
PlanHab 2040 evaluated as
satisfactory
Indicator 5. Studies conducted      0          1007            1           0          2           600         1          1,000        1          700          0              0         5         2,400
to support reformulation of the
National Housing Policy6
Total associated amount8                      13,400                    10,400                   16,600                  7,100                  5,870                    685                    54,055


1    Initial disbursement. In the first disbursement tranche, the executing agency requested US$8 million from the Bank (14.8% of the proposed loan amount) to finance the program’s startup
     actions, i.e. setting up the guarantee fund, which will require robust funding, both to promote the guarantee operation itself and to demonstrate to the market a consistent flow of resources
     to meet the demands as presented, thus transmitting a sense of security in what is an innovative operation. These funds will be disbursed when the loan contract is signed.
2    The complete amount is US$570,925.00.
3    The US$200,000 advance is being deducted from this final disbursement. Although it is not a disbursement, the borrower must submit the independent verification report on the results.
4    The US$7.8 million advance is being deducted from this last disbursement. Although it is not a disbursement, the borrower must submit the independent results verification report.
5    According to the policy instrument for loans based on results (LBR), the disbursement indicators may also include output indicators linked to the strengthening of country systems,
     planning, and monitoring capacity if they are associated with the overall achievement of the expected results. As this is an institutional strengthening indicator (linked to an outcome:
     specific objective 2, indicator 2), it can be considered a disbursement indicator.
6    This indicator also relates to institutional strengthening. Therefore, although it is an output indicator, it is also a disbursement indicator. It is an institutional prerequisite for achieving the
     results of indicator 4.
7    Financing of previous results (retroactive financing). Outcomes achieved earlier may also be financed in the Loan Based on Results (LBR) instrument, as set forth in the Proposal to
     Establish the Bank’s Sovereign Guaranteed Loan Based on Results (document GN-2869-1). Some outcomes may need to have been achieved before an LBR operation is approved,
     such as the establishment of systems to calculate baselines, monitoring and evaluation arrangements, and outcomes related to the institutional capacity building needed for
     implementation. In such cases, the Bank may finance and disburse on the basis of disbursement-linked results indicators (DLIs) achieved prior to LBR project eligibility. The total amount
     of such financing will not exceed 15% of the Bank’s financing.
8    The amounts shown in this table correspond to financing by the Bank. In addition, there is counterpart funding of US$500,000, wholly associated with Indicator 5.
                                                                                                                                                                                       Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 7


                                                                     DISBURSEMENT INDICATOR VERIFICATION PROTOCOL
                                    Definition/estimation
        Indicator                                                       Means of verification              Verifying entity                          Verification protocol
                                        methodology
Initial disbursement          The funding provided as an initial     Signature and eligibility of   N/A                          N/A
                              disbursement is intended to help       the operation
                              the executing agency launch the
                              activities needed to achieve the
                              agreed-upon results.
Indicator 1. Families         Consists of the number of              System report                  Consultant or verification   The system verification report enables the executing agency
registered in the             families registered in the platform                                   agency                       to count the number of families that are registered in the
platform                      during the program execution                                                                       platform.
                              period
Indicator 2. Number of        Consists of the number of              Report issued by the CEF       Consultant or verification   Operating agent collects data on the number of
microfinance guarantee        microfinance guarantee contracts       (operating agent) for SNH      agency                       microfinance guarantee contracts for housing improvements
contracts for home            for home improvement signed by                                                                     and prepares a report that is sent to the SNH. In turn, the
improvement signed            borrowers                                                                                          SNH validates the report sent against the amount of funding
                                                                                                                                 made available, and an external agent (external consultant
                                                                                                                                 or consulting firm) audits this.
Indicator 3. Mechanism        Consists of the institutionalization   Resolution of the FDS          Consultant or verification   Verification of the legal instrument that creates the
for providing home            of the home Improvement                board of trustees published    agency                       HIG guarantee mechanism
improvement                   guarantees (HIG) mechanism, as         in the Brazilian Official
guarantees instituted in      approved by the board of trustees      Gazette
accordance with local         of the Social Development Fund
legislation                   (FDS). It is the instrument that
                              legally creates the HIG
                              mechanism.
Indicator 4. First cycle of   PlanHab establishes evaluation         PlanHab monitoring and         Consultant or verification   The verification will be conducted relative to the PlanHab
the National Housing          cycles for each cycle of the new       evaluation system report       agency                       monitoring and evaluation system report.
Plan, PlanHab 2040,           multiyear plan (PPA). It the first                                                                 The evaluation will be qualitative, considering whether
evaluated as                  evaluation cycle to be carried out                                                                 progress is being made according to the plan and whether
satisfactory                  in conjunction with the PPA.                                                                       the studies and projects planned to date have been
                                                                                                                                 implemented.
                                                                                                                                 The evaluation will use a metric measurement methodology
                                                                                                                                 with at least four categories: excellent, satisfactory, regular,
                                                                                                                                 unsatisfactory. The aim is to evaluate the qualitative
                                                                                                                                 progress of the plan’s implementation.
Indicator 5. Studies          PlanHab is the main planning           Reports submitted/             Consultant or verification   The verification will take place following the federal
conducted to support          instrument of the federal              Technical notes approving      agency                       government’s approval of the National Housing Plan
reformulation of the          government’s National Housing          the reports                                                 Studies ( PlanHab 2040).
National Housing Policy       Policy. Sector-level studies will
                              inform its general guidelines.
                                                                                                                                                                         Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 7


                                                                                      OUTPUTS

                                                           Unit of         Baseline                     Year
                       Outputs                                                                                           Target                Means of verification
                                                          measure        Value   Year    1       2        3     4   5
COMPONENT 1. Housing supply and demand management platform
1.1. Business intelligence solution implemented            Solution              2022    0       1        1     1   0       3      Document issued by the SNH indicating
                                                                                                                                   definitive acceptance of the service/process
1.2. Platform governance plan                                Plan                2022    1       0        0     0   0       1      Document issued by the SNH indicating
                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                   definitive acceptance of the service/process
1.3. Services of the housing supply and demand            Number of              2022    0       2        5     5   0      12      Document issued by the SNH indicating
     management system (platform) implemented              services                                                                definitive acceptance of the service/process
COMPONENT 2. HOME IMPROVEMENT FINANCING PROGRAM
2.1. Home improvement governance system                    System         0      2022    1       0        0     0   0       1      Document issued by the SNH indicating
     implemented                                                                                                                   definitive acceptance of the service/process
2.2. Mechanism providing home improvement                Mechanisms       0      2022    1       0        0     0   0       1      Decision of the FDS board of trustees
     guarantees instituted in accordance with local                                                                                published in the Brazilian Official Gazette
     legislation (disbursement indicator)
2.3. Financial agents operating in the program            Number of       0      2022    0       0        0     0   1       1      Report issued by the CEF (operating agent)
     established                                           agents
2.4. Creation of a system of statistics on green home      System         0      2022    1       0        0     0   0       1      Document issued by the SNH indicating
     improvement (with environmental impact and                                                                                    definitive acceptance of the service/process
     climate change attributes)
COMPONENT 3. Studies, tools, and capacity building for the review of planning, promotion of socioenvironmental sustainability, and diversification of social housing programs
3.1. Studies conducted to support reformulation of the       Plan         0      2022    1       1        2     1   0       5      Reports submitted/technical notes of
     National Housing Policy (disbursement indicator)                                                                              approval of the reports issued by the SNH
3.2. Architecture and engineering professionals           Number of       0      2022    0      1,520   1,520   0   0     3,040    Reports submitted/technical notes of
     trained in home improvements with                   professionals                                                             approval of the reports issued by the SNH
     socioenvironmental and climate sustainability
     attributes
3.3. Public agents trained in socioenvironmental          Number of       0      2022    0      1,000   1,000   0   0     2,000    Accreditations issued by the SNH
     sustainability and climate change issues              agents
     employed in housing policy
3.4. Public agents with training in the gender and        Number of       0      2022    0      1,000   1,000   0   0     2,000    Accreditations issued by the SNH
     diversity issues covered in housing policy            agents
3.5. Technical study with diagnostic assessment and         Study         0      2022    0       0        0     1   0       1      Reports submitted/technical notes of approval
     policy proposal and recommendations to facilitate                                                                             of the reports issued by the SNH
     women’s access to housing microfinance, with an
     intersectional approach
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 7


                                                                                          PROGRAM OVERVIEW
                                                                      Outcome indicator 1.1. Housing units                                Output indicator 1.1. Business intelligence solution
                                                                      registered in the housing platform                                  implemented
                                                                      Outcome indicator 1.2. Housing units                                Output indicator 1.2. Platform governance plan
                                                                      registered in the housing platform with
                                        Specific development          environmental information established
                                                                                                                    Component 1.
                                        objective 1. Connect
                                                                                                                    Housing supply and
                                        housing supply with           Outcome indicator 1.3. Families                                     Output indicator 1.3. Services of the housing supply and
                                                                                                                    demand
                                        demand, with the aim of       registered in the housing platform                                  demand management system (housing platform) implemented
                                                                                                                    management
                                        facilitating access to        (disbursement indicator)                      platform
                                        decent housing
                                                                      Outcome indicator 1.4. Heads of
                                                                      household registered in the housing
                                                                      platform with information on gender,
                                                                      disability, race, and ethnicity (pro-gender
                                                                      and pro-ethnicity indicator)
General                                                               Outcome indicator 2.1. Number of                                    Output indicator 2.1. Housing improvement governance
Development                             Specific development
                                                                      microfinance guarantee contracts for                                system implemented
Objective: From                         objective 2. Develop
                                                                      housing improvement signed
the federal level, to                   and implement a                                                                                   Output indicator 2.2. Mechanism providing home improvement
                                                                      (Disbursement indicator + CRF
provide public,         Impact          national microfinance                                                                             guarantees instituted in accordance with local legislation
                                                                      indicator 2.3: Beneficiaries of targeted
private, and civil      indicator:      program for sustainable                                                     Component 2.          (disbursement indicator)
                                                                      anti-poverty programs
society actors with     Increase in     home improvement,                                                           Home improvement
new tools to            property        targeting low-income          Outcome indicator 2.2. Housing units          financing program     Output indicator 2.3. Financial agents operating in the program
facilitate and          values after    families with the aim of      with improvements completed                                         established
diversify access to     interventions   narrowing the qualitative                                                                         Output indicator 2.4. Creation of a system of statistics on
social housing          completed.      (substandard) housing                                                                             green home improvement (with environmental impact and
solutions, and thus                     deficit                                                                                           climate change attributes)
make obtaining a
decent home more                                                      Outcome indicator 3.1. First cycle of                               Output indicator 3.1. Studies conducted to support the
achievable                                                            PlanHab 2040 evaluated as satisfactory                              reformulation of the National Housing Policy (Disbursement
                                        Specific development          (disbursement indicator)                                            indicator)
                                        objective 3. Strengthen
                                                                      Outcome indicator 3.2. Percentage of          Component 3.          Output indicator 3.2. Architecture and engineering
                                        the National Housing
                                                                      trained professionals who issued              Studies, tools, and   professionals trained in home improvements with socio-
                                        Plan and National
                                                                      Technical Responsibility Annotation           capacity              environmental and climate sustainability attributes
                                        Housing Policy by
                                                                      (ART) and/or Technical Responsibility         development for the
                                        promoting                                                                                         Output indicator 3.3. Public agents with training in
                                                                      Registration (RRT) for improvement            review of planning,
                                        socioenvironmental                                                                                socioenvironmental sustainability and climate change issues
                                                                      works contracted with guarantees              promotion of
                                        sustainability; providing                                                                         employed in housing policy
                                                                                                                    socioenvironmental
                                        training to civil servants,   Outcome indicator 3.3. Percentage of                                Output indicator 3.4. Public agents with training in gender and
                                                                                                                    sustainability, and
                                        engineers, and                subnational governments with executive                              diversity issues employed in housing policy (Pro-gender and
                                                                                                                    diversification of
                                        technicians at the            staff trained in gender, diversity,           social housing        Pro-ethnicity indicator)
                                        subnational level; and        socioenvironmental sustainability and         programs
                                        diversifying social                                                                               Output indicator 3.5. Technical study with diagnostic
                                                                      climate change (pro-gender and
                                        housing programs                                                                                  assessment and policy proposal and recommendations to
                                                                      pro-ethnicity indicator)
                                                                                                                                          facilitate women’s access to housing microfinance with an
                                                                                                                                          intersectional approach
                                                                                             Annex III
                                                                                           Page 1 of 4



                        FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS


Country: Brazil    Division: HUD        Operation number: BR-O0014; BR-L1596            Year: 2023

Executing agency: Ministry of Cities through the National Housing Secretariat
Project name: Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) “ProMorar” (BR-O0014);
and First Individual Operation under the CCLIP “ProMorar Brasil – Promoting New Housing
Strategies for the Low Income Population” (BR-L1596).

                       I. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1. Use of country systems in the operation. Any system or subsystem that is subsequently
   approved may be applicable to the operation, pursuant to the terms of the Bank’s validation.

    Budget             Reporting              Information system              National competitive
                                                                              bidding (NCB)
    Treasury           Internal audit         Shopping                        Other
    Accounting         External control       Individual consultants          Other

2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

     Specific       This is the first operation structured as a Loan Based on results (LBR) under
     features of    the “ProMorar” CCLIP (operation BR-O0014), in which the borrower will be
     fiduciary      the Federative Republic of Brazil. The Ministry of Cities (MCID) will execute
     execution      the program through the National Housing Secretariat (SNH), which will be
                    responsible for the program’s financial management and procurement,
                    disbursements, records, and financial statements. To manage program
                    disbursements, the executing agency will prepare a program execution
                    status report and results indicators to be used for disbursements. The
                    executing agency will submit the report for external results verification, in
                    order to analyze their fulfillment, based on the protocols established in the
                    program Operating Regulations. An independent external evaluator will verify
                    achievement of the results against the established objectives and within the
                    time frame specified in the terms of reference agreed upon with the Bank for
                    that purpose. Once achievement of the disbursement results has been
                    verified, the executing agency will submit the corresponding disbursement
                    request to the Bank, which will then reimburse expenses by depositing funds
                    in a subaccount of the Treasury Single Account (TSA), designated by the
                    National Treasury Secretariat. The Bank will disburse the amount
                    corresponding to each indicator, provided that the result of the external
                    verification shows that the level of the indicator is equal to or higher than the
                    established target. If lower, the Bank may make a partial disbursement in
                    proportion to the degree of achievement of the target. Unused balances may
                    be reprogrammed in subsequent disbursements.
                                                                                       Annex III
                                                                                     Page 2 of 4


3. Fiduciary capacity

 Fiduciary         Pursuant to policy GN-2869-1, the Bank used the Institutional Capacity
 capacity of the   Analysis Platform (ICAP) to assess the executing agency’s fiduciary
 executing         capacity, which was found to be satisfactory. The executing agency has
 agency            developed fiduciary systems in place that are sufficient to monitor program
                   execution and ensure that the expected results are achieved. Accordingly,
                   the fiduciary risk is low. Nonetheless, actions to ensure adequate internal
                   control of the program will be specified in the program Operating
                   Regulations.

4. Fiduciary risks and risk response

 Risk taxonomy                    Risk                  Risk level      Response to risk
 Economic and       In an LBR, the executing agency Medium-low       Timely coordination with
 financial          must have sufficient cash flow to                personnel responsible
                    cover the expenditures needed to                 for the MCID budget
                    achieve the program’s intended
                    results. Without adequate
                    financial planning underpinned
                    by a timely and sufficient annual
                    budget allocation, the
                    achievement of results and the
                    flow of disbursements may be
                    delayed.
 Organizational     Lack of knowledge of the Bank’s    Medium-low    Provision of assistance
 structure          fiduciary management                             and training, on Bank
                    requirements may result in                       policies and procedures,
                    delays in the preparation of                     to fiduciary professionals
                    financial reports.                               in the program
                                                                     management unit
                                                                     (PMU). In addition,
                                                                     inclusion of the detailed
                                                                     financial requirements in
                                                                     the program Operating
                                                                     Regulations.

5. Policies and Guidelines applicable to the operation: The Financial Management Guidelines
   for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-12) will be used for the program’s financial
   management.

6. Exceptions to Policies and Guidelines: Not applicable.
                                                                                               Annex III
                                                                                             Page 3 of 4


           II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

 Special conditions precedent to the first disbursement: (i) creation of the program Management
 unit (PMU) by the Minister of MCID; and (ii) approval of the draft program Operating Regulations,
 previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.7).
 Exchange rate: For purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties agree that
 the applicable exchange rate will be the one indicated in paragraph (b)(ii) of that article.
 Accordingly, the agreed-upon exchange rate will be the rate in force on the date on which the
 borrower, the executing agency, or any other person or legal entity in whom the power to incur
 expenditures has been vested, makes the related payments to the contractor, supplier, or
 beneficiary.
 Type of audit: Audited financial statements will be submitted within 120 days of each fiscal year-
 end, and during the loan disbursement period. The final report will be submitted within 120 days
 following the date of the final disbursement, and will include an analysis of any differences between
 actual program costs and the amounts disbursed. The terms of reference will be agreed upon with
 the Bank; and the audit will be performed by the Office of the Comptroller General (CGU).
 Retroactive financing: Up to US$5.4 million (equivalent to 10% of the loan amount) may be used
 to finance expenses in respect of outcomes already achieved through actions undertaken in the
 period between the project profile approval date (21 March 2022) and the loan approval date.

               III. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

      Special procurement       The program plans to execute very few, low-value procurement
      provisions applicable     processes, for which the country methods and recommendations
      to the operation          included in the program Operating Regulations will be applied.

Main procurement items

 Description of the       Selection        New procedures/           Estimated        Estimated
   procurement             method               tools                  date          amount (US$)
 Goods
 Works
 Nonconsulting
 services
 Firms
 Individuals


 Procedures                                 Rationale for use
                                                                                           Annex III
                                                                                         Page 4 of 4


              IV. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Programming       The executing agency budget is included in the budget of the MCID, and
and budgeting     therefore forms part of the federal government budget. The MCID, through the
                  SNH, is responsible for coordinating the entire planning process for the
                  execution of activities. It will ensure that program funding is duly budgeted in
                  the Annual Budget Law and registered in the federal government’s integrated
                  financial management system (SIAFI), the official federal budget management
                  and control system.
Treasury and      For program execution, the executing agency will draw on funds from the fiscal
disbursement      contribution, after which reimbursement will be managed on the basis of the
management        program disbursement matrix, following the independent verification of results
                  achieved. The loan proceeds will be deposited in the Single Treasury Account
                  of the Union, and payments arising from program execution will be made
                  through the same single account. For these purposes, the accounting system
                  must be able to track income and expenditures. When submitting disbursement
                  requests, the executing agency will not be required to justify expenses or
                  provide supporting documentation for expenditures incurred to achieve the
                  results. However, it must keep such documentation on file as part of appropriate
                  administrative, internal control, procurement, and accounting systems to
                  ensure timely issuance of program financial statements, which will be audited
                  annually by the CGU. Disbursements will be made in U.S. dollars, under the
                  expenditure reimbursement modality. The executing agency may request an
                  initial disbursement of up to 15% of the loan amount to finance activities and
                  outputs that are justified as necessary to achieve the results. The exchange
                  rate to be used in the operation will be the one prevailing on the date of payment
                  of each expenditure in local currency. The executing agency will use the Online
                  Disbursement platform to manage disbursements with the Bank.
Accounting,       The program will have a chart of accounts, based on the public sector chart of
information       accounts, in which all activities, whether financed from the local contribution or
systems, and      from the loan proceeds, are recorded in SIAFI, under the transactional unit for
reporting         operations with international organizations. Inasmuch as the program’s income
                  and expenses must be accounted for, a specific budgetary program may be
                  opened. The program Operating Regulations, with the documented definition
                  of workflows and internal controls, will be used to supplement the policies and
                  guidelines applicable to the operation.
External          The program’s external audit will be performed by the CGU, which is eligible to
control and       audit Bank-financed operations, under terms of reference previously agreed
financial         upon between the borrower and/or executing agency and the Bank.
reporting         The external audit report will be submitted within 120 days of each fiscal year-
                  end, and during the loan disbursement period. The final report will be submitted
                  within 120 days following the date of the final loan disbursement, and will
                  include an analysis of any differences between actual program costs and
                  amounts disbursed.
Financial         The financial supervision plan will be based on the risk and fiduciary capacity
supervision of    assessments made of the executing agency. It will include both on-site
the operation     supervision visits and desk audits, and monitoring of the results and
                  recommendations made in audits of the program’s annual financial statements.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/23



     Brazil. Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) ProMorar (BR-O0014)


        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        1.   To authorize the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall
designate, to enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the
Federative Republic of Brazil, to establish the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects
(CCLIP) ProMorar (BR-O0014) (the “Line”) for an amount of up to US$600,000,000, chargeable
to the resources of the Ordinary Capital of the Bank.

        2.   To establish that the resources allocated to the Line shall be used to finance
individual operations under the Line, in accordance with: (a) the objectives and regulations of
the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects approved by Resolution DE-58/03, as
amended by Resolutions DE-10/07, DE-164/07, DE-86/16 and DE-98/19; (b) the provisions set
forth in documents GN-2564-3 and GN-2246-13; and (c) the terms and conditions included in
the proposal for the corresponding individual operation.



                                 (Adopted on __ __________ 2023)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZIDB0000366-620307903-42785
BR-O0014
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/23



  Brasil. Loan ____/OC-CH to the Federative Republic of Brasil. ProMorar Brasil – Promoting
        New Housing Strategies in Brazil for the Low-Income Population. First Individual
                  Operation under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment
                           Projects (CCLIP) ProMorar (BR-O0014)



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary
with the Republic of Chile, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing to cooperate in the
execution of the ProMorar Brasil – Promoting New Housing Strategies in Brazil for the Low-Income
Population, which constitutes the first individual operation under the Conditional Credit Line for
Investment Projects (CCLIP) ProMorar (BR-O0014), approved on __ ______2023 by Resolution
DE-__/23. Such financing will be for an amount of up to US$54.055.925 from the Ordinary Capital
resources of the Bank, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special
Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                                (Adopted on ___ __________ 2023)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZIDB0000366-620307903-42784
BR-L1596
