                                                                                      PUBLIC


                  DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                          ECUADOR




               HOUSING SOLUTIONS FOR POOR AND VULNERABLE HOUSEHOLD
                                    (EC-L1245)

       FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR
       INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP): CASA PARA TODOS SECTOR PROGRAM
                                         (EC-O0004)



                      PROPOSED MODIFICATION OF LOAN CONTRACT
                                 (4788/OC-EC)




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Nora Libertun de Duren, Project
Team Leader; Beatriz González and María Elena Acosta (CSD/HUD); Karina Calahorrano
(CAN/CEC); Ana Cuesta (SPD/SDV); and Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO).


Under the Access to Information Policy, this document is subject to public disclosure.
                                                     CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY


I.     BACKGROUND ........................................................................................................ 1

       A.     Document purpose and background ............................................................. 1
       B.     Progress of components ............................................................................... 2
       C.     Borrower’s request ....................................................................................... 3
       D.     Rationale for the proposed changes ............................................................. 3
       E.     Strategic alignment ....................................................................................... 5

II.    DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED MODIFICATIONS ..................................................... 6

       A.     Objective of the CCLIP ................................................................................. 6
       B.     Components and their modification .............................................................. 6
       C.     Costs and sources of financing ..................................................................... 7
       D.     Results Matrix............................................................................................... 8
       E.     Environmental and social risks ..................................................................... 8
       F.     Fiduciary risks .............................................................................................. 9
       G.     Implementation arrangements. ..................................................................... 9
       H.     Program evaluations..................................................................................... 9

III.   RECOMMENDATION ................................................................................................. 9




                                                    APPENDIXES


Proposed resolution
                                                 - ii -



                                              ANNEXES
Annex I       Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix
Annex II      Results Matrix


                                   UPDATED ELECTRONIC LINKS
REQUIRED

1. Approved loan proposal
2. Loan contract
3. First disbursement report
4. Beneficiary social monitoring report
5. Request for modification from the executing agency
6. Request for modification from the borrower
7. Component 1 demand report
8. Component 2 demand report
9. Memorandum of constitution of trust
10. Annual work plan
11. Monitoring and evaluation plan
12. Program Operating Regulations
13. Recalculation of climate financing
14. Ministerial Resolution 001
15. Ministerial Resolution 010-19
16. Program monitoring report
                                   - iii -



                             ABBREVIATIONS


AFD       Agence Française de Développement [French Development Agency]
CCLIP     Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects
ENEMDU    Encuesta Nacional de Empleo, Desempleo y Subempleo [National
          Survey of Employment, Unemployment, and Underemployment]
INEC      Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas y Censos [National Statistics and
          Census Institute]
MEF       Ministry of the Economy and Finance
MIDUVI    Ministry of Urban Development and Housing
SBU       Salario Básico Unificado [Unified basic wage]
SIIDUVI   Sistema Integral de Información de Desarrollo Urbano y Vivienda
          [Integrated Urban Development and Housing Information System]
SIV       Sistema de Incentivos para Vivienda [Housing incentives system]
SRI       Servicio de Rentas Internas [Internal Revenue Service]
VAT       Value added tax
                                              I. BACKGROUND

A.        Document purpose and background
1.1       The purpose of this document is to request that the Board of Executive Directors of
          the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) approve the contractual modifications
          requested by the Government of Ecuador to the Loan Contract (link 2) for the first
          individual operation: “Housing Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable Households”
          (EC-L1245; 4788/OC-EC), under the conditional credit line for investment projects
          (CCLIP): “Casa Para Todos Sector Program” (EC-O0004). These modifications
          are set forth in paragraphs 1.10 and 1.14.
1.2       Background. On 22 May 2019, through Resolutions DE-36/19 and DE-37/19, the
          Board of Executive Directors approved the CCLIP: “Casa Para Todos Sector
          Program” for up to US$200 million from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, together with
          the first individual operation under the CCLIP for US$93.9 million (link 1). To this
          amount was added parallel cofinancing from the Agence Française de
          Développement (AFD) of US$80 million1 and a US$708,000 local counterpart
          contribution, such that the program total came to US$174.6 million. Loan Contract
          4788/OC-EC (link 2) was signed on 12 July 2019 and declared eligible for
          disbursements on 5 September 2019.2
1.3       The CCLIP’s general objectives are to: (i) improve access for Ecuadorian
          households living in a situation of poverty or vulnerability and without adequate
          housing, to affordable, sustainable, and universally accessible housing; and
          (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Government of Ecuador to generate and
          implement long-term housing policies. The specific objectives of the first operation
          (EC-L1245; 4788/OC-EC) are to: (i) reduce the quantitative housing deficit among
          rural households in the country’s two lowest income quintiles, prioritizing those with
          specific vulnerability indicators;3 (ii) reduce the quantitative housing deficit among
          households in urban areas in the first, second, and third quintiles, with household
          incomes of up to twice the unified basic wage (SBU); and (iii) optimize the
          MIDUVI’s institutional processes.
1.4       The executing agency is the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing
          (MIDUVI), which has extensive experience implementing a system of housing
          incentives (SIV) in Ecuador. The SIV involves paying direct cash subsidies to poor

1    Operation with parallel IDB-AFD cofinancing. Partnership Framework Agreement signed on 11 October
     2018 and Parallel Cofinancing Agreement with Services signed on 11 November 2019, agreeing the
     provision of services regarding funds provided by the AFD for the common components of Component 1
     and Component 2, which are governed by the same program Operating Regulations. On 22 November
     2019, the AFD signed Loan Contract CEC 1031 01 U, targeting smaller value resources on shared
     components, going from US$80 million to US$54 million. The results matrix (from the original version
     and the present proposed modification) only considers results stemming from Bank financing, i.e. they
     do not include the results stemming from the parallel cofinancing with services of the AFD.
2    Eligibility declaration issued for the operation, with the exception of Component 2, until the Ministry of the
     Economy and Finance (MEF) and Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI) define the
     execution arrangements for the trust managing these resources. IDB communication
     CAN/CEC-1072/2019 of 5 September 2019.
3    Both the original proposal and the current proposed modification consider households with specific
     vulnerability indicators to be those with: older adults, three or more minors, headed by women,
     individuals with disabilities, victims of domestic or sexual violence, afro-Ecuadorians or members of
     indigenous or Montubio peoples.
                                                  -2-




          households facing a housing deficit to help them gain access to adequate housing.
          Since its creation in 1997, the SIV has supported housing solutions for over 30,000
          low-income households. Since 2012, the MIDUVI’s policies have contributed to a
          reduction of nearly 11 percentage points4 in the housing deficit, with the support of
          the IDB through two successfully executed previous operations (the National
          Program for Social Housing Infrastructure (2279/OC-EC) and the National Social
          Housing Program Stage II (2797/OC-EC)).
1.5       The first individual operation comprises three components, together with an item
          for other expenses:
          a. Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of new housing on own
             land in rural and urban areas (IDB: US$44 million). This component will
             finance direct monetary subsidies to family units living in conditions of
             extreme and moderate poverty. The amount of the subsidy will be up to 41.12
             times the SBU (US$16,201).5 Financing will be provided for the construction
             of sustainable and universally accessible housing on the beneficiary’s own
             land.
          b. Component 2. Partial subsidies for the purchase of urban housing (IDB:
             US$44 million). This component will finance direct monetary subsidies to
             households living in poverty or moderate poverty. The value of the subsidy
             will be US$6,000, and in conjunction with credits from the financial or
             cooperative sector and/or household savings, this will enable the
             beneficiaries to purchase a sustainable, universally accessible home for a
             value of 57.57 to 101.52 times the SBU (US$22,680 to US$40,000).
          c. Component 3. MIDUVI strengthening (IDB: US$3.9 million). This
             component will finance technical and technological improvements in the
             Integrated Urban Development and Housing Information System (SIIDUVI).
          d. Other expenses (IDB: US$2 million). This includes evaluation and
             monitoring costs, as well as administration, and contingencies.
1.6       The first individual operation prioritizes allocation by specific vulnerability indicators
          to households with older adults, three or more minors, headed by women,
          including individuals with disabilities, victims of domestic or sexual violence,
          afro-Ecuadorians or members of indigenous or Montubio peoples. Additionally, at
          least 6% of total program subsidies will be awarded to households including
          individuals with disabilities and at least 22% will benefit women heads of
          household, under criteria set out in the program Operating Regulations (link 12).6
B.        Progress of components
1.7       Execution of the first individual operation has so far been satisfactory. Since
          signing the loan contract on 12 July 2019, the executing agency has met all the
          conditions precedent. The operation was declared eligible for disbursements on


4    IDB sector diagnostic assessment.
5    This equivalence is approximate and may vary over time.
6    Program Operating Regulations (link 12) through Ministerial Resolution 010-2019 of 4 September 2019
     (link 15).
                                                -3-




         5 September 2019, enabling a first disbursement of US$40 million on 9 September
         2019.
1.8      The Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI) has now managed to
         commit US$34.4 million for Component 1, representing over 78% of the total
         amount under this component, and 86% of the first disbursement.7 This committed
         value will enable the MIDUVI to serve 2,361 families, 32% of which are households
         headed by women, and 16.5% of which include an individual with a disability
         (link 4). This resource allocation complies with the eligibility guidelines established
         in the program Operating Regulations and exceeds the program’s targeting goals
         (see paragraph 1.6). Components 2 – Partial subsidies for the purchase of urban
         housing and 3 – Strengthening of the MIDUVI, will be executed starting 2020 in
         accordance with the annual work plan (link 10).
C.       Borrower’s request
1.9      By official letter MIDUVI-MIDUVI-2019-0793-O (link 5) dated 25 September 2019,
         the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI) requested that the
         Ministry of the Economy and Finance (MEF) process a modification to the scope of
         Components 1 and 2 of the loan contract with the IDB. On 21 November 2019, by
         official letter MEF MINFIN-2019-0340-O (link 6), the MEF, representing the
         borrower, submitted the formal application to the Bank for the indicated
         modifications to the first operation. Meanwhile, the MEF requested that the
         payment of value added tax (VAT) be financed from loan resources (link 14).
1.10     In light of the MEF’s request, the purpose of this modification is to: (i) modify the
         second specific objective of the first individual operation so as to extend the range
         of eligible quintiles for Component 2 to include households with an income of up to
         twice the SBU; (ii) transfer US$30 million from Component 2 to Component 1 in
         order to continue financing new homes on own land in urban and rural areas for
         households in income quintiles one and two; and (iii) provide that VAT may be paid
         from the loan proceeds under Component 3.
D.       Rationale for the proposed changes
1.11     Expansion of eligibility in Component 2 to households with income of up to
         two SBU. A household with an income of twice the SBU is in the third income
         quintile, as the second quintile encompasses families with up to 1.10 times the
         SBU.8 The mechanism to facilitate access to mortgage borrowing for low-income
         households is an innovation in the SIV, as it promotes financial inclusion for
         low-income households. Ecuador’s economic difficulties have affected the ability of
         households in quintiles one and two to obtain credit. The current value of one SBU
         is US$400. According to the National Employment, Unemployment, and
         Underemployment Survey (ENEMDU, 2019), income in quintiles one and two as of
         December 2017 came to 0.58 times the SBU (US$209) and 1.1 x SBU (US$420), 9
         respectively, while these incomes in the same period of 2018 were 0.57 SBU
         (US$230) and 1.08 SBU (US$432). The household shopping basket in October

7    For more details see: First disbursement report link 3.
8    As of 1 January 2020, 1 SBU = US$400.
9    The Employment and Unemployment Surveys (ENEMDU) for December 2017 and December 2018 were
     used to calculate the income quintiles. Employment income as calculated by INEC is considered.
                                                     -4-




          2019 cost 1.82 SBU (US$718). This means that households in the lowest income
          quintiles do not have sufficient income to meet their basic needs. Even with the
          MIDUVI subsidy and a preferential lending rate,10 these households are unable to
          obtain mortgages from the financial system, which is a prerequisite for them to
          benefit from Component 2 of the operation. Consequently, it is being requested
          that eligibility be expanded to include households with an income of twice the SBU.
1.12      Transfer of additional resources from Component 2 to Component 1. The
          proposed modification will enable the allocation of the resources of the first
          individual operation to be optimized, considering that in just five months of
          execution, the executing agency managed to commit 36.6% of the loan proceeds
          and 78% of Component 1. This rapid progress demonstrates the MIDUVI’s
          commitment to implementing the operation, and the interest it has generated
          among the Ecuadorian population.
1.13      The transfer of resources (US$30 million), equivalent to 31.9% of the total for the
          first operation, will enable MIDUVI to address the increase in demand in rural
          areas stemming from rising poverty levels and the rural housing shortage.11 The
          data at national level show that poverty12 in June of 2017 stood at 23.1% and, in
          the same period of 2019, it had reached 25.5%.13 However, rural poverty rose from
          40.9% to 43.8% over the period. This situation is accompanied by a serious
          housing shortage. As of June 2017, the national housing shortage was 13.8%, and
          in the same period of 2019 it had risen to 14.6%.14 These gaps are even wider in
          rural areas. Whereas in June 2017 the quantitative housing gap in rural areas was
          26.8%, in 2019 it had increased to 29.6% (National Statistics and Census Institute
          (INEC), 2019).
1.14      Provide for VAT payment from operation proceeds in Component 3 and
          other costs. The MEF issued Ministerial Resolution 001 (link 14), dated 2 January
          2020, providing that VAT payments be financed from the proceeds of external
          borrowing operations and not be considered part of the local counterpart
          contribution. In the case of this operation, this would affect the US$708,000 under
          Component 3 and other costs, linked to the counterpart resources, which would be
          eliminated and absorbed by the loan proceeds. It is worth noting that the absence
          of a local counterpart contribution does not significantly affect the scope of
          Component 3 or its administration costs, as these were considered under other
          expenses.
1.15      Rationale. In accordance with Operations Administration Manual OA-430, the
          change requested by the Ecuadorian authorities entails a modification of one of the

10   With the IDB’s support, Ecuador is implementing the first Sovereign Social Bond. This is an instrument
     that will enable mortgage finance for social and public-interest housing at a preferential interest rate
     (4.99%) for Ecuadorian households.
11   The MIDUVI has received a total of 6,977 new applications both at its technical offices across the
     country and via its website (link 7).
12   INEC calculates poverty by determining the poverty line, the income threshold below which people are
     considered poor. As of June 2019, the poverty line stood at US$85.03. The income threshold for people
     under conditions of extreme poverty was US$47.92.
13   For more, see Indicadores de Pobreza INEC, June 2019.
14   To calculate the quantitative housing deficit between 2017 and 2019, the INEC’s ENEMDU survey for
     June of each year analyzed was used.
                                                    -5-




          specific objectives of the first individual operation under the CCLIP. Accordingly,
          pursuant to the Update to the Procedures for Processing Sovereign Guaranteed
          Operations, the changes proposed in this document will be processed as a
          modification, given that: (i) the design of the operation approved by the Bank’s
          Board of Executive Directors is not extensively altered; and (ii) a significant portion
          of the approved resources is not used, and no new funds are added (for an
          amount equal to or greater than 40% of the original loan), to finance new or
          different activities, or expand the original activities. Moreover, this request is
          supported by MIDUVI’s strong track record of satisfactory performance.
1.16      Cofinancing. Meanwhile, the AFD, the bilateral development agency with which
          the IDB signed a parallel cofinancing agreement with services15 to complement
          solely the resources of Components 1 and 2 of this operation, has expressed its
          agreement with the modification proposed by the Ecuadorian authorities regarding
          the inclusion of households with income of up to twice the SBU. As regards VAT
          financing (link 14) the components financed by the AFD (Components 1 and
          (2) are not affected, as they do not envisage VAT, which is only applicable to
          Component 3 of this operation.
E.        Strategic alignment
1.17      The proposed modification remains consistent with the second Update to the
          Institutional Strategy (document AB‑3190-2) and the 2020‑2023 Corporate Results
          Framework (document GN‑2727‑12); responding to the challenge of social
          inclusion and equality by promoting access to quality housing for poor households.
          It is also aligned with the following crosscutting themes: (i) Gender equality and
          diversity, by prioritizing households headed by women, including individuals with
          disabilities and other vulnerable groups; and (ii) Climate change and environmental
          sustainability, by promoting sustainable housing.
1.18      The first individual operation is also aligned with the IDB Integrated Strategy for
          Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable
          Energy (document GN‑2609‑1) by promoting the reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2)
          emissions in the construction sector. It is also aligned with the following sector
          framework documents: (i) Urban Development and Housing (document
          GN‑2732‑6) by promoting access to housing for households in the poorest income
          quintiles; (ii) Climate Change (document GN‑2835‑8) by promoting housing with
          bioclimatic adaptations; and (iii) Gender and Diversity (document GN‑2800‑8) by
          prioritizing property titling for women and universal-access housing. Lastly, this
          operation contributes to Goal 11 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
          by promoting adequate, safe, and affordable housing. The proposed modifications
          will increase climate financing to 76.88%.16 However, under the multilateral
          development banks’ joint methodology for estimating climate finance, climate
          finance data is reported according to the year of approval of the operation. The



15   On 22 November 2019, the AFD signed loan contract CEC-1031-01-U for US$54 million with the
     Government of Ecuador.
16   For information purposes, solely to illustrate this contractual modification’s contribution to climate
     change, the climate change finance is estimated at 76.88%. It should be noted that, for the reasons
     given, this percentage will not be reflected in the climate financing reports (link 13).
                                                   -6-




          proceeds of this operation were accounted for in the original year of approval,
          2019, and ultimately not accounted for again toward the climate finance target.

                      II. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED MODIFICATIONS

A.        Objective of the CCLIP
2.1       The original general objective of the CCLIP is maintained, namely to: (i) expand
          access for Ecuadorian households living in a situation of poverty or vulnerability
          and without adequate housing, to affordable, sustainable, and universally
          accessible housing; and (ii) strengthen the Ecuadorian government’s capacity to
          design and implement long-term housing policies.
2.2       As regards the specific objectives of the first individual operation, objectives (i) and
          (iii) are left unchanged, while objective (ii) will be changed, such that it is expressed
          as follows: “reduce the quantitative housing deficit among households in urban
          areas in the first, second, and third quintiles, with household incomes of up to twice
          the SBU.”
B.        Components and their modification
2.3       This modification maintains the technical scope of Component 1, although the
          amount of the investment will be increased to US$74 million due to the transfer of
          US$30 million from Component 2. Consequently, the targets and the numbers of
          households and beneficiaries/subsidies awarded will be adjusted. Also,
          households living in poverty or moderate poverty with an income of up to twice the
          SBU will be considered beneficiaries in Component 2, with the corresponding
          adjustment to the resources invested and the target number of beneficiary
          households/subsidies awarded. The targets for Component 3 set out in the results
          matrix remain unchanged, but without a local counterpart contribution.17 In what
          follows, a description of each component following the modification is given:
2.4       Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of new housing on own land in
          rural and urban areas (IDB: US$74 million, AFD: US$40 million). This
          component will finance direct monetary subsidies to family units living in conditions
          of extreme and moderate poverty, in quintiles one and two according to their score
          on the social register. The subsidy will be for up to 41.12 times the unified basic
          wage (SBU). Financing will be provided for the construction of sustainable and
          universally accessible housing on the beneficiary’s own land, for a value of up to
          41.12 times the SBU. The home will have two or three bedrooms (depending on
          the family structure); and it will observe architectural criteria adapted to the
          bioclimatic zone.18 The MIDUVI will organize and prioritize demand by groups,
          pursuant to the program Operating Regulations. The beneficiaries of this program
          may request an additional subsidy of US$1,500 to finance works or equipment for
          the provision of services (water, wastewater disposal, and electricity) when these
          are lacking; and US$600 for titling processes. With the Bank funding for this


17   According to the modification proposed per Ministerial Resolution 0001 issued by the Ecuadorian
     Ministry of Finance.
18   Characterized by reduced energy and water use of 20% and savings in energy and materials compared to
     conventional construction.
                                                      -7-




          component, it is estimated that about 5,204 subsidies will be granted to an equal
          number of families.
2.5       Component 2. Partial subsidies for the purchase of urban housing (IDB:
          US$14 million; AFD: US$14 million). This component will finance direct
          monetary subsidies to households living in poverty or moderate poverty, in the first,
          second, and third quintiles, with household incomes of up to twice the SBU, to
          purchase sustainable housing with universal accessibility in the price range from
          57.57 to 101.52 times the SBU. The homes will include mitigation measures to
          reduce their energy and water consumption. Individual or group applications are
          submitted to the MIDUVI and may be done directly by the eligible household. All
          households making up a committee19 will be prioritized according to the criteria of
          the program Operating Regulations. The value of the subsidy will be US$6,000,
          which, in conjunction with credits from the financial or cooperative sector and/or
          household savings, will enable the beneficiaries to purchase their home. The
          Bank’s funding for this component is expected to finance 2,333 subsidies awarded
          to an equal number of family units.
2.6       Component 3. MIDUVI strengthening (IDB: US$3.9 million). This component
          will finance technical and technological improvements in the SIIDUVI, in: (i) the
          access module, for the registration, eligibility, and prioritization of beneficiaries, and
          awarding of subsidies; (ii) the supply module, to register, qualify, award, and
          evaluate housing developers and builders; and (iii) the optimization of the property
          database (identification and selection of available land parcels, based on criteria of
          accessibility and vulnerability to risks). The activities are based on an initial plan of
          improvements that include programming, systems, equipment, and human talent.
          An algorithm will be designed to improve beneficiary selection and enhance
          coordination with the decentralized autonomous municipal governments, and their
          training in land management.
C.        Costs and sources of financing
2.7       As described in the previous section, it is proposed that the table of costs in the
          first individual operation under the CCLIP be modified as follows:




19   A group of households that apply jointly for the housing subsidy.
                                                   -8-



                             Table 1. Estimated program costs (US$ million)
             Components                     IDB      LOCAL           AFD           Total      %
Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of a new home on own land in rural and urban areas
Subsidies for housing construction           69         0              35           104       70
Subsidies for water connection               3.6        0               3           6.6       4.4
Subsidy for administrative and legal
                                             1.4        0               2           3.4       2.3
expenses
Total Component 1                            74         0              40           114      76.7
Component 2. Partial subsidies for the purchase of an urban home
Subsidies for home purchase                  14         0              14           28       18.8
Total Component 2                            14         0              14           28       18.8
Component 3. MIDUVI strengthening
Support for the MIDUVI                       3.9        0               0           3.9       2.9
Total Component 3                            3.9        0               0           3.9       2.9
Other expenses
Administration                               1.2        0               0           1.2       0.9
Evaluation and monitoring                    0.5        0               0           0.5       0.4
Audits                                       0.3        0               0           0.3       0.2
Total other expenses                          2         0               0            2        1.5
Total                                      93.9        020             54          147.9     100
Sums rounded to the nearest decimal.


D.        Results Matrix
2.8       The results matrix will reflect the outcome and output indicators set out in the
          program monitoring report (link 17) in order to finance the increase in resources in
          Component 1 and include households with an income of up to twice the SBU in
          Component 2, while maintaining Component 3, as described below: Component 1.
          Subsidies for the construction of a new home on own land in rural and urban
          areas; Component 2. Partial subsidies for the purchase of an urban home; and
          Component 3. MIDUVI strengthening. The changes in this modification would lead
          to an increase in the number of households benefiting from Component 1 from
          2,404 to 5,204, and decreasing the number of households benefiting from
          Component 2 from 7,333 to 2,333.
E.        Environmental and social risks
2.9       The proposed modification does not entail changes in the environmental and social
          risks of the operation, as identified at the time of approval, nor in the management
          measures identified at the relevant time; the operation remains classified under
          directive “B.13.” It is worth noting the fulfillment and satisfactory progress in the
          management of the program’s environmental and social risks, including the hiring
          of a specialist on social issues to join the executing agency’s management team
          and the incorporation of eligibility and exclusion criteria in the program Operating
          Regulations. It should be noted that this operation does not envisage resettlement.




20   In accordance with Executive Decree 0001 of 2 January 2020.
                                            -9-




F.     Fiduciary risks
2.10   The proposed modification does not entail changes to the fiduciary risks, such that
       the operation maintains its medium risk classification. This modification is expected
       to result in the operation’s making more rapid progress, given the executing
       agency’s experience in the execution mechanism under Component 1.
G.     Implementation arrangements.
2.11   As part of this modification, after the contract modification has come into effect, as
       a condition precedent to the first disbursement, the executing agency will:
       (i) submit the updated program Operating Regulations including the eligibility
       criteria for Component 2 to include households in quintiles one, two, and three with
       an income of up to twice the SBU; (ii) update the investment plan for the execution
       of Component 2 (link 8), definition of beneficiary selection processes, and
       execution monitoring activities; and (iii) maintain the management team to ensure
       fulfillment of the stipulations of the loan contract.
H.     Program evaluations
2.12   Evaluations originally planned are maintained without changes, including a
       midterm evaluation and a final evaluation.

                                 III. RECOMMENDATION

3.1    Considering the request and the documentation submitted by the borrower, in
       conjunction with the analysis in the preceding sections conducted by the project
       team, the Bank’s Management recommends that, in accordance with the
       provisions of Operations Administration Manual OA-430 (Substantial and
       Fundamental Changes to Operations), Section B, points 4 and 6; the provisions of
       paragraph 3.29(c) of the Regulations of the Board of Executive Directors of the IDB
       (document DR-398-18); and paragraph 6 of the List of matters to be considered by
       the Board via Short Procedure (document CS-3953-4); the Board of Executive
       Directors approve the modifications proposed in this document by short procedure.
       The corresponding modifications will be reflected, as applicable, in a modification
       to loan contract 4788/OC-EC.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Annex I - EC-L1245
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 1 of 1




                                                                                  Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                          Summary
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
1. IDB Development Objectives                                                                                                                         Yes


                                                                                                       -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                       -Gender Equality and Diversity
   Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes
                                                                                                       -Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability




                                                                                                       -Reduction of emissions with support of IDBG financing (annual million tons CO2 e)*
                                                                                                       -Beneficiaries of targeted anti-poverty programs (#)*
                                                                                                       -Households benefitting from housing solutions (#)*
                                                                                                       -Jobs created by supported firms (#)*
                                                                                                       -Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*
                                                                                                       -Households with new or upgraded access to drinking water (#)*
                                                                                                       -Households with new or upgraded access to sanitation (#)*
   Country Development Results Indicators                                                              -Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and
                                                                                                       managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*
                                                                                                       -Households with wastewater treatment (#)*
                                                                                                       -Households with solid waste disposed in a sanitary landfill (#)*
                                                                                                       -Households protected from flood risk (#)*
                                                                                                       -Households with new or improved access to electricity supply (#)*
                                                                                                       -Urban rail and bus mass transit systems built or upgraded (km)*




2. Country Development Objectives                                                                                                                     Yes


   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                              GN-2924             Financing for low-income housing




   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                               GN-2948             The intervention is included in the 2019 Operational Program.



    Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
    strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                                         Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                               10.0
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                             3.0
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                                           4.0
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                                        3.0
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                                           9.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                                    3.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                                  3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                                        1.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                                          2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                               0.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                          10.0
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                                         2.5
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                               7.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                                    Low
                                 Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                                        Yes
                                     Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks
                        Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                            B.13
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                                    Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and
                                                                                                                                    Reporting, External Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                       Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)                Yes
                                                                                                                                    Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison,
                                                                                                                                    Contracting Individual Consultant, National Public Bidding.



                                                                                                                                    Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and
                                                                                       Non-Fiduciary               Yes
                                                                                                                                    Evaluation National System.


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                                   Yes                                                0
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project


Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.


The objectives of the CCLIP are: (i) to expand the access to affordable, sustainable and universally accessible housing of Ecuadorian households in housing deficit and in a situation of poverty or
vulnerability; and (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Government of Ecuador to generate and implement long-term housing policies. The specific objectives of the First Individual Operation of the
CCLIP "Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable Households" are: (i) to reduce the quantitative housing deficit among households in rural and urban-marginal areas of the two bottom quintiles of income
in the country, prioritizing specific vulnerability indicators; (ii) to reduce the quantitative housing deficit among households in urban areas of the quintiles one, two, and three, and with a household
income up to 2 SBU; and (iii) optimize the institutional processes of MIDUVI.

The project presents a complete diagnosis; with an accurate description of the current situation of the housing deficit in Ecuador. The results indicators included in the results matrix are SMART
and have means of verification.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) and focused on expected benefits related to the valuation of real estate assets and the profitability of
the housing market. The CBA has reasonable assumptions, uses a rigorous methodology and has an adequate sensitivity analysis. The analysis concludes that the project is economically viable,
with an IRR of 22.4%, using a discount rate of 12%.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is in line with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured according to several approaches: an
experimental evaluation, a difference-in-differences analysis, and matching.
                                                                                                                                                                  Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                Page 1 of 6




                                                                            RESULTS MATRIX

                                      The specific objectives of the first individual operation (EC-L1245) are to: (i) reduce the quantitative housing deficit among rural
    Objective:
                                      households in the country’s two lowest income quintiles, prioritizing those with specific vulnerability indicators; (ii) reduce the
                                      quantitative housing deficit among households in urban areas in the first, second, and third quintiles, with household incomes
                                      of up to twice the unified basic wage (SBU); and (iii) optimize Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI) institutional
                                      processes.


                                                                           EXPECTED OUTCOMES

                                                             Baseline   Intermediate                       Means of
         Indicators          Unit of Measure        Baseline                           Final target                                 Comments2
                                                               year        target1                        verification
    Specific objective 1: Reduce the quantitative housing deficit among rural households in the country’s two lowest income quintiles, prioritizing those
    with specific vulnerability indicators
    Outcome 1.1: Reduction of the housing deficit in rural and urban periphery areas
    Number of
    beneficiary
    households with new
                                                                                                      Delivery-acceptance
    homes built                  Households          0         2019           -           5,204                               By vulnerability status.
                                                                                                           certificates
    according to the
    program Operating
    Regulations
    Outcome 1.2: Better access to water services
    Percentage of homes      Number of homes
    delivered that are        delivered that are
    connected to                connected to
                                                                                                      Delivery-acceptance
    domestic drinking         domestic drinking     0%         2019         100%          100%                                By vulnerability status.
                                                                                                           certificates
    water service           water service / Total
                              number of homes
                                   delivered




1    Intermediate target measured when 50% of program funds have been disbursed.
2    The numbers should be reported by vulnerability status.
Annex II
Page 2 of 6


                                                          Baseline    Intermediate                        Means of
       Indicators        Unit of Measure      Baseline                                Final target                                  Comments2
                                                            year         target1                         verification
 Outcome 1.3: Increase in property titling
 % of homes                  Number of new                                                                                 By vulnerability status.
 delivered, with full     homes titled / Total
                                               0%     2019               100%            100%         Municipal records
 property titles.            number of new
                                  homes
 % of property titles in Number of property                                                                                57% of households that are
 the name of women       titles in the name of                                                                             eligible under the social
 or jointly with their      women or jointly                                                                               register are headed by
 partner.                 with their partner / 0%     2019                57%            57%          Municipal records    women, or by women jointly
                            Total number of                                                                                with their partners.
                              property titles
                                delivered
 Outcome 1.4: Reduction of household energy consumption
 Efficient use of                Monthly                                                                                   Baseline of the Environmental
 electricity.                consumption in                                                                                Information Module of the
                         kilowatt hours (kWh)                                                                              National        Survey     of
                                                                                                                           Employment, Unemployment,
                                                                                                                           and          Underemployment
                                                                                                      MIDUVI records
                                                                                                                           (ENEMDU 2012); Monthly
                                                 88.9       2012          50             50         (through the Energy
                                                                                                                           electricity   consumption   –
                                                                                                          Ministry)
                                                                                                                           Rural.      The intermediate
                                                                                                                           outcome is the same as the
                                                                                                                           final     outcome     because
                                                                                                                           savings are expected in each
                                                                                                                           home delivered.
 Specific objective 2: Reduce the quantitative housing deficit among households in urban areas in the first, second, and third quintiles, with household
 incomes of up to twice the SBU
 Outcome 2.1: Reduction of the housing deficit among low-income households in urban areas
 Number of
 beneficiary
 households with new
                                                                                                    Delivery-acceptance By income level, taking twice
 homes built                Households            0         2019          --           2,333
                                                                                                         certificates      the SBU as the threshold.
 according to the
 program Operating
 Regulations
                                                                                                                                      Annex II
                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 6


                                                      Baseline   Intermediate                    Means of
     Indicators         Unit of Measure     Baseline                            Final target                            Comments2
                                                        year        target1                     verification
Outcome 2.2: Reduction of the energy consumption of affordable housing
                                                                                                                Baseline of the Environmental
Efficient use of           Monthly                                                                              Information      Module     of
                                              155.4       2012       100            100        MIDUVI records
electricity           consumption in kWh                                                                        ENEMDU         2012;   Monthly
                                                                                                                electricity consumption-Urban.
Specific objective 3: Optimize MIDUVI institutional processes
Simplification of the
beneficiary
registration, eligibility,
and prioritization
process and the            Time taken
                                                120        2019      80             80         MIDUVI records
registration process         (hours)
for housing
developers and
builders (SIIDUVI
module 1)
Simplification of the
procedure for
technical verification         idem             120        2019      40             40         MIDUVI records
of land parcels
(SIIDUVI module 2)
Simplification of the
procedure for
monitoring and
control of the delivery
of housing and                 idem             120        2019      80             80         MIDUVI records
compliance with the
rules of civic
coexistence (SIIDUVI
module 3)


                                                                   OUTPUTS
Annex II
Page 4 of 6


                                      Unit of              Baseline                                     Final    Means of
               Outputs                          Baseline             2020     2021 2022 2023 2024                                  Comments3
                                     Measure                 year                                      target   verification
    Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of a new home on own land in rural and urban areas
    Number of subsidies                                                                                           MIDUVI
                                    Subsidies       0       2019     1,961 1,821 1,422         -   -   5,204
    delivered                                                                                                     records
    Number of additional subsidies
    for connection to piped water
                                    Subsidies       0       2019     1,961     443      -      -   -   2,404
    delivered on land without
    services
    Number of additional subsidies
    for titling processes in                                                                                      MIDUVI
                                    Subsidies       0       2019       0       100      -      -   -    100
    households with vulnerability                                                                                 records
    indicators
    Subindicator:                  Number of                                                                                   Subindicator.
    Percentage of subsidies        subsidies                                                                                   21.6% of households
    awarded to women heads of      awarded to                                                                                  in poverty or extreme
    household                      women                                                                                       poverty are headed
                                   heads of                                                                       MIDUVI       by women (Living
                                                    0       2019      431      401    313      -   -   22%
                                   household                                                                      records      Conditions Survey,
                                   / Total                                                                                     2014).
                                   number of
                                   subsidies
                                   awarded
    Subindicator:                  Number of                                                                                   Subindicator.
    Percentage of subsidies        subsidies                                                                                   The prevalence of
    awarded to households          awarded to                                                                                  disability in Ecuador
    including individuals with     households                                                                                  is 5.64%, with a
    disabilities                   including                                                                                   higher incidence in
                                   individuals                                                                    MIDUVI       households living in
                                                    0       2019      118      109     85      -   -    6%
                                   with                                                                           records      poverty (INEC 2010).
                                   disabilities
                                   / Total
                                   number of
                                   subsidies
                                   awarded



3    The numbers should be reported by vulnerability status.
                                                                                                                                              Annex II
                                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 6


                                   Unit of              Baseline                                         Final    Means of
          Outputs                            Baseline              2020   2021    2022    2023   2024                               Comments3
                                  Measure                 year                                          target   verification
Component 2. Partial subsidies for the purchase of an urban home
Number of subsidies awarded                                                                                        MIDUVI
                                 Subsidies      0         2019      -     1,333   1,000    -      -     2,333
for home purchase                                                                                                  records
Subindicator:                   Number of                                                                                       Subindicator.
Percentage of subsidies         subsidies
awarded to women heads of       awarded to
household                       women
                                heads of                                                                           MIDUVI
                                                0         2019      -     293     220      -      -     22%
                                household                                                                          records
                                / Total
                                number of
                                subsidies
                                awarded
Subindicator:                   Number of                                                                                       Subindicator.
Percentage of subsidies         subsidies
awarded for households          awarded to
including individuals with      households
disabilities                    including
                                individuals                                                                        MIDUVI
                                                0         2019      -      80      60      -      -      6%
                                with                                                                               records
                                disabilities
                                / Total
                                number
                                subsidies
                                awarded
Annex II
Page 6 of 6


                                         Unit of                       Baseline                                                     Final     Means of
                Outputs                                   Baseline                    2020     2021      2022     2023     2024                                     Comments3
                                        Measure                          year                                                      target    verification
    Component 3: MIDUVI strengthening
    Integrated Urban Development
    and Housing Information
    System (SIIDUVI 1) modules:
                                                                                                                                                 Reports
    Access to housing; and
                                                                                                                                                 SIIDUVI
    feasibility and viability analysis
                                                                                                                                               reports on
    (access, registration, eligibility,
                                                                                                                                              households
    qualification, prioritization,      Systems               0          2019           -         1        -        -        -        1
                                                                                                                                               registered
    allocation, and award of
                                                                                                                                                   and
    subsidies to beneficiaries,4
                                                                                                                                                subsidies
    registration of builders/
                                                                                                                                                awarded
    developers, and qualification
    and registration of low-income
    housing projects).5
    SIIDUVI 2 Land bank modules:
    Construction issues and
    financing models (land bank,
    cartographic data, accessibility,                                                                                                           MIDUVI
                                        Systems               0          2019           -         -        -        -        1        1
    and environmental risks.                                                                                                                    records
    Monitoring of house
    construction and inspection,
    types of subsidies).6
    SIIDUVI 3 Habitat formation and
    monitoring and control modules
                                                                                                                                                MIDUVI
    (monitoring of delivery of homes    Systems               0          2019           -         -        1        -        -        1
                                                                                                                                                records
    and compliance with rules of
    civic coexistence).




4    The process considers the management of beneficiary records, MIDUVI analysis of eligibility by contrasting information with the social register, civil register, internal revenue
     service (SRI), etc. and notification of priority to central MIDUVI plant. Optimization envisages interoperability between various systems and eliminating the current manual checks,
     as well as replacing notification by the Quipux system by an online report through SIIDUVI.
5    The optimization process considers the implementation of system interoperability for the developer register.
6    The procedure envisages analysis of information on the land, a field visit, preparation of reports, and sending to MIDUVI head office. The process will be optimized by developing
     a SIIDUVI module allowing reports, plans, files, etc. to be input, so that information can be transferred online, eliminating the need to send reports via Quipux.
