                                                                                       PUBLIC
                                                                     SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                            MEXICO




        PROJECT TO ADDRESS SOCIAL AND BASIC SERVICES GAPS
                         IN URBAN AREAS




                                          (ME-L1167)




                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of Carolina Piedrafita
(IFD/FMM), Project Team Leader; Alejandro Rasteletti (FMM/CME); Juan Carlos Pérez-
Segnini (SGO/CME); Gloria Coronel and Víctor Escala (FMP/CME); Gmelina Ramírez
(CCS/CME); Crystal Fenwick (VPS/ESG); Andrés Restrepo (IFD/ICS); María Eugenia de la
Peña Ramos (WSA/CME); Nelly Cerón (CID/CME); Raimundo Arroio; Ophélie Chevalier,
Laura Aguilera, and Dianela Ávila (IFD/FMM).




This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus
superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                     CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY


I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 8
       C.    Key outcome indicators ................................................................................ 9

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................. 9

       A.    Financing instruments .................................................................................. 9
       B.    Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 10
       C.    Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 11
       D.    Other risks .................................................................................................. 11

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 11

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 11
       B.    Summary of results monitoring arrangements ............................................ 15
                                                      - ii -



                                                    ANNEXES
Annex I        Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM)
Annex II       Results Matrix
Annex III      Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                            ELECTRONIC LINKS
REQUIRED

1.   Multiyear execution plan

2.   Annual work plan

3.   Monitoring and evaluation plan

4.   Environmental and social management report – environmental characterization

5.   Procurement plan

OPTIONAL

1.   Economic analysis
     A. Economic analysis calculations

2.   Program Operating Regulations

3.   Vulnerability index
     A. Vulnerability index – adjusted for risk factors
     B. Vulnerability index – priority municipios

4.   Gender perspectives

5.   Terms of reference – International City/County Management Association (ICMA)

6.   Public Utilities Policy compliance analysis

7.   SEDATU institutional capacity assessment report

8.   Site visit reports – ex post environmental evaluation

9.   Justification for requesting a waiver of the Bank’s procurement policies

10. Safeguard Policy Filter and Safeguard Screening Form for classification of projects
                                   - iii -



                            ABBREVIATIONS


CDCs     Community development centers
COSO     Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
ICB      International competitive bidding
INEGI    Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía [National Statistics and
         Geography Institute]
LIBOR    London Interbank Offered Rate
NAFIN    Nacional Financiera, S.N.C., I.B.D.
SEDATU   Secretaría de Desarrollo Agrario, Territorial y Urbano [Department of
         Agrarian, Territorial, and Urban Development]
SFP      Secretaría de la Función Pública [Civil Service Department]
SHCP     Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público [Department of Finance]
SIIPSO   Sistema Integral de Información de los Programas Sociales
         [Comprehensive Information System on Social Programs]
                                                              PROJECT SUMMARY

                                                          MEXICO
                                    PROJECT TO ADDRESS SOCIAL AND BASIC SERVICES GAPS
                                                     IN URBAN AREAS
                                                        (ME-L1167)

                                                        Financial terms and conditions
                                                                                                                             (a)
Borrower: United Mexican States                                               Flexible Financing Facility
Executing agency: Department of Agrarian, Territorial,     Amortization period:                           25 years
and Urban Development (SEDATU), in cooperation with        Original WAL:                                  11 years
the states or municipios                                   Disbursement period:                             3 years
           Source         Amount (US$)            %        Grace period:                                  5.5 years
                                                                                                              (b)
                                                           Inspection and supervision fee:
IDB (Ordinary Capital):      200 million         100       Interest rate:                               LIBOR-based
                                                                                                              (b)
                                                           Credit fee:
                                                                                                  United States dollars from
Total:                       200 million         100       Approval currency:
                                                                                                     the Ordinary Capital
                                                       Project at a glance
Project objective: To help improve habitability in areas with social and urban infrastructure gaps by: (i) expanding access to such
infrastructure; and (ii) promoting social development in safe spaces.
Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement: Signing of an agency agreement between the borrower,
SEDATU, and Nacional Financiera, S.N.C., I.B.D. (paragraph 3.1).
Exceptions to Bank policies: A waiver of the Polices for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document
GN-2349-9) is requested so that procedures under national legislation may be used for the procurements to be carried out under
Components I and II (paragraphs 3.8 to 3.10).
                         (c)
Project qualifies as:                             SV                  PE                 CC                  CI
(a)
      Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization
      schedule, as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account
      when reviewing such requests.
(b)
      The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of
      the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the corresponding policies.
(c)
      SV (Small and vulnerable countries); PE (Poverty reduction and equity enhancement); CC (Climate change, sustainable energy, and
      environmental sustainability); CI (Regional cooperation and integration).
                            I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Programa Hábitat (the Habitat Program) is a federal government program to
          improve the habitability of dwellings1 in municipios with at least 15,000 inhabitants.
          It targets underserved areas of these municipios (called polygons) by financing
          physical investments and social development activities.2 These include building or
          expanding urban infrastructure; constructing, equipping, expanding, or upgrading
          community development centers (CDCs);3 and funding training courses,
          workshops, and other supplemental activities4 at these centers.5 The program also
          helps to build the municipios’ capacity to plan and execute such investments.
1.2       The polygons are territorial divisions within urban areas of the municipios, where
          there is legal land tenure (households holding title to their property) and at least
          50% of families are living in poverty.6 All of the polygons have deficits in access to
          infrastructure, e.g. water, drainage, paving, public lighting, green space, and
          community centers. To be considered a polygon, at least 80% of its lots must be
          occupied, and it must measure more than 10 manzanas in total. The formula used
          to create the polygons combines socioeconomic data and information on access to
          services based on census and municipal data. All municipios with more than
          15,000 inhabitants have at least one polygon, the dynamics and development of
          which depends on poverty conditions and the aforementioned deficits.
1.3       Since the Habitat Program was launched in 2005, the Bank has supported it
          through three loans: 1583/OC-ME, 1928/OC-ME, and 2569/OC-ME
          (US$780 million). Between 2005 and 2014, the program worked with a universe
          of 3,351 polygons located in the 705 municipios that make up the National Urban
          System.7 Through works and actions, the program has supported 57% of that
          universe, benefiting four million households.
1.4       The program has a solid execution track record and demonstrated capacity to
          deliver federal resources to the municipios in a timely and appropriate manner. On

1
     “Habitability” is defined as a set of basic characteristics and qualities—both social and urban—that
     contributes to creating a public space that is appropriate for and conducive to the development of the
     households in the polygon. At a minimum, these characteristics include complete streets, water, sanitation,
     paving, public lighting, an interconnected and accessible road network, and CDCs.
2
     Works and activities are financed with federal resources (provided in part by this operation), supplemented
     with state and municipal resources.
3
     CDCs provide differentiated social and community services based on local demand. They generally include
     recreational areas.
4
     The objectives of these activities are based on demand in each community, ranging from specific training
     workshops to the promotion of social integration through sports and cultural activities or violence prevention
     actions.
5
     In a very few cases, it is not feasible to build a CDC due to a lack of available physical space. In such
     circumstances, the program is authorized to finance activities in other buildings.
6
     According to the National Council for the Evaluation of Social Development Policy (CONEVAL), a household
     is defined as poor when it has at least one social gap―in the six indicators, i.e. access to education, access
     to health care services, access to social security, dwelling quality and size, access to basic services in the
     dwelling, and access to food―and its income is insufficient to buy the goods and services necessary to meet
     its food and nonfood needs.
7
     The country has 2,457 municipios, 705 of which have more than 15,000 inhabitants. National Statistics and
     Geography Institute (INEGI).
                                                      -2-



          average each year, it funds 3,000 infrastructure works and 12,000 training
          workshops or social development activities, while supporting the municipios in
          planning and executing these interventions. The cornerstones of this capacity are:
          (i) the program’s georeferenced management information system (Comprehensive
          Information System on Social Programs–SIIPSO), which facilitates the real-time
          flow of requests, approvals, and payments between the municipal and federal
          levels; (ii) the structure of the local offices of the Department of Agrarian,
          Territorial, and Urban Development (SEDATU) in each state, which collaborate
          with the municipios to execute the program; and (iii) the municipios’ commitment to
          plan, provide local financing, and execute the investments.
1.5       The Habitat Program is locked in as part of the federal strategy for serving urban
          areas.8 The change in the executing agency from the Department of Social
          Development (SEDESOL) to the new SEDATU in 2013 neither affected the
          program’s ability to achieve its objectives nor the pace of its execution. This has
          enabled the program to maintain a long-term vision and make ongoing
          improvements, updating itself to meet the changing needs of the country and the
          beneficiaries. The following new features were included in the most recently
          approved operation (loan 2569/OC-ME, 2012-2015): (i) a line of financing for social
          prevention of violence,9 as a supplementary line for urban renewal; and
          (ii) methodologies for the environmental sustainability of the investments
          (paragraphs 1.8 and 1.9, respectively).
1.6       Impact and outcomes achieved. A pilot impact evaluation10 of the Habitat
          Program (2009-2012) was conducted—one of the first of its kind for neighborhood
          improvement programs—which demonstrated the positive effect of the strategy of
          targeting polygons. Although the municipios have their own resources to invest in
          infrastructure and services as they see fit, in terms of their Habitat-supported
          interventions, these investments tended to be concentrated in the most
          underserved areas. In the areas targeted by the program, the price per square
          meter (proxy for habitability) increased by 15%, whereas the corresponding
          increase for the control group was only 5%. Moreover, the economic analysis of
          the project supplementing the impact evaluation showed that every peso invested
          in urban environment improvement projects yielded a return of 2.8 pesos.11
1.7       A comparison between the control group and the treatment group revealed the
          following statistically significant gains in the latter: (i) 3% in the urban infrastructure
          availability index;12 (ii) 7% in dwellings with paved roads and sidewalks; and (iii) 6%
          in dwellings with functioning public lighting. In terms of users’ satisfaction with their
          environment, the polygons in which the program had been implemented were:
          (i) 9% more satisfied with public lighting; and (ii) 7% more satisfied with their
          neighborhoods’ streets and sidewalks than the control group. Moreover, in the
          communities where the Habitat Program was implemented, there was an increase
8
     In fact, it complements the actions of other federal programs, such as the Public Spaces Rehabilitation
     Program, the Housing Unit Recovery Program, and efforts to regularize informal areas.
9
     This refers to the Preventive Interventions Pillar incorporated into the program in 2012 (program Operating
     Regulations).
10
     Colegio de la Frontera Norte.
11
     For further details on the program’s outcomes, as well as an infographic summarizing the Habitat Program’s
     pilot impact evaluation, see the Development Effectiveness Overview 2014, Inter-American Development
     Bank, pp. 126-128 (https://iadb.org/publications/DEO 2014).
12
     Combines access to sidewalks, paved roads, public lighting, water, and drainage.
                                                       -3-



          in trust among neighbors and in their sense of belonging, as they had community
          centers that offered a broad range of services and activities for adults and young
          people. Lastly, the program had a spillover effect on the quality of the housing in
          the targeted neighborhoods: these neighborhoods show a significant difference
          with respect to the housing in the control group in terms of water or sanitary
          service connections, and in the improvement of flooring materials.
1.8       Regarding social prevention of violence as a complementary action to urban
          renewal, more than 1,300 CDCs have been built or recovered. These centers offer
          specific social development activities and workshops. Since 2014, the program’s
          works have been increasingly framed in a planning process based on the “crime
          prevention through environmental design” methodology. Thus, in addition to
          building, expanding, or upgrading CDCs, “safe routes” are selected and lit,
          degraded public spaces are rehabilitated, and prevention activities are financed,
          which range from the prevention of domestic violence or bullying in schools to a
          variety of training activities.13 These activities have been carried out in more than
          303 municipios.
1.9       Additionally, the municipios’ capacity to mitigate and adapt14 to the impacts of
          climate change has been strengthened, and effective actions have been added to
          reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Through the program, SEDATU15 is
          undertaking important actions, such as: (i) promoting executing agency and
          community capacity-building in the areas of sustainability and the protection and
          preservation of the natural environment; (ii) financing urban watercourse sanitation
          projects; (iii) utilizing more sustainable materials in infrastructure works (e.g. eco-
          friendly concrete and energy efficient lighting); and (iv) financing works to improve
          and maintain forest cover in cities (tree planting). Adopted in 2014 and
          implemented in 201 CDCs thus far, the sustainable community development
          center concept advocates the rational use of nonrenewable natural resources by
          encouraging construction with materials that minimize environmental impacts,
          bioclimatic architectural designs, and the use of energy efficient systems and
          devices (e.g. solar panels, recycling water for irrigation, water catchment, and
          green rooftops).16
1.10      Rationale and lessons learned. The Habitat Program’s continued operation is
          justified by the positive results it has obtained in improving habitability conditions in
          polygons with deficiencies. The experience amassed over 10 years of working
          jointly with Mexico—in addition to more than 25 years in other countries of the
          region—has been acknowledged in Bank publications and in the external


13
     Since 2014, 70% of the job skills training courses offered by the program have been certified by official
     accreditation agencies.
14
     The program includes works in the mitigation and adaptation category. For example, tree planting contributes
     to climate change mitigation—since trees absorb CO2—and adaptation by providing shade and reducing
     landslides. The bioclimatic designs of some CDCs are adapted to the local temperature, and also provide for
     the use of energy efficient devices, such as energy-saving light bulbs or solar water heaters, thus
     contributing to mitigation.
15
     SEDATU is among the departments that contribute to Mexico’s Special Climate Change Program. This
     program contributes to compliance with its Strategy (paragraph 1.2) by implementing actions to reduce the
     urban population’s climate change risk.
16
     The issues of social prevention of violence and climate change impacts were not included the impact
     evaluation, because at the time of the evaluation, they were only pilot interventions.
                                                       -4-



          literature.17 The results of this program’s impact evaluation (paragraphs 1.6 to 1.9)
          and the evaluation of similar programs18 highlight the importance of territorial
          targeting, as well as the relevance of adopting a multisector and cross-sector
          approach to address and manage the basic infrastructure and social service needs
          of households, such as risk factors associated with the problems of violence and
          insecurity. The benefits of this approach have been confirmed by experience and
          research, which show that improving the physical environment is a prerequisite to
          advancing social development, and that both interventions should be done in
          coordination so as to increase their impact.19
1.11      Some interesting lessons have also been gleaned at the operational level: a 2013
          SEDATU analysis of the program’s investments found that the lack of investment
          planning had resulted in a significant dispersion of the investments, even within the
          polygons. It was therefore not unusual to encounter polygons where water had
          been installed in one section, pavement in another, and lighting in yet another. No
          systematic planning process was followed for investments—since it was not a
          requirement—and little thought was given to efficiency considerations or
          developing synergies to maximize their impact.
1.12      With respect to social prevention of violence activities to complement urban
          renewal efforts, the program’s expansion into new municipios since 2014 brought
          to light the municipios’ low capacity to formulate, monitor, and supervise such
          activities. This demonstrated the need for Habitat to provide local authorities with
          more support to: (i) develop a planned institutional response to the problems of
          violence and insecurity; and (ii) systematize interventions.
1.13      In this context, the program’s main challenges are:
1.14      Insufficient infrastructure and services. The program has helped raise national
          averages for basic infrastructure coverage above 90%. Nevertheless, high levels of
          inequality in access to urban services in the country’s municipios persist, especially
          in those containing polygons that are eligible for the program. These municipios
          have very limited own resources and low institutional capacity, which prevents
          them from addressing the needs of all areas with infrastructure and service deficits.
          According to a 2014 update conducted by SEDATU,20 there are still
17
     Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), 2012, Slum Upgrading: Lessons Learned from Brazil,
     Magalhães, F. and F. di Villarosa, editors; IDB, 2009, Building Cities: Neighborhood Upgrading and Urban
     Quality of Life, Rojas, E. editor; IDB, 2007, Facing the Challenges of Informal Settlements in Urban Centers:
     The Re-urbanization of Manaus, Brazil, Magalhães F. and E. Rojas. With respect to Mexico specifically, see
     Gonzalez-Navarro, M. and C. Quintana-Domeque, 2010. Urban Infrastructure and Economic Development:
     Experimental Evidence from Street Pavement, IZA, Discussion Paper 5346, November 2010.
18
     Results of An Impact Evaluation Study of the Upgrading of Informal Settlements Programme in Selected
     Projects in South Africa, 2011, World Bank; Indonesia: Evaluation of the Urban Community Driven
     Development Program, 2013, World Bank; and the final evaluation of the Barrio Improvement Program II
     (PROMEBA II), 2011.
19
     Moser, C. 2006, The Stages-of-Progress Methodology, Assets, and Longitudinal Trends: Results from a
     Five-year Study in 236 Communities of Five Countries; Asset Accumulation Policy and Poverty Reduction;
     Solimano, A. 2006; Asset Accumulation by the Middle Class and the Poor: Economic Considerations and the
     Latin American Experience; Cattaneo M. et al., 2009, Housing, Health, and Happiness, American Economic
     Journal: Economic Policy, 1:1, 75-105. Also, the experience of countries such as Brazil, with a strong
     tradition of integrated neighborhood improvement programs, has also shown that the social needs of an
     underserved population cannot be adequately addressed without also recovering the fiscal environment,
     Claudio Beato. 2012, Crime e Cidades [Crime and Cities], Editora UFMG.
20
     The map of program polygons was updated based on 2010 census data, eliminating those in which urban
     and social infrastructure gaps had been closed and habitability had been improved.
                                                       -5-



          2,948 polygons in the country with high levels of social gaps, where some six
          million households reside. Of this total, the program has accorded priority to
          777 containing dwellings with the most deficiencies. Of these, the current stage of
          the program will have the capacity to address the needs of approximately 400.21
          Specifically, these deficiencies are in terms of: (i) paved roads and sidewalks
          (34.2%); (ii) public lighting (26.5%); (iii) potable water (9.2%); and (iv) sanitary
          drainage (4.4%). Most of the polygons lack green spaces,22 community support
          networks, and common spaces where support services could be provided to
          strengthen the skills and income-earning opportunities of men and women. This is
          especially important for women, since they already account for 25% of the
          country’s heads of household. Most of these women are responsible for household
          tasks, and 60% work in the informal sector.23
1.15      Insecurity. The aforementioned deficiencies are coupled with the current state of
          insecurity and violence in these areas24 and in the rest of the country. Although the
          Mexican government’s 2014 report on the main advances made in the country’s
          security policy shows a downward trend in criminal activity in the country in the last
          year—with a national homicide rate of 17 per 100,000 inhabitants and a crime rate
          of 1,328 per 100,000 inhabitants25—Mexico remains one of the countries most
          affected by violence, with an estimated 1.34% loss of GDP (US$14.3 billion)26 and
          the region’s highest rates of perceived insecurity (72.3% for persons over 18).
          Young people are both the main victims and perpetrators of this violence. 27 While
          much of the escalation in violence is attributable to drug trafficking and differences
          vary significantly by region, there are underlying risk factors for this problem,
          including: (i) domestic violence; (ii) the unemployed population; (iii) the high
          percentage of children and adolescents ages 6 to 17 who do not attend school;
          (iv) the low level of household income; (v) overcrowded housing conditions; and
          (vi) the percentage of young people who neither work nor study. Although the
          polygons targeted by the program do not necessarily have the country’s highest
          violence or homicide rates, the above-mentioned risk factors are present at high or

21
     This is an estimate based on the levels of service provided in previous stages and therefore not a maximum
     limit or exact figure to be executed by the program. Interventions in some of these polygons began in 2015,
     and this work will continue in the coming years.
22
     The Public Spaces Rehabilitation Program, for which SEDATU is also the executing agency, analyzed the
     777 polygons prioritized by the Habitat Program and identified 450 degraded amenities.
23
     In 2014, Mexico’s National Women’s Institute (INMUJERES) conducted a study of 37 federal programs,
     including Habitat. With respect to the latter, it found significant gender gaps in areas such as capacity-
     building, education, and domestic violence prevention in the targeted polygons. The activities under
     Component II are aimed at narrowing most of these gaps, while taking into account the specific needs of
     women.
24
     Criminal activity is a recurring problem in areas and neighborhoods with serious physical and environmental
     degradation, as well as poor socioeconomic conditions. While deteriorated neighborhoods are not always
     violent, violent neighborhoods are always deteriorated. C. Beato. Crime e Cidades, 2012, p. 183.
25
     Informe de Principales Avances de la Política de Seguridad del Gobierno de la República 2014 [Report on
     the Main Progress of the Security Policy of the Government of the Republic 2014], Department of the
     Interior, Department of National Defense, Department of the Navy (Mexican Navy), and the Office of the
     Attorney General.
26
     This figure refers to the Mex$215.2 billion cited in Mexico’s 2013 National Survey on Victimization and
     Perception of Public Security.
27
     The national average homicide rate was 21 per 100,000 inhabitants, reaching 38 among 20- to 24-year-olds,
     and 45 among 25- to 29-year-olds (INEGI, 2011). On average, 18- to 29-year-olds accounted for 41.4% of
     alleged offenders in cases under federal jurisdiction and for 50% in cases under local jurisdiction during the
     2000-2008 period. World Bank, 2012, La violencia juvenil en México [Youth Violence in Mexico].
                                                      -6-



          very high levels in 25% of the municipios the program has slated for intervention,
          and at moderate levels in 35%.28
1.16      Limited resources versus service demand. The program’s universe of
          intervention is still quite extensive (paragraph 1.14). Considering the current
          deficits in the priority polygons and the program’s average annual budget, it would
          take at least 15 years to eliminate them,29 and this does not factor in any new
          intervention areas. In addition to budget insufficiency, two aspects of the program’s
          design have thus far prevented it from maximizing the impact of its resources:
          (i) the program has historically accorded priority to the continuity of investments in
          the polygons (i.e. completing investments that have begun in one polygon before
          moving on to another), which is why no new polygons have been added in recent
          years; and (ii) until 2014, the program’s Operating Regulations had established a
          relatively low annual investment ceiling per polygon, averaging US$450,000,30 so it
          took several years to close the gaps identified.
1.17      Program strategy. Based on the positive findings of the evaluations conducted and
          the lessons learned in the Bank’s monitoring of the execution of this and other
          similar programs in the region, this operation will complement previous interventions
          while still: (i) targeting polygons; (ii) pursuing simultaneous interventions in physical
          works and complementary social development and prevention activities; and
          (iii) building municipal capacity to plan interventions.
1.18      To address the pending challenges, these practices will be supplemented by:
          a. Targeting actions in the 777 polygons in which households have the most
             pronounced urban infrastructure gaps; most of these are new to the program.
          b. Eliminating the investment ceiling per polygon, thereby enabling municipios
             with the means to contribute more of their own resources to access additional
             federal funding.
          c. Stepping up social prevention of violence activities, including: (i) use of the
             crime prevention through environmental design approach for investments in
             public commons; (ii) a focus on violence prevention programs targeting at-risk
             youth, offering them ongoing activities (i.e., job training and cultural and
             sporting activities to pursue in their free time) designed based on international
             good practices; (iii) training for local officials in the design and implementation
             of prevention plans; and (iv) the documentation of prevention experiences.
          d. Concentrating actions to prevent the fragmentation of investments and
             enhancing the program’s impact through: (i) emphasis, in planning, on the
             mandatory preparation of a comprehensive action plan for each polygon (each
             such plan will prioritize investments in subareas where gaps are concentrated);
             (ii) the incorporation of the complete streets concept, which provides that all
             urban infrastructure (e.g. water, drainage, paving, sidewalks, and lighting) be
             installed or completed for each street targeted for intervention; and (iii) the

28
     SEDATU built and calculated a municipal vulnerability index that correlates these risk factors with the
     cumulative homicide rates per 100,000 inhabitants in the municipio analyzed.
29
     At the current pace of investment—US$303.5 million per year, including the funding provided by the Bank
     and the contributions of the federal and municipal governments—it would take approximately 15 years to
     close all gaps in the program’s 777 priority polygons.
30
     Notwithstanding the differences between programs, the budget for a Habitat polygon represents roughly half
     the amount invested by similar programs in the region.
                                                     -7-



              continuation of actions that effectively improve the municipios’ capacity to
              mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate change (paragraph 1.9).
1.19      Strategic alignment. The program’s actions are consistent with the territorial
          development focus of the IDB country strategy with Mexico 2013-2018 (document
          GN-2749). The objective in the urban sector is to promote the orderly, safe, and
          sustainable development of cities, with a focus on: (i) fostering sustainable and
          smart urban development; (ii) narrowing gaps in housing and basic utilities; and
          (iii) creating favorable urban environments that deter the causes of crime and
          violence. The Urban Development and Housing Sector Framework (document
          GN-2732-2) identifies comprehensive urban interventions as one of the lines of
          action guiding the Bank’s operational activities. The operation is also aligned with
          the Operational Guidelines for Program Design and Execution in the Area of Civic
          Coexistence and Public Safety (document GN-2535-1), and with the Citizen
          Security and Justice Sector Framework (document GN-2771-3). With regard to
          climate change, the program is aligned with the Bank’s Integrated Strategy for
          Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable
          Energy (document GN-2609), through its efforts to build municipal capacity on
          climate change issues, as well as direct financing for mitigation and adaptation
          activities in vulnerable urban areas. It will also contribute to the lending priorities of
          the Report on the Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Inter-American
          Development Bank (document AB-2764) on: (i) poverty reduction and equity
          enhancement; and (ii) supporting initiatives in the areas of climate change,
          renewable energy, and sustainable practices. Likewise, it will contribute to regional
          infrastructure targets for competitiveness and social welfare by: (i) increasing
          coverage of paved roads through the indicator “square meters built or rehabilitated
          with pavement”; and (ii) reducing gastrointestinal diseases through the indicators
          “linear meters of potable water built or rehabilitated” and “linear meters of drainage
          and sewers built or rehabilitated”; as well as the regional target on protecting the
          environment and responding to climate change. Lastly, it will contribute to the
          priority of Sector Strategy Institutions for Growth and Social Welfare (document
          GN-2587-2).
1.20      The program meets the financial sustainability and economic evaluation conditions
          of the Public Utilities Policy (document GN-2716-4) and is consistent with the
          policy’s principles (Public Utilities Policy compliance analysis). The basic
          infrastructure works are socioeconomically viable (paragraphs 1.6 and 1.26). The
          federal resources—which are partially financed by this program and supplemented
          with local resources—are allocated in a transparent manner,31 with a view to
          expanding access to basic urban infrastructure and social services
          (paragraph 1.21). To support the distribution of resources to eligible polygons, local
          and/or state governments will conduct participatory community-based
          assessments, and will also organize planning workshops with the community.
          These workshops will develop and forward proposals to the execution unit, which
          in turn transfers funds from the federal contribution to the aforementioned
          governments for implementing the projects (paragraph 3.3 addresses selection
          and implementation considerations). This includes the execution and maintenance-
          related aspects of the investments pursuant to the federal regulatory framework on


31
     The program distributes resources among the states of the federation according to a national distribution
     formula based on socioeconomic conditions.
                                                        -8-



          contracting public works and procurement, in keeping with Bank policies (program
          Operating Regulations).
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.21      Objective. To help improve habitability in areas with social and urban infrastructure
          gaps32 by: (i) expanding access to such infrastructure; and (ii) promoting social
          development in safe spaces. In keeping with this objective, the project is divided
          into three components:
1.22      Component I. Improvement of the urban environment (US$164 million). The
          objectives are to: (i) expand or build basic urban infrastructure in the polygons;
          (ii) provide or rehabilitate urban equipment and street furniture, taking situational
          crime prevention guidelines into account; and (iii) promote crosscutting climate
          change actions in the design of infrastructure works and equipment, and in the
          operation of the CDCs.33 Support will be provided for urban infrastructure networks
          (e.g. paving, potable water, sanitary and storm drainage, road and sidewalk
          construction, electrification, and public lighting), as well as the construction or
          upgrading of social and community infrastructure (e.g. CDCs).
1.23      Component II. Promotion of social development (US$31.24 million). The
          objectives are to strengthen the individual capacities of polygon inhabitants and
          improve citizen security and civic coexistence interventions. This component will
          support activities including social integration and violence prevention to be carried
          out at the CDCs, based on demand in each community. These activities include
          specific training workshops,34 activities with a gender focus,35 and sporting or
          cultural activities that encourage positive use of free time. Also included are
          actions to prevent young people from engaging in risk behaviors. In addition, this
          component may support participatory community-based assessments and action
          plans that combine urban renewal interventions with measures for social
          prevention of violence, as well as other activities promoting social development.
          This component will include pilot programs, on the basis of which a more extensive
          plan will be developed to strengthen the civic coexistence and social prevention of
          violence intervention methodology, and to fine-tune the programmatic content.36
1.24      Component III. Institutional strengthening (US$4.4 million). The objectives are
          to build the capacities of the executing entities to formulate, monitor, execute, and
          evaluate this project, and the capacity of the execution unit to select the executing
          agency to manage it. Accordingly, the component will support actions including:

32
     The Social Gap Index is a weighted measurement that combines four social gap indicators (education,
     health, basic services, and housing spaces) into a single index. www.coneval.gob.mx.
33
     This will be done by adopting better designs for infrastructure works that municipios have traditionally carried
     out, through training and workshops that promote the use of eco-friendly technologies in works, such as
     hydraulic cement and the use of biodigesters to treat wastewater. In addition, steps will be taken to
     encourage the rational use of nonrenewable natural resources through the installation of energy efficient
     systems, e.g. solar panels and solar water heaters, devices for capturing and reusing rainwater; and green
     rooftops.
34
     Workshops on sewing, cooking, handicrafts, carpentry, plumbing, hairdressing, vegetable gardening, and
     others, aimed at supplementing family income.
35
     The aim of training and gender-focused workshops is to help close gender gaps detected in the communities
     (gender perspectives).
36
     The location of the pilots will be determined at the outset of execution, in localities where the greatest
     demand for such interventions is identified, together with municipal willingness to carry them out.
                                                       -9-



          (i) training activities targeting the project’s central, local office, and executing
          agency levels in the areas of planning (preparation of a comprehensive action
          plan), climate change, and environmental sustainability; (ii) training for local
          authorities in identifying, assessing, planning, executing, and monitoring programs
          for social prevention of violence; (iii) training activities and opportunities to share
          experiences with and among the authorities and beneficiaries in the municipios
          and polygons targeted for intervention; (iv) forums for transferring knowledge and
          good practices between the central level and the executing agencies; and
          (v) integrating the SIIPSO with other execution unit information systems so as to
          improve its capacity to analyze information.
C.        Key outcome indicators
1.25      Expected outcomes. Of the 777 priority polygons, in this project the available
          resources are expected to partially cover half (400), encompassing two million
          households. The project’s impact indicator will be property value, which is a proxy
          for improved habitability in the polygons. The outcome indicators include: (i) the
          narrowing of deficits in service coverage (i.e. water, drainage, paving, and public
          lighting); (ii) the improvement in the perception of safety in the targeted areas,
          among the population as a whole and women specifically; and (iii) the
          improvement in the employment status of young people who participate in
          prevention workshops for that purpose. Also included are sector output indicators
          regarding: (i) the beneficiaries of improved housing solutions; and (ii) the
          beneficiaries of citizen security projects designed or evaluated by the Bank
          (Annex II, Results Matrix).
1.26      Economic evaluation. As part of this evaluation, a cost-benefit analysis was
          conducted that compared the costs of the program’s planned investments with
          their expected benefits. The program’s costs37 include the investments and
          expenses associated with program operation and maintenance, as well as the
          costs of environmental mitigation and monitoring. The benefits derive from the
          residents’ enhanced well-being attributable to the works executed in their
          polygons, and expressed as appreciation in the property values of lots, which are
          expected to increase 15% in polygons targeted by the program versus a
          5% increase in polygons that were not. This 10% difference means that, based on
          a 12% discount rate and a 20-year evaluation horizon, net present value is positive
          and equivalent to US$90 million. Moreover, the program’s cost-benefit ratio is 1.45,
          meaning that every dollar invested generates US$1.45 in benefits. Lastly, the
          sensitivity analysis conducted on the main variables impacting costs and benefits
          showed that the program’s results would continue to be solid in the event of
          increases in maintenance costs for the program’s main investments, and a
          reduction in the value of home prices (economic analysis).

                            II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       The total cost of the project will be US$200 million, which will be financed with an
          investment loan from the Ordinary Capital.


37
     Infrastructure costs are expected to account for 80% of the program’s total cost, and the investments will be
     executed over a three-year period.
                                             - 10 -



                                 Table 1. Program costs (in US$ thousands)
                                    Component                                 Bank       %
       Component I. Improvement of the urban environment                     164,000    82
       Component II. Promotion of social development                          31,240    16
       Component III. Institutional strengthening                              4,400     2
       Project management
         Evaluation                                                              210     0
         Auditing                                                                150     0
       TOTAL                                                                 200,000   100


2.2   The Habitat Program’s execution record is solid. Of the last three operations, two
      were executed in three years, as planned. With respect to the remaining operation,
      it requested a one-year extension, due mainly to the time involved in the 2013
      change in administration and at SEDATU. On average each year, the program
      disburses between US$65 million to US$70 million, as illustrated in the following
      table:

                       Table 2. Schedule of disbursements (in US$ millions)
                  2016                       2017                         2018
                   60                         70                            70



B.    Environmental and social risks
2.3   This program does not require classification under Directive B.13 of the IDB’s
      Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (Operational Policy OP-703).
      During the preparation of loan 2569/OC-ME and the current project, a profile of the
      environmental performance of Bank-financed actions was prepared. It showed that
      99% of investments are small in scale, involve little or no environmental complexity
      (construction or rehabilitation of public lighting, sidewalks, urban infrastructure,
      etc.), and generate significant positive social impacts. The few adverse
      environmental and social impacts associated with the program are localized,
      temporary, and readily mitigated. Hence, the environmental and social risk is
      minimal. In these cases, verification of the operations against the Bank’s list of
      excluded activities and use of Mexico’s regulatory framework while following the
      executing entities’ supervision protocols (states and municipios), even in the
      municipios lagging farthest behind, are sufficient to safeguard the low degree of
      the program’s adverse environmental and social impacts.
2.4   A few works were also identified that, due to their nature, could generate more
      intense and longer-lasting environmental and social impacts. These were assigned
      a higher risk profile (Annex II of the environmental and social management report).
      For the time being, the program will finance only one type of work in this category,
      such as road or paving works covering a significant area (more than 50,000 m2).
      For works like these with a higher risk profile and/or an investment value over
      US$5 million, implementation of the environmental and social management system
      will be requested, as described in the environmental and social management
      report.
2.5   Lastly, ex post supervision is proposed for all works supported by the project,
      including those with a high risk profile. Each year the Bank will select a random
                                           - 11 -



      sample of such works and will conduct inspection visits to verify compliance with
      the required environmental and social procedures and, if necessary, agree on
      corrective measures. Lastly, in the event of a significant change in the size or
      nature of the operations and/or the program, a review of this environmental and
      social strategy may be requested and any necessary corrections made
      (environmental and social management report).
C.    Fiduciary risks
2.6   Based on the Bank’s experience with this executing agency and projects with
      Mexico’s federal government, the fiduciary and procurement risks are classified as
      low. Given the Department of Social Development’s satisfactory transfer of this
      operation and its information systems to SEDATU in 2013, and the effective
      participation of the states and municipios in the program, the current structure
      should remain in place, in which SEDATU’s execution unit is responsible for
      coordinating, managing, and executing the program, as well as for monitoring
      technical, programmatic, budgetary, and financial considerations. In May 2015, an
      analysis of SEDATU’s institutional capacity was conducted using the Bank’s
      Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS), resulting in an average weighted
      score of 97%, indicating a satisfactory level of development and confirming the
      project’s low fiduciary execution risk (see Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and
      Requirements and the evaluation report on SEDATU institutional capacity).
2.7   This classification of SEDATU is consistent with the low fiduciary risk associated
      with municipal execution. No problems were observed in its last two operations with
      the Bank. This is partly due to the fact that the municipios are very familiar with how
      the program operates and that it: (i) finances works projects that are traditionally
      associated with municipios, which they request and cofinance; and (ii) provides
      support and guidance to improve the quality of municipal planning. The Operating
      Regulations also include provisions for reallocating resources in the event the
      municipios fail to comply in a timely manner with their plans or commitments.
D.    Other risks
2.8   Two potential medium risks have been identified: (i) coordination difficulties
      between the public works and social development areas of the municipios in terms
      of implementing the actions set out in the comprehensive action plan; and (ii) the
      possibility that young people may not be interested in participating in activities for
      social prevention of violence. To mitigate the first risk, the various municipal
      government agencies would take part in developing the comprehensive action
      plans, through an administrative act issued by the mayor requiring the involvement
      and collaboration of the aforementioned areas. Regarding the second, the young
      people benefiting from the program would take part in formulating proposals for
      activities to be included in the comprehensive action plan, prompted by the sharing
      of similar experiences that have met with successful outcomes in other countries,
      and conducting a communications campaign to raise awareness on the available
      activities.

                    III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1   Borrower and executing agency. The borrower will be the United Mexican
      States, acting through the Department of Finance (SHCP). The executing agency
                                                        - 12 -



          will be SEDATU, through the execution unit established or designated for such
          purposes. Works and services for this project will be contracted by the executing
          entities (states, municipios, or other entities established in the project’s Operating
          Regulations) and by SEDATU (for consulting services). Nacional Financiera,
          S.N.C., I.B.D. (NAFIN) will serve as financial agent and will oversee compliance
          with the IDB’s rules and policies in order to contribute to the transparency and
          eligibility of the expenditures. As a special condition precedent to the first
          disbursement, an agency agreement will be signed between the borrower,
          SEDATU, and NAFIN.
3.2       Project execution, administration, and Operating Regulations. The project will
          be governed by the Habitat Program’s current Operating Regulations, or any
          updates thereto, as published in the Official Gazette. They were published in
          accordance with federal laws and regulations, which require that the operating
          regulations of all programs that receive funds from the federal government be
          approved and published annually. SEDATU, in consultation with the Bank, will
          prepare and periodically review the operating regulations.
3.3       Overall project execution and administration. The execution unit will serve as
          the financing window for the project and works, which will be proposed and
          prepared by the state and municipal governments with technical and regulatory
          support from SEDATU’s local offices in the states. These works and projects will
          be presented in the comprehensive action plan for each polygon, which is the
          mandatory planning instrument and must be submitted in order to obtain program
          resources. In each comprehensive action plan, the municipio’s social development
          and public works areas submit a coordinated intervention proposal at the request
          of the mayor, who issues an administrative act for such purpose. Once analyzed
          by the regional and central authorities, the comprehensive action plans will be
          approved for implementation.
3.4       Once agreement is reached on state and municipal cofinancing, coordination
          framework agreements38 are signed (between SEDATU and the states) as well as
          specific coordination agreements39 (between SEDATU and the municipios) to
          establish the responsibilities of the executing agencies for the execution and
          maintenance of the approved projects. SEDATU headquarters will transfer the
          resources to its local offices, which will in turn release them to the municipios to
          make the corresponding contracting arrangements and payments. The SEDATU
          local office will designate staff for the financial monitoring of the projects at the local
          level, as well as to supervise and monitor them, retaining all supporting
          documentation for SEDATU headquarters to process the respective disbursements.


38
     This agreement sets out the state ceiling (which is published in advance in the oficio de distribución de
     subsidies [official distribution of subsidies letter], the program operating regulations, and the requirement for
     the executing agencies to submit a comprehensive action plan.
39
     Under this agreement, the municipio agrees to: (i) apply the federal subsidies and local financial resources
     contributed to the Habitat Program, in accordance with applicable legislation; (ii) open a bank account
     specifically to manage federal resources; (iii) open a bank account to manage local contributions;
     (iv) supervise program works or actions, and ensure that the program’s execution complies with the pertinent
     standards; (v) keep the CDCs operating for the purposes agreed upon for a period of at least five years from
     their delivery date, and schedule and budget for CDC social activities; (vi) maintain works and equipment,
     and record them in the appropriate inventories, informing the local office with respect to their use and
     safekeeping; and (vii) maintain the necessary budget resources to cover its contribution for the execution of
     projects approved under the program.
                                          - 13 -



      The original basic documentation used to justify expenditures will remain with the
      executing entities.
3.5   Sustainability of project actions. In addition to the above-mentioned contractual
      provisions for the maintenance of works and the operation of the CDCs, the
      continuity of social actions and social prevention of violence will be fostered
      through activities to strengthen the municipios and SEDATU local offices to be
      financed under Component III. Community committees will also be strengthened to
      ensure that comprehensive action plan proposals maintain continuity with those of
      previous fiscal years, and collect information on the workshop preferences of
      program beneficiaries.
3.6   The execution unit will be responsible for the general and administrative
      coordination of the operation, pursuant to the provisions of the project’s Operating
      Regulations. It will also be responsible for consolidating the project’s financial
      information and relations with the Bank. NAFIN will be the intermediary for financial
      management, technical supervision, external auditing, and overall program
      monitoring. Component III will allow for specific consulting contracts to strengthen
      the execution unit, SEDATU local offices, and the municipios.
3.7   Retroactive financing. The Bank may recognize against the loan proceeds eligible
      expenditures made by the borrower prior to the date the loan is signed in all project
      categories, for up to US$40 million (20% of the proposed loan amount), provided
      that requirements substantially similar to those established in the loan contract were
      met, regardless of their stated source of financing in the federal expenditure budget
      for the corresponding fiscal year. Such expenditures must have been made on or
      after 22 April 2015 (project profile approval date), but in no case will expenditures
      made more than 18 months before the loan approval date be included.
3.8   Procurement. Two types of procurements are conducted under the program:
      (i) SEDATU procurement, consisting primarily of consulting services to be provided
      by consulting firms or individual consultants, as well as nonconsulting services
      (defined in Component III); and (ii) procurement funded by SEDATU contributions
      to the states or municipios for the construction or expansion of urban infrastructure
      (water, sanitation, drainage, paving, public lighting), and the construction,
      expansion, rehabilitation, and equipping of CDCs, and CDC activities (defined in
      Components I and II). In the case of the former, procurement will be carried out in
      accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed
      by the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies
      for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American
      Development Bank (document GN-2350-9), standard bidding documents, standard
      requests for proposals agreed on between the Bank and Mexico’s Civil Service
      Department (SFP), and on the basis of the procurement plan.
3.9   For procurements funded by SEDATU contributions to the states and municipios, a
      waiver to the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the
      IDB (document GN-2349-9) in Components I and II would need to be requested to
      allow for the use of national legislation. Such a waiver was obtained for the
      program’s first two operations because: (i) the program is demand-driven and
      executed during the fiscal year, and it is therefore impossible to identify with
      sufficient advance notice the list of projects to be supported, the requesters, or the
      amounts; (ii) some 10,000 procurements are made each year and are widely
      scattered geographically over some 300 municipios and 32 federative entities; one-
                                                       - 14 -



          third are for works (simple40 and executed by local contractors) and the remainder
          are for goods or nonconsulting services. In view of this, applying the Bank’s
          procurement policies would entail high costs for the borrower and the Bank alike in
          terms of transactions, training, and time. Hence, the same reasons a waiver to the
          Bank’s procurement policies was granted in the two previous operations continue
          to apply, including that nearly all the contracts (99%)41 were for amounts below the
          ceiling established by the Bank for the use of the shopping method in Mexico
          (US$500,000) for works.42 The remaining contracts, involving amounts over
          US$500,000, would follow the national competitive bidding method.43 It should be
          noted that Federal Budget and Fiscal Responsibility Law (and its regulations)
          applies to the requested waiver; it rigorously reviews the physical and financial
          execution of the works, and the Civil Service Department verifies that the
          processes comply with the requirements of federal legislation.
3.10      To verify some of the aforementioned conditions, a consulting firm was hired in
          2014 to analyze a sample of the procurements conducted between 2012 and 2013
          and profile: (i) the contracting firms; and (ii) the processes used in awarding
          106 projects in all amount categories, including all contracts over US$500,000. The
          consulting study confirmed that all the contracts were awarded to small and
          medium-sized enterprises in the same locality or state where the works were
          executed (consequently, it would appear that international bidders would not be
          interested in these works), and that the percentage of works valued at over
          US$500,000 is very small (in a two-year sample, there were only 19 such works
          out of a total of 6,000). Of these 19 works, only one reached US$1.5 million, while
          the others barely exceeded US$500,000.44 For more detailed information, see
          Annex III, Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements and the optional electronic link
          on justification for requesting a waiver of the Bank’s procurement policies.
3.11      Procurement planning. SEDATU will submit the proposed procurement plan to
          the Bank for review and approval, in accordance with the provisions of the Bank’s
          policies governing procurement and the contracting of consultants. The
          procurement plan will be updated at least every 12 months during execution, and
          each updated version will be submitted for the Bank’s review and no objection.


40
     Works and consulting contracts average US$60,000 and US$14,000, respectively.
41
     The percentage is less than 1%. Between 2012 and 2013, only 19 contracts (.003%) in the latter category
     were concluded out of a total of 6,759 contracted works.
42
     Mexico’s procurement method (invitation to at least three bidders) may be used when the amount falls below
     the aforementioned ceiling, since it is compatible with the shopping method provided in the Bank’s
     procurement policies.
43
     The differences between Mexican legislation and Bank rules in this category refer to the participation of
     foreign firms and an award system combining points and price, which involves two potential risks: that
     interested foreign firms may be prevented from bidding (eligibility risk) and that the contract may not be
     awarded to the least-cost bid. In both cases, the results of a 2014 consulting study showed that the likelihood
     of these risks materializing is low. This same study found that because small works located in scattered
     areas were involved, the contracts would be awarded to local contractors. It also confirmed that, based on a
     sample, the contracts are awarded to the least-cost bids.
44
     Pursuant to its procurement policies, the Bank sets thresholds for each country, over which participation by
     international firms (international competitive bidding) is possible. Below these thresholds, no international
     participation is expected inasmuch as the local market has sufficient competitors, and international bidders
     would not be able to submit competitive bids. The international competitive bidding thresholds for Mexico
     are: for simple works, over US$15 million; and for complex works, over US$500 million (see footnote 40 on
     the types of works included in this project).
                                                       - 15 -



3.12      External auditing. The program’s annual financial statements will be prepared by
          SEDATU in accordance with the guidelines issued by the SFP. They will be
          reviewed by an external audit firm selected by the SFP, and their work will be done
          in accordance with the general terms of reference harmonized with the World
          Bank, the SFP, and the IDB. SEDATU will submit the project’s annual financial
          statements to the Bank, through NAFIN, within 180 days following the end of the
          federal government’s fiscal year, in view of the fact that 120 days is not enough
          time for SEDATU to obtain the financial information on the execution of Habitat
          Program resources from the federative entities and municipios. The annual audit
          will be conducted by a firm of independent auditors acceptable to the Bank. This
          firm will be selected on an annual basis by the Civil Service Department.45
B.        Summary of results monitoring arrangements
3.13      Monitoring by the executing agency. The execution unit will use the following
          documents to monitor the project: (i) the Results Matrix; (ii) the multiyear execution
          plan; (iii) the monitoring and evaluation plan; (iv) the procurement plan; (v) the risk
          and risk assessment and mitigation matrices; and (vi) the program disbursement
          plan. The execution unit will prepare consolidated semiannual progress reports for
          review by the Bank, which will be submitted no later than 60 days following the end
          of each six-month period.
3.14      Monitoring by the Bank. The Bank will conduct administration missions or
          inspection visits, depending on the size and complexity of project execution. In
          addition, the Bank agrees that the execution unit will use the indicators and format
          of the progress monitoring report as the basis for its semiannual reports.
3.15      In addition, there will be yearly joint meetings between the execution unit and the
          Bank to discuss the project’s progress and the targets for the following year. The
          execution unit undertakes to maintain a project monitoring and evaluation system,
          based on which it will prepare the reports and data to be provided to the Bank. The
          execution unit will also engage a specialist responsible for planning and monitoring
          its activities.
3.16      Evaluation. Achievement of the outcome and impact targets set forth in the results
          matrix will be verified through a final evaluation as well as an ex post cost-benefit
          analysis. The final evaluation will be performed when 90% of the loan proceeds
          have been disbursed and will focus on verifying the degree of fulfillment of the
          targets set for each of the expected outcomes and the generation of outputs by
          component. It will include: (i) a survey to measure the change in security conditions
          in the municipios where most of the interventions are concentrated; and (ii) an
          evaluation of the results of social prevention of violence programs targeting young
          people. The aim of the ex post cost-benefit analysis is to measure the project’s
          results and benefits (monitoring and evaluation plan).




45
     The minimum information required for audits will include the annual financial report, which has been
     accepted by NAFIN in terms of the consistency of the figures, the list of projects supported with Bank
     resources during the fiscal year under review, the execution unit’s organizational structure, the disbursement
     requests, and the official subsidy distribution letter.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Annex I - ME-L1167
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 1




                                                                                   Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                                  Summary
I. Strategic Alignment
1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives                                                                                                        Aligned
                                                                                       -Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement
   Lending Program                                                                     -Lending to support climate change initiatives, renewable energy and environmental sustainability


                                                                                       -Incidence of waterborne diseases (per 100,000 inhabitants)
                                                                                       -Paved road coverage (Km/Km2)
   Regional Development Goals
                                                                                       -Countries with planning capacity in mitigation and adaptation of climate change

                                                                                       -Households with new or upgraded water supply
                                                                                       -Households with new or upgraded sanitary connections
   Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)                 -Km of inter-urban roads built or maintained/upgraded
                                                                                       -Km of electricity transmission and distribution lines installed or upgraded

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives                                                                                                     Aligned

   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                GN-2749              Promote the orderly, secure and sustainable growth of cities.


   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                 GN-2805              The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.


Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned
to country strategy or country program)
II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                      Highly Evaluable                            Weight                                  Maximum Score
                                                                                                    9.0                                                                               10
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                            10.0                                  33.33%                                       10
   3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                            3.0
   3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                          4.0
   3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                       3.0
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                       10.0                                  33.33%                                         10
  4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a
                                                                                                     4.0
General Economic Analysis
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits                                                          1.5
     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs                                                             1.5
     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                      1.5
     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                        1.5
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                         7.0                                 33.33%                                         10
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                       1.5
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                             5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                               Low
                  Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                                                  Yes
                      Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks                                                                   Yes
        Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation                                                                    Yes
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                       B.13
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                       Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting, External
                                                                                                                       control, Internal Audit.
                                                        Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)                Yes
                                                                                                                       Procurement: Information System, Shopping Method, National Public Bidding.

                                                                       Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended
beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

                                                                     Gender Equality
                                                                             Labor
                                                                                                                       The strengthening of the municipal management capacity on areas related to
                                                                         Environment                Yes                climate change adaptation and mitigation will benefit future works that will not
                                                                                                                       be financed by the project.


                                                                                                                       With the Bank’s resources two consultancies were undertaken to support four
Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the
                                                                                                                       municipalities in the country in the formulation of participatory diagnostics
public sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of                     Yes
                                                                                                                       and integral action plans focalized on at-risk youth. These consultancies will
the project
                                                                                                                       monitor the execution of these plans as well as their results.



The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close
knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the project document
and/or in the evaluation plan


The Habitat Program of Mexico's Federal Government aims to improve the living conditions of households in municipalities with more than 15,000 inhabitants. The Bank has supported Habitat since
2005 with positive operational results. In the previous project, a rigorous impact evaluation was undertaken that demonstrated that the program had a significant positive impact on the living conditions
of the beneficiary population, by improving urban infrastructure, and achieving greater population satisfaction with the environment. The execution of the program significantly increased the property
values of the beneficiary households versus those that did not participate in the program.

The diagnosis is clear and closely linked with the proposal of this new operation, which also includes new areas of support such as violence prevention and capacity to mitigate climate change. This
project proposes a program focused on the areas that have the greatest infrastructure deficits. It comprises three components: i) improvements in urban areas through the construction of
infrastructure, provision and rehabilitation of equipment, and promotion of transversal actions on climate change; (ii) promotion of social development by financing social integration activities and
training for the prevention of violence; and (iii) institutional strengthening, which includes training for municipalities and horizontal transfer of knowledge.

The results matrix has clear vertical logic. The final impact, increase in property values, is generated as a consequence of greater availability of urban infrastructure (water, sewerage, public lighting,
road pavement), and an improved perception of security. All indicators are SMART.

A cost-benefit analysis was undertaken, which is based on the impact evaluation of the program for the period 2009-2012. This evaluation indicates that Habitat’s interventions produced significant and
positive results in several dimensions. The improvements are expressed in a greater willingness to pay for property in the intervened areas, which was valued at 66 pesos per square meter over the
property value of the control group. The cost-benefit analysis of the base case indicates that for every peso invested, 1.45 pesos are recovered in net benefits as a result of the property value increases
documented on the impact evaluation. This return is consistent with previous evaluations of the program and with other similar programs in the region. The sensitivity analysis indicates that this
estimation is solid when faced with variations in the most important assumptions.

The monitoring and evaluation plan proposes a reflexive evaluation and an ex post cost-benefit analysis.
                                                                                                                                                                        Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 1 of 5


                                                                                         RESULTS MATRIX
                                                             1                      2
                              To help improve habitability in areas with social and urban infrastructure gaps by: (i) expanding access to such infrastructure; and (ii) promoting social
Program objective:
                              development in safe spaces.


Expected impact: Improved habitability in the targeted polygons

           Impact indicator                          Baseline                       Target              Means of verification                               Observations
                                                                                                     Specialized consulting report.   This indicator is used as a proxy for habitability, since
Property value per square meter in the                           3                           4
                                                   Mex$973.80                Mex$1,124.74            Final report from the ex post    property value is a measure of the services and
targeted areas
                                                                                                     cost-benefit analysis            features accessible to dwellings and their environs.

                                                                                                              5
                                                                                        OUTCOME INDICATORS
Expected outcome 1: Improved access to urban infrastructure in targeted polygons
                                                   Baseline                Interim
               Indicator                                                 measurement Target             Means of verification                               Observations
                                           Unit       Base       Year       2016
                                                                                                    -Registry of beneficiaries        Deficit = total households without access to paving
                                                                                                    -Georeferencing of works          (1,045,964) / total households in the 777 priority
 Paving deficit                             %         34.2       2014          33            31.7   -Census data (2010), National     polygons (3,059,441).
                                                                                                     Statistics and Geography
                                                                                                     Institute (INEGI)
                                                                                                    -Registry of beneficiaries        Deficit = total households without access to water
 Water access deficit                       %          9.2       2014          8.9           8.7    -Georeferencing of works          (281,104) / total households in the 777 priority
                                                                                                    -Census data (2010), INEGI        polygons (3,059,441).

           1
                  “Habitability” is defined as a set of basic characteristics and qualities—both social and urban—that contributes to creating a public space that is appropriate for
                  and conducive to the development of the households in the polygon. At minimum, these characteristics include complete streets, water, sanitation, paving, public
                  lighting, an interconnected and accessible road network, and community development centers (CDCs).
           2
                  The Social Gap Index is a weighted measurement that combines four social gap indicators (i.e., education, health, basic services, and housing spaces) into a
                  single index.
           3
                  Value (in Mexican pesos) per square meter in 2012 of properties in the control group of loan 2569/OC-ME, updated as of 2015. During the first quarter of the
                  project’s execution, a consulting firm will be engaged to confirm this value (see monitoring and evaluation plan).
           4
                  The results of the impact evaluation conducted for loan 2569/OC-ME were taken into account in calculating the target, i.e. a 5% increase in property value per
                  square meter of properties that were not targeted for intervention (from Mex$973.80 to Mex$1,022.50) and, based on this result, a 10 percentage point increase in
                  property value per square meter (from Mex$1,022.50 to Mex$1,124.74) of properties targeted for intervention.
           5
                  The outcomes and outputs cited below stem from a combination of federal and state contributions and resources from the municipios where the program
                  operates.
                Annex II
                Page 2 of 5


Expected outcome 1: Improved access to urban infrastructure in targeted polygons
                                           Baseline            Interim
               Indicator                                     measurement Target         Means of verification                               Observations
                                    Unit     Base     Year
                                                                2016
                                                                                    -Registry of beneficiaries         Deficit = total households without access to drainage
 Drainage deficit                    %        4.4     2014       3.9        3.4     -Georeferencing of works           (134,522) / total households in the 777 priority
                                                                                    -Census data (2010), INEGI         polygons (3,059,441).
                                                                                    -Registry of beneficiaries         Deficit = total households without access to public
 Public lighting deficit             %       26.5     2014       25.5       24.5    -Georeferencing of works           lighting (809,993) / total households in the 777 priority
                                                                                    -Census data (2010), INEGI         polygons (3,059,441).


Expected outcome 2: Social development strengthened in safe spaces
                                           Baseline            Interim
              Indicator                                      measurement   Target       Means of verification                               Observations
                                    Unit     Base     Year
                                                                2016
                                                                                                                       In the survey to be administered in 2018, the
                                                                                                                       beneficiaries will be asked whether their perception of
Perception of security               %        N/A                           60       Perception survey on security     security in their neighborhoods had improved,
                                                                                                                       remained the same, or worsened over the preceding
                                                                                                                       three years. No baseline will be established.
Improvement in women’s                                                                                                 Survey responses will be analyzed based on gender
                                     %        N/A                           70       Perception survey on security
perception of security                                                                                                 criteria. No baseline will be established.
                                                                                                                       Measures whether or not young people are employed
                                                                                                                       12 months after completing the training programs,
                                                                                                                       which include a series of social prevention activities
Young people ages 18-24 who
                                                                                                                       targeting at-risk youth. A consulting firm will monitor the
have completed training in job                                                          Evaluation report on the
                                                                                                                       young people who participate in these activities and will
skills development and have a job    %         0      2015                   5         project’s social prevention
                                                                                                                       subsequently evaluate the results achieved. The first
12 months after completing the                                                        activities in four municipios.
                                                                                                                       report will establish a baseline for this indicator. The
course
                                                                                                                       target assumes a 5% increase over the baseline. The
                                                                                                                       results will be disaggregated for male and female
                                                                                                                       beneficiaries.
                                                                                                                                                                  Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                Page 3 of 5

                                                                                                       6
                                                                                  OUTPUT INDICATORS
                                Unit of                                                                     Means of
Output                         measure     Baseline     Year 1       Year 2       Year 3      Target                                               Observations
                                                                                                           verification
Component I
                                                                                                    Comprehensive
                                                                                                                          The baseline is 0 because work will be beginning in the
                                                                                                      Information
                                                                                                                          777 priority polygons.
Square meters of roads                2                                                               System on
                                  m           0       2,500,000    2,500,000    2,500,000 7,500,000                       A percentage of these works will contribute to climate change
built or repaved                                                                                         Social
                                                                                                                          mitigation and/or adaptation by installing eco-friendly
                                                                                                       Programs
                                                                                                                          concrete.
                                                                                                       (SIIPSO)
Linear meters of potable                                                                                                  The baseline is 0 because work will be beginning in the
                                  LM          0         55,000       55,000      55,000      165,000         SIIPSO
water built or rehabilitated                                                                                              777 priority polygons.
                                                                                                                          The baseline is 0 because work will be beginning in the
Linear meters of sanitary
                                                                                                                          777 priority polygons.
drainage and sewerage             LM          0         90,000       90,000      90,000      270,000         SIIPSO
                                                                                                                          A percentage of these works will also contribute to climate
lines built or rehabilitated
                                                                                                                          change mitigation and/or adaptation by preventing flooding.
                                                                                                                          The baseline is 0 because work will be beginning in the
Linear meters of                                                                                                          777 priority polygons
electrification built or          LM          0         10,000       10,000      10,000       30,000         SIIPSO       A percentage of these works will also contribute to climate
rehabilitated                                                                                                             change mitigation and/or adaptation by installing energy-
                                                                                                                          efficient lighting.
                                                                                                                          The baseline is 0 because work will be beginning in the
                                                                                                                          777 priority polygons
Number of public lighting
                                  No.         0         2,500        2,500        2,500       7,500          SIIPSO       A percentage of these works will also contribute to climate
units built or rehabilitated
                                                                                                                          change mitigation and/or adaptation by installing energy-
                                                                                                                          efficient lighting.
                                                                                                                          The baseline is 0 because work will be beginning in the
                                                                                                                          777 priority polygons
Linear meters of
                                                                                                                          A percentage of these works will also contribute to climate
stormwater drainage built         LM          0         1,500        1,500        1,500       4,500          SIIPSO
                                                                                                                          change mitigation and/or adaptation by: (i) preventing climate
or rehabilitated
                                                                                                                          change-induced flooding; and (ii) saving energy through the
                                                                                                                          use of stormwater that does not require purification.
                                                                                                                          The baseline reflects the total number of CDCs in the
                                                                                                                          777 priority polygons.
CDCs built, expanded,
                                  No.        802         450          450          450        1,350          SIIPSO       A percentage of these works will also contribute to climate
equipped, and/or upgraded
                                                                                                                          change mitigation and/or adaptation by adopting bioclimatic
                                                                                                                          designs and the use of efficient technologies.



          6
               The procurement plan will indicate the annualized costs of Component III outputs.
             Annex II
             Page 4 of 5


                              Unit of                                                                 Means of
Output                       measure    Baseline     Year 1       Year 2      Year 3      Target                                              Observations
                                                                                                     verification
Component II
                                                                                                                      These courses are driven by community demand. Primarily,
Number of job skill
                                                                                                                      these include carpentry, computing, hairdressing, electricity,
development courses            No.          0        1,900        1,900       1,900       5,700         SIIPSO
        7                                                                                                             plumbing, cooking and pastry making, information technology,
imparted
                                                                                                                      and cosmetology (nails).
Number of social
prevention awareness-                                                                                                 Driven by community demand, these courses combine
raising workshops, group                                                                                              interventions that are enjoyable and attractive for the
therapy sessions, and          No.          0        2,300        2,300       2,300       6,900         SIIPSO        beneficiaries with prevention workshops on topics such as
learning labs and                                                                                                     raising awareness about violence and preventing and
complementary activities                                                                                              reporting crime.
imparted
                                                                                                                      Driven by community demand, these courses address
Number of courses
                                                                                                                      problems identified by the communities and topics such as
promoting gender equity        No.          0         800          800         800        2,400         SIIPSO
        8                                                                                                             women’s leadership, the civic rights of men and women, and
imparted
                                                                                                                      domestic violence prevention.
Design and monitoring
                                                                                                                    Studies will be conducted to systematize the prevention
mechanisms for the
                                                                                                    Report tracking experiences. Based on that work, improvements to the design
Preventive Interventions       No.        N/A           1                                    1
                                                                                                     the reforms    and monitoring mechanisms for the Preventive Interventions
Pillar installed in the
                                                                                                                    Pillar will be proposed.
corresponding municipios
Component III
Training events in social                                                                           Training report
                              No. of
and situational violence                                1                                    1        and list of
                              events
prevention                                                                                           participants
Training events to improve
                                                                                                    Training report
technical and operational     No. of
                                                        1           1            1           3        and list of
coordination at the           events
                                                                                                     participants
municipal level imparted
Climate change training                                                                             Training report
                              No. of
events imparted                                         1                        1           2        and list of
                              events
                                                                                                     participants




         7
             Official agencies in each state have been certifying these courses since 2015.
         8
             Skill development and gender-focused workshops are designed to help close gender gaps identified in the communities by Mexico’s National Women’s Institute.
                                                                                                                                                       Annex II
                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 5


                             Unit of                                                        Means of
Output                      measure    Baseline    Year 1    Year 2    Year 3    Target                                                Observations
                                                                                           verification
Forums and workshops
imparted to transfer
                                                                                             Report on
knowledge and good            No. of
                                                    1         1         1         3       forums and list
practices between the        forums
                                                                                           of participants
central and municipal
levels.
Program information
                                                                                            Integrated       The best reporting and information systems developed will be
systems integrated into     system                  1                   1         2
                                                                                              system         presented as proof of this output’s fulfillment.
SIIPSO

                                                                       SECTOR INDICATORS
                                                                                                             Among the objectives of this project, dwellings are improved
                                                                                                             by expanding their access to basic infrastructure. This output
Beneficiaries of improved                                                                                    measures those dwellings in polygons where the investment
                              No.        0        140,000   140,000   140,000   140,000      SIIPSO
housing solutions                                                                                            was completed and that therefore have “complete” streets
                                                                                                             (access to water, sanitation, electrification, sidewalks, paving,
                                                                                                             and public lighting).
                                                                                                             Prevention actions considered here will be those resulting
Beneficiaries of Bank-                                                                                       from the consulting study currently under way to formulate
                                                                                            Registry of
designed or evaluated         No.        0         160       200       240       600                         and implement a series of social prevention activities targeting
                                                                                           beneficiaries
citizen security projects                                                                                    at-risk youth. The specific courses and activities are
                                                                                                             considered in the first two output indicators of Component II.
                                                                                 Annex III
                                                                               Page 1 of 7




                        FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Country:            Mexico
Project No.:        ME-L1167
Name:               Project to Address Social and Basic Services Gaps in Urban Areas
Executing           Department of Agrarian, Territorial, and Urban Development
agency:             (SEDATU) in collaboration with the states and municipios
Prepared by:        Gloria Coronel, Víctor Escala, and Uriel Barrios (FMP/CME)


                               I.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.1   The Bank has supported the Habitat Program from its inception (2005) to the
      present with three loans: 1583/OC-ME, 1928/OC-ME, and 2569/OC-ME, totaling
      US$780 million in lending resources, and will continue supporting it through the
      current program. Habitat is a federal government program developed to improve
      living conditions and access to basic urban and social services in municipios with
      at least 15,000 inhabitants. It targets underserved areas in municipios—known
      as polygons—with a comprehensive approach, cofinancing physical and social
      investments. These include building or expanding urban infrastructure (e.g.
      water, sanitation, drainage, paving, and public lighting), constructing, expanding,
      equipping, or upgrading community development centers (CDCs) and funding
      courses, workshops, and/or complementary activities that take place at the
      CDCs.

                  II.   THE EXECUTING AGENCIES’ FIDUCIARY CONTEXT

2.1   The borrower will be the United Mexican States, and Nacional Financiera,
      S.N.C., I.B.D. (NAFIN) will serve as financial agent, in keeping with the agency
      agreement to be signed by the Department of Finance (SHCP), the executing
      agency, and NAFIN. The executing agency will continue to be SEDATU, through
      the executing unit it will designate. In 2013, the new government administration
      transferred responsibility for the execution of loan 2569/OC-ME from the
      Department of Social Development (SEDESOL) to SEDATU, and the amended
      contract was signed on 26 September 2013. The last disbursement date for the
      loan is 25 April 2016, which has a balance pending disbursement of
      Mex$16,063,646 (5.7% of the approved amount).

2.2   SEDATU performs its activities in accordance with the policies, strategies, and
      priorities established in the National Development Plan, the Sector Program, and
      the strategies of the federal government. For purposes of coordination with the
      Bank, SEDATU is supported by Nacional Financiera, S.N.C. I.B.D. (NAFIN), as
      the financial agent that oversees compliance with Bank rules and policies, to
      support transparency and proper eligibility of expenditures.
      Annex III
      Page 2 of 7



                          III.    FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS

      3.1     An institutional capacity assessment report on SEDATU was prepared in
              May 2015, using the Bank’s Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS)
              tool. The resulting weighted average score was 97%, indicating a satisfactory
              level of development and low risk in terms of the project’s fiduciary execution.

                                          Table 1: Results of the ICAS tool quantification
                                                    Quantification             Development         Risk level
3.2         3.3 Capacity         System
                                          Score %       IR%    Weighted      (ND, ID, MD, SD)   (HR, SR, MR, LR)

                    CPO           SPA      100.00        50          46.88         SD                 LR
                                  SOA       96.00        50          48.00         SD                 LR
                TOTAL                                                94.88         SD                 LR
                     CE           SAP      100.00        30          30.00         SD                 LR
                                 SABS       96.77        30          29.03         SD                 LR
                                  SAF       97.77        40          40.00         SD                 LR
                TOTAL                                                99.03         SD                 LR
                     CC           SCI       93.10        80          74.48         SD                 LR
                                  SCE      100.00        20          20.00         SD                 LR
                TOTAL                                                94.48         SD                 LR
               TOTAL WEIGHTED                           100          97.00         SD                 LR


               IV.         CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS

      4.1     The exchange rate for rendering accounts will be that published by Banco de
              México, using for the purposes of conversion to dollars the exchange rate on the
              last business day of the immediately preceding month in which the borrower, the
              executing agency, or any natural or artificial person authorized to make
              expenditures made the related payments to the contractor or supplier.

      4.2     Audited financial reports for the loan will be delivered within 180 calendar days
              following the end of each fiscal year of the federal government during the
              disbursement period. They will be duly audited by a firm of independent auditors
              acceptable to the Bank and presented in accordance with the general terms of
              reference for auditors of projects financed by international financial organizations,
              and the general guidelines for the financial management of projects financed by
              international organizations, agreed upon between the Bank and Mexico’s Civil
              Service Department (SFP) or the entity designated by the federal government for
              such purpose. The last of these reports is to be delivered within 180 calendar days
              following the last disbursement.

      4.3     Unaudited financial reports will be delivered within 60 calendar days following the
              close of each six-month period during the disbursement period, in the formats
              agreed upon between the Bank and the Civil Service Department.

      4.4     Retroactive financing. The Bank may recognize against the loan proceeds up to
              US$40 million in eligible expenditures made by the borrower prior to the loan
                                                                                        Annex III
                                                                                      Page 3 of 7



         signature date (20% of the proposed loan amount) for all eligible categories,
         provided that requirements substantially similar to those established in the loan
         contract were met, regardless of their stated source of financing in the federal
         expenditure budget for the corresponding fiscal year. Such expenditures must
         have been made on or after 22 April 2015 (project profile approval date), but in
         no case will expenditures made more than 18 months before the loan approval
         date be included.

4.5      Under the project, SEDATU procurements and contracting of consulting services
         and nonconsulting services will be performed in accordance with the Policies for
         the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document
         GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants
         Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9), standard bidding documents and
         standard requests for proposals currently in effect that were agreed upon
         between the Bank and Mexico’s Civil Service Department. For contracting by the
         municipios and the states, Mexican national laws will apply, as has been the
         case in previous Bank-financed projects.

             V.   AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

5.1      Procurement execution. Two types of procurement and contracting are
         conducted under the project: (i) SEDATU-executed procurement within the
         framework of Component III, consisting primarily of consulting services to be
         provided by consulting firms or individual consultants, and nonconsulting
         services; and (ii) procurement executed within the framework of Components I
         and II, funded by SEDATU nonreimbursable contributions to the states and
         municipios for the construction or expansion of urban infrastructure (water,
         sanitation, drainage, paving, and public lighting), the construction, expansion,
         equipping, or upgrading of CDCs, and the funding of courses, workshops, and/or
         complementary activities, such as sports or cultural activities held at the CDCs.
         With respect to the former, procurement and contracting will be executed in
         accordance with documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9, the standard bidding
         documents, and the standard requests for proposals currently in effect that were
         agreed upon between the Bank and Mexico’s Civil Service Department or the
         entity authorized for that purpose by the federal government, as well as the
         corresponding procurement plan and paragraphs 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, and 5.7
         hereof. With respect to the latter case, a waiver of the Bank’s procurement
         policies will be requested, pursuant to the proposal set out in paragraph 5.8.

5.2      Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for
         works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 generated under the project and
         subject to international competitive bidding or to national competitive bidding will
         use the harmonized bidding documents agreed upon between the Bank and the
         Civil Service Department, or the entity authorized for that purpose by the federal
         government. Those documents are available in the electronic link for the SFP.
         The project sector specialist is responsible for reviewing the technical
         specifications for procurements during the preparation of selection processes.

1
    Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods.
Annex III
Page 4 of 7



5.3      Selection and contracting of consultants. Consulting service contracts
         generated under the project will be procured using the standard request for
         proposals agreed upon by the Bank and the Civil Service Department, or the
         entity authorized for that purpose by the federal government, which can be
         consulted at the link provided in the preceding paragraph. The project sector
         specialist is responsible for reviewing the terms of reference for contracting
         consulting services.

5.4      Selection of individual consultants. Contracts for consulting services with
         individual consultants will be executed using the model contract for individual
         consultants agreed on between the Bank and the Civil Service Department, or
         the entity authorized for that purpose by the federal government. That contract is
         available at the aforementioned link.

          Table 2: Threshold amounts for the procurement of works, goods, and consulting services
                                    Threshold amounts (US$ thousands)
                                                               2                   Consulting
                        Works                            Goods
                                                                                     services

           International       National                 International     National                 International

                                             Shopping                                   Shopping
                                                                                                                   Shortlist
            competitive       competitive                competitive     competitive                publicity –-    100%
                                                                                                                   national
              bidding           bidding                    bidding         bidding                  consultants

                           <15,000 and                                  <3,000 and
          ≥15,000                           <500        ≥3,000                         <100         ≥200            <500
                              ≥500                                         ≥100


5.5      Main procurements. The main items will be procured by SEDATU. These are
         services provided by consulting firms or individual consultants in a variety of
         areas, all of which are set out in the preliminary procurement plan over a period
         of 36 months (attached).

5.6      Procurement supervision. In view of the program’s low fiduciary risk,
         SEDATU’s procurements will be reviewed ex post, as indicated in the
         procurement plan. To this end, one annual inspection visit may be programmed.

5.7      Ex post procurement reviews will be conducted by an external audit firm, which
         will submit a special supplement with the procurement report pursuant to the
         terms of reference agreed upon between the IDB and the Civil Service
         Department, or the entity authorized for that purpose by the federal government.

                           Table 3: Threshold amounts for external audits and ex post review
                                        Threshold for ex post review (US$ thousands)
                            Works                           Goods                      Consulting services
                            15,000                          3,000                              500
          Note:        The thresholds set for ex post review are based on the executing agency’s fiduciary
                       capacity for execution and may be modified by the Bank as that capacity varies.


2
    Includes nonconsulting services.
                                                                                  Annex III
                                                                                Page 5 of 7



5.8   Other. Use of national legislation. For the procurement of works, goods, and
      nonconsulting services funded by SEDATU contributions to the states and
      municipios under Components I and II, the use of national legislation is considered
      necessary, given the special nature of the project. Consequently, a waiver is
      requested to the procurement policies, as outlined in the justification for
      requesting a waiver of the Bank’s procurement policies.

                            VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

6.1   Programming and budget. SEDATU’s budget resources are allocated annually
      in the Expenditure Budget of the Federation, which is approved by the Congress.
      Consequently, the resources necessary for this operation should be taken into
      account in SEDATU’s annual work plan. This plan will be implemented pursuant
      to the pertinent regulations of the Department of Finance and included in the
      information for the Cuenta Pública [an annual report on government financial
      transactions].

6.2   Accounting and information systems. SEDATU is required to document and
      monitor its economic transactions through the Department of Finance’s
      Accounting and Budget System (SICOP)—for accounting and budgetary
      records—and the Federal Integrated Financial Management System (SIAFF)—
      for the control of payments. The SIAFF is regulated and controlled by Mexico’s
      Treasury, which is also an agency of the Department of Finance. The summary
      of this information is consolidated by the Department of Finance’s Government
      Accounting Unit, which compiles and prepares the Executive Branch’s
      annualized Cuenta Pública report for the Legislative Branch.

6.3   Disbursements, cash flow, and supporting documentation for
      expenditures. The Financial Services and Resource Management Office (single
      window) sends the project’s coordination team a report generated using the
      database of the Comprehensive Information System on Social Programs
      (SIIPSO) to prepare the breakdown of payments that will make up the
      disbursement request, which is officially sent to NAFIN, which in turn reviews it
      and submits the reimbursement request to the Bank. Once the request is
      approved, the Bank reimburses the funds to NAFIN, which transfers them to the
      Federal Treasury. The same personnel who are currently supporting the
      executing unit with loan 2569/OC-ME are expected to support this new operation.
      This continuity, combined with the strength of the systems used to execute the
      program, helps reduce the fiduciary risks associated with the execution of this
      new operation.

6.4   Internal oversight and internal audit. The Civil Service Department issues the
      general internal control guidelines for the federal public administration, which are
      generally applicable in government offices and agencies. These guidelines help
      to achieve the established goals and objectives, prevent risks that could
      jeopardize their achievement, and encourage due compliance with civil service
      financial reporting and transparency obligations. SEDATU is supported by
      personnel assigned to it by the Civil Service Department’s Internal Control Unit
      (OIC) as well as all federal laws and regulations. These laws and regulations are
Annex III
Page 6 of 7



        based on the 1992 report of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
        Treadway Commission (COSO) and take into account its updates (COSO II in
        2004 and COSO III in 2013), which fine-tune the traditional concepts of internal
        control to extend their breadth.

6.5     The Regional Operation and Social Comptroller’s Unit of the Civil Service
        Department is tasked with reviewing and verifying the use of resources
        transferred to the states or municipios, as part of the federal government’s
        internal control.

6.6     External control and reports. Each year, the Civil Service Department issues
        and publishes a guide for the financial management of projects financed by
        international financial organizations, which stipulates that the executing agency is
        to deliver semiannual and annual reports to the financial agent. The purpose of
        those reports is to support the project executing agency in their timely forwarding
        (within the contractually established time frames) to the IDB. The linked
        templates are the only financial reports required semiannually and they contain
        the financial statement on the sources and uses of funds, the statement on
        disbursement requests, and the statement of cumulative investments, together
        with the notes that are an integral part of those documents. Those templates are
        posted on the Civil Service Department–External Audit Office website, and
        describe the operation’s financial progress at the end of each reporting period
        and the cumulative report by investment category. They also include details of
        the requests submitted during the year and of expenses pending processing,
        which are reviewed by the financial agent for consistency with its records and
        those of the Bank, so they contain figures that have been properly reconciled.
        The Civil Service Department, the IDB, and the World Bank, in coordination with
        the financial agents, have harmonized the templates for semiannual and annual
        financial reports (the latter already include the templates that are not linked) so
        as to make preparing them more efficient. The Federal Supreme Audit Office is
        responsible for SEDATU external control. It audits the project in accordance with
        its plan of activities. The program’s annual financial reports will be audited by
        firms designated by the Civil Service Department that are acceptable to the
        Bank. Because the program’s execution is decentralized in 32 federative entities
        (with transfers to the participating municipios) and the period for submitting
        information for the federal government’s Cuenta Pública closes in February of
        each year, the period for submitting the annual financial reports should be
        extended from 30 April to 30 June or a period of 180 days. The financial
        supervision plan is summarized below:
                                                                                                 Annex III
                                                                                               Page 7 of 7




                                  Table 4. Financial supervision plan
Supervision                                                                     Responsible party
  activity              Nature and coverage               Frequency
                                                                               Bank        Third party
                                                                            Fiduciary/
                 Ex post review of disbursement                                             External
                                                          Periodic      financial team for
                 requests                                                                    auditor
                                                                         reimbursements
                 Fiduciary inspection visit/analysis of
                                                                          Financial and
                 internal controls and control                                                External

    Financial
                                                            Annual        procurement
                 environment for payments and                                                 auditor
                                                                              team
                 procurement
                                                                           Project Team
                 Annual allocation of budget                                Leader with
                                                                                              Executing
                 resources required for the execution       Annual           support of
                                                                                               agency
                 of the project                                         fiduciary/financial
                                                                               team
                                                                           Project Team
                                                                            Leader with
                                                            Annual                            External



    Compliance
                 Delivery of audited financial reports                       support of
                                                           and final                          auditor
                                                                        fiduciary/financial
                                                                             specialist
                                                                           Project Team
                 Conditions precedent to the first                          Leader and        Executing
                                                           Once
                 disbursement                                           fiduciary/financial    agency
                                                                               team
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/15



                   Mexico. Loan ____/OC-ME to the United Mexican States
                      Project to Address Social and Basic Services Gaps
                                        in Urban Areas



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as
may be necessary with the United Mexican States, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a
financing to cooperate in the execution of a project to address social and basic services gaps in
urban areas. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$200,000,000 from the resources
of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and
the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                                (Adopted on ___ __________ 2015)



LEG/SGO/CID/IDBDOCS#39721480
ME-L1167
