                   SPECIFIC PROCUREMENT NOTICE (Works)

                                     Request for Bids (RFB)



Date of Publication: 24 November 2025
Publication Reference Number: IDB-5877OCBL-P00011-SPN


Institution: Inter-American Development Bank
Executing Agency: Ministry Of Finance, Economic Development, And Investment

Country: Belize
Project: Sustainable And Inclusive Urban Development Program
Operation or Grant Number: BL-L1046
Loan Contract Number: 5877/OC-BL
Title of the Request for Bids: Design- Build For Corozal Town (Public Space Upgrading)
Procurement Process Number: BL-L1046-P00011
Sector: Urban Development And Housing

1. This Invitation for Bids is issued following the publication of the General Procurement Notice
   (GPN) for this project, which was published on the Inter-American Development Bank’s
   website under publication number 1 on 03 July 2025.

2. Belize has received financing from the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) to partially
   finance the cost of the Sustainable And Inclusive Urban Development Program and intends
   to apply part of the proceeds to payments under the Contract detailed in this Request for
   Bids.

3. The Ministry Of Finance, Economic Development, And Investment
        invites eligible bidders to submit sealed bids for Design and Build . The estimated
   construction period is 420




4. The Request for Bids (RFB) will be conducted through the National Competitive Bidding
   process as specified in the Inter-American Development Bank’s Procurement Policies for
   the Procurement of Goods and Works (applicable edition according to the Loan Contract)
   and is open to all bidders from eligible countries, as defined in the Bidding Documents.

5. Bidders must meet the following qualification criteria:
Qualifications requirements include, among others: (a) total monetary value of construction works
performed for each of the last three (3) years, (b) experience in design of works of a similar nature
and size for each of the last ten (10) years, (c) essential key personnel and equipment as indicated in
bidding document, (d) management certified statements on the financial standing, such as profit and
loss statements and/or income statements for the past three (3) years (2021,2022, and 2023), (e) a
minimum amount of liquid assets and/or credit facilities net of other contractual commitments in the
amount of $175,977.00 BZD (g) other requirements provided in the respective Bid Document.

6. Interested bidders may obtain a complete set of Bidding Documents in english by submitting
   a written request to the address provided at the end of this notice. The documents will be
   available upon payment of a non-refundable fee of $0.00. Payment should be made via
   N/A. The Bidding Document will be delivered via The bidding document can be downloaded
   from the Ministry of Finance procurement website at https://procurement.gov.bz/mof-design-
   and-build-for-corozal-town-public-spaces-and-facilities-works-0031-mof2025/.

   https://procurement.gov.bz/mof-design-and-build-for-corozal-town-public-spaces-and-
   facilities-works-0031-mof2025/
7. Bids must be delivered to the address specified below no later than 19 December 2025 at
   10:00 AM. Electronic submissions will be permitted. Late bids will be rejected.

8. Bids will be opened physically and electronically in the presence of bidders' representatives
   who wish to attend in person or online, at the address indicated below on 19 December
   2025 at 10:15 AM.

9. All bids must be accompanied by a bid security declaration.

10. The address for bid submission and opening ,Ministry of Finance 2ndl Floor, Sir Edney Cain
    Building, Belmopan. . Address for obtaining additional information or requesting the
    procurement documents: procurement@ceu.mof.gov.bz. Attn: Sandeep Betancourt, Email:
    sbetancourt@ceu.mof.gov.bz, Phone: 822-4106.


Address: Ministry of Finance 2ndl Floor, Sir Edney Cain Building, Belmopan
Executing Agency: MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND
INVESTMENT


Attn: Sandeep Betancourt
Email: procurement@ceu.mof.gov.bz
Telephone: 822-4106
Website: https://procurement.gov.bz/opportunities/
