                                                                                        PUBLIC
                                                                      SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                              PERU




             PROGRAM TO PROMOTE SOCIAL HOUSING IN PERU



                                           (PE-L1293)




                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Sebastián Lew, Project Team
Leader; Francisco Demichelis (IFD/CMF) and Jason Hobbs (CSD/HUD), Alternate Project
Team Leaders; Luis Felipe Vera, María Paloma Silva de Anzorena, Nora Libertun de Durén,
Dianela Ávila, Sofía Del Castillo, Silvia Pérez Moreno, Elena Acosta Maldonado, Alejandro
Torero, Gabriel De Barros Torres, and Karin Villaroel (CSD/HUD); Rhina Cabezas Valencia
(CAN/CAN); Jaime Fernández-Baca (CSD/CCS); Abel Cuba Valdivia and Freddy Andara
Chacón (VPC/FMP); Javier Jiménez Mosquera and Monica Centeno Lappas (LEG/SGO);
Diana Bocarejo (SCL/GDI); Yesimer Gamboa Vallecillos and Diego Villanueva Moreano
(CAN/CPE); and Franklin Mendoza Yauri (INO/SMC).



In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and
distributed to the Bank's Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been
approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version
will be made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                    CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................................2

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale.............................................2
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost................................................................11
       C.    Viability analysis ...........................................................................................14

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................15

       A.    Financing instruments ..................................................................................15
       B.    Environmental and social risks .....................................................................16
       C.    Fiduciary risks...............................................................................................17
       D.    Other key issues and risks ...........................................................................17

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN..............................................................18

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements..................................................18
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ........................................20
       C.    Post-approval design activities .....................................................................20
                                                      - ii -




                                                     REQUIRED LINKS

Annex I            Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary

Annex II           Results Matrix

Annex III          Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                     REQUIRED LINKS

1           Multiyear execution plan

2           Monitoring and evaluation plan

3           Environmental and social review summary


                                                     OPTIONAL LINKS

1           Analysis of project cost and economic viability

2           Sustainability and climate change

3           Program Operating Regulations

4           Theory of change

5           Study on demand and housing programs

6           Bibliography

7           Technical cooperation: Support for the Program to Promote Social Housing in Peru (PE-T1593; ATN/CV-
            21221-PE; ATN/OC-21222-PE)

8           Environmental safeguards policy filter
                                          - iii -



                                     ABBREVIATIONS
ABC      Ahorro-Bono-Crédito (Savings-Subsidy-Credit)
APEIM    Asociación Peruana de Empresas de Inteligencia de Mercado (Peruvian Association
         of Market Intelligence Companies)
BBP      Bono del Buen Pagador (Good payer subsidy)
BFH      Bono Familiar Habitacional (Family housing subsidy)
ENAHO    Encuesta Nacional de Hogares (National Household Survey)
ESRS     Environmental and Social Review Summary
FMV      Fondo MiVivienda
FONAFE   Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento de la Actividad Empresarial del Estado (National
         Fund for Financing State Business Activity)
ICAP     Institutional Capacity Assessment Platform
IFI      Intermediary financial institution
LLMIH    Low- and lower-middle-income household
MEF      Ministry of Economy and Finance
MVCS     Ministry of Housing, Construction, and Sanitation
NCMV     Nuevo Crédito Mi Vivienda
OC       Ordinary Capital
SBS      Superintendency of Banking, Insurance, and Pension Fund Managers
SPT      Specialized program team
                                                        PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                     PERU
                                    PROGRAM TO PROMOTE SOCIAL HOUSING IN PERU
                                                  (PE-L1293)

                                                  Financial Terms and Conditions
 Borrower:                                                                                Flexible Financing Facility(a)
                                                                         Amortization period:             11.5 years
 Republic of Peru
                                                                         Disbursement period:             5 years
 Executing agency:                                                       Grace period:                    7.5 years(b)
                                                                         Interest rate:                   SOFR-based
 Fondo MiVivienda (FMV)
                                                                         Credit fee:                      (c)

                                              Amount
                Source                                          %
                                               (US$)                     Weighted average life:           10 years
 IDB (OC):                                  300,000,000          100
                                                                         Approval currency:               U.S. dollars
 Total:                                     300,000,000          100

                                                          Project at a Glance
 Project objective/description: The general development objective is to help expand access to adequate housing solutions
 for low- and lower-middle-income households (LLMIHs) in Peru. The specific objective is to broaden access to financing
 for adequate housing solutions for LLMIHs.
 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower, through the Ministry
 of Economy and Finance (MEF), and the executing agency have entered into an agreement, and this is in force, for the
 transfer of proceeds from the loan and the obligations of the parties with respect to execution of the program; and (ii) the
 executing agency has approved the Program Operating Regulations, and these are in force, in accordance with the terms
 and conditions previously agreed on with the Bank, which include clauses relating to socioenvironmental issues based on
 the environmental and social review summary (ESRS) (paragraph 3.5).
 Exceptions to Bank policies: None
                                                          Strategic Alignment
 Objectives:(d)                        O1 ☒                                    O2 ☒                                      O3 ☒
 Areas of
                                             OF2-G ☒
 operational                 OF1 ☒                             OF3 ☐           OF4 ☒          OF5 ☒             OF6 ☒           OF7 ☐
 focus:(e)                                   OF2-D ☒
(a)   Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization
      schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe protection conversions. The Bank will take operational
      and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)   Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that
      they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)   The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its
      review of the Bank’s lending charges in accordance with the applicable policies.
(d)   O1 (Reduce poverty and inequality); O2 (Address climate change); and O3 (Bolster sustainable regional growth).
(e)   OF1 (Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action); OF2-G (Gender equality); OF2-D (Inclusion of diverse population groups);
      OF3 (Institutional capacity, rule of law, and citizen security); OF4 (Social protection and human capital development); OF5
      (Productive development and innovation through the private sector); OF6 (Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure); and
      OF7 (Regional integration).
                            I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale

1.1       Background. Over the past 20 years, Peru has experienced significant economic
          growth, tripling its gross domestic product (GDP) per capita.[1]1, 2 This growth has
          been accompanied by a sustained urbanization process, and 79% of the country's
          10 million households now live in urban areas.3 Despite economic progress, deep
          economic and social inequalities persist due to institutional and market failures,
          which are reflected in disparate income levels and inadequate housing conditions
          among urban households.[4] For example, 75% of the economically active
          population engages in informal employment,[5] and the majority of urban
          households earn lower-middle (35.5%)4 or low (34.8%) incomes.5

1.2       With household growth outpacing population growth, the country is undergoing a
          demographic transition, which is increasing the demand for adequate housing. At
          present, 220,000 new urban households are being formed each year, exceeding
          the annual intercensal average (2007-2017), which was 149,821 households.[6] In
          addition, the country has received more than 1.5 million Venezuelan migrants.[7]
          This contributed to the fact that around 3 million households in urban areas suffer
          from a housing deficit due to limited access to adequate housing solutions.[9]6 This
          deficit exists in 37.4% of households and breaks down into 5.7% with a quantitative
          deficit7 (448,000 households) and 31.7% with a qualitative deficit8 (2.5 million
          households).[10]9

1.3       High levels of informality, combined with other factors described below, mean that
          most homes built in Peru are self-builds with scant technical assistance and
          deficient permitting. Out of a total stock of 6,600,000 urban homes, 71% are
          self-built, of which only 3% comply with an acceptable quality building process and
          have all the necessary permits.[11] In regional terms, there is a substantial gap in
          the proportion of permitted housing10 in Peru (1.5 per 1,000 inhabitants) with

1     See complete list of bibliographic references identified by the number in square brackets [#].
2     Driven by the country’s mining sector and sound macroeconomic policies, GDP per capita grew from
      US$2,126.14 in 2003 to US$7,789.87 in 2023.
3     Although this growth began in Lima in the 1940s,[2] in the last 20 years Peru's cities have expanded by
      almost 50%, at a rate of more than 3,400 hectares per year.[3]
4     Lower-middle-income households are households earning between two and four times the minimum
      wage, which is equivalent to US$270.
5     Low-income households are households earning less than two times the minimum wage.
6     Adequate housing solutions are solutions that are affordable, accessible, efficient, safe, resilient,
      well-connected, and well-located.[8]
7     Households with multiple people living together or living in homes with irreparable deficiencies.
8     Households in homes with any of the following deficiencies: lack of one or more public services,
      overcrowding (more than three people per room), or poor quality of materials.
9     Clarification: These values are not comparable with the INEI official definition of housing deficit, because
      they take into account additional housing deficiencies.
10    Permitting is the process that local governments follow to authorize home construction or remodeling,
      ensuring that homes comply with urban development and building parameters and other applicable
      regulations.
                                                       -3-



          respect to Colombia (4.2) and Chile (7.5).[12] Self-builds run into cost overruns
          and inefficiencies that entail up to twice the cost, which falls mainly (83%) on
          households.11

1.4       The housing deficit is also concentrated in the group of low- and lower-middle-
          income households (LLMIHs)12 and decreases as incomes rise. In total, 83.47% of
          households in housing deficit are LLMIHs,[15] with 378,542 LLMIHs in quantitative
          deficit and 2,081,612 in qualitative deficit. Of the latter, 31.41% have precarious
          materials in flooring, walls, or roofing, 31.22% are overcrowded, and the remaining
          37.37% lack one or more basic services.[16]

1.5       Social housing policies. Since 2002, the Peruvian government has implemented
          a market-based system called Ahorro-Bono-Crédito (Savings-Subsidy-Credit)
          (ABC). This system is based on three pillars: (i) a direct demand-side subsidy
          given by the government; (ii) prior savings by families; and (iii) a mortgage to close
          the transaction, extended by intermediary financial institutions (IFIs). This system
          is implemented through two main programs, with different types of interventions:
          (i) Nuevo Crédito Mi Vivienda (NCMV),13 which grants the Bono del Buen Pagador
          (Good Payer Subsidy) (BBP); and (ii) Techo Propio,14 which grants the Bono
          Familiar Habitacional (Family Housing Subsidy) (BFH). In 2024, the government
          created the Integrator BBP, which provides an additional subsidy of US$895 to the
          low-income15 or vulnerable (older adults, persons with disabilities, or returned
          migrants) population. While housing programs have a significant impact, they can
          be optimized, scaled up, and better targeted to LLMIHs. Despite the programs'
          incentives, the lack of access to mortgage loans hinders the use of subsidies by
          LLMIHs, which continue to engage in self-builds.




11    The main cost overruns arise as a result of building inefficiencies (lack of economies of scale), overpriced
      basic services, and expenses due to related health problems.[13]
12    In all, 44.35% (2,460,154) of LLMIHs have a housing deficit.[14]
13    The NCMV program provides a mortgage loan through an IFI to buy, build, or improve, together with the
      BBP subsidy that complements the down payment. Between 2013 and 2023, the NCMV financed 58.8%
      of social housing and 20.8% of formal housing.
14    The Techo Propio program provides the BFH subsidy to LLMIHs to buy, build, or improve homes and
      offers complementary financing through IFIs. Between 2013 and 2023, Techo Propio financed 73,087,
      41.2% of social housing and 14.6% of formal housing.
15    Maximum income of US$1,098.
                                                    -4-



                Figure 1. Distribution of housing production by socioeconomic level16 and type of
                                            production in 11 major cities




           Source: Espinoza and Fort, 2021.


1.6       Fondo MiVivienda (FMV). This fund is a public financial institution that promotes
          access to housing, especially for the low-income population, under the Ministry of
          Housing, Construction, and Sanitation (MVCS). It administers housing subsidies
          and operates as a second-tier bank, providing loans to IFIs to finance home
          purchases, construction, and improvements. Until 2023, the FMV financed 16.9%
          of the country's total mortgage portfolio and annually administers more than
          US$300,000,000 in subsidies.[17] The remaining 83.1% of mortgages are
          financed by private banks (commercial banks, municipal savings banks, and rural
          savings banks) using own resources. The FMV also provides the Credit Risk
          Coverage service, which provides insurance for the IFI-extended mortgage
          subloans to improve the prospects of recovery in the event of default and stimulate
          a larger supply of home loans.

1.7       New regulatory framework. In 2021, the Peruvian government approved the
          National Housing and Urban Development Policy for 2030 and enacted the
          Sustainable Urban Development Law to improve the population’s housing
          conditions, with an emphasis on vulnerable and low-income sectors. In 2023, the
          Social Interest Housing Regulations were approved, and two other regulations of
          the Sustainable Urban Development Law are being drafted: (i) public land operator
          and (ii) land management instruments, which will help increase the supply of
          available urban land.

1.8       Problem addressed. LLMIHs face difficulties in accessing adequate housing
          solutions, which pushes them toward self-builds without assistance on plots

16    The y-axis represents the number of homes and the x-axis represents socioeconomic groups, with AB
      being the highest level and E the lowest. The socioeconomic levels correspond to the taxonomy prepared
      by the Peruvian Association of Market Intelligence Companies (APEIM), with data from the National
      Household Survey (ENAHO).
                                                       -5-



          acquired in the informal market. This problem is associated with market failures
          (asymmetric information; insufficient supply of financing for households with the
          ability to pay; low production of affordable formal housing; scarcity of well-located
          land; climate change externalities due to increasing vulnerability to disasters; and
          inefficient use of energy and water) and institutional failures (inefficiencies in
          housing programs and limited interagency coordination) that require a public policy
          response. Consequently, two main determinants for this problem have been
          identified.

1.9       Determinant 1. Limited supply of financing for LLMIHs to access adequate
          housing solutions. The private mortgage market is insufficient, with less than 3%
          of households having mortgages.[18] Although the sector is expanding, it still has
          great growth potential when compared with neighboring economies such as Chile
          and Colombia, both in terms of mortgage debt relative to GDP17 and the number
          of outstanding mortgage loans per 1,000 inhabitants.[21]18 In addition, there are
          failures in the functioning of the mortgage market (such as asymmetric
          information), which make it regressive, as it mainly serves middle- and
          high-income households: those with incomes over eight times the minimum wage
          (7% of all households) represent 30% of households with mortgage loans. In
          contrast, households with incomes below two times the minimum wage (35% of
          the total) only account for 9% of households with mortgage loans.[22]

1.10      The limited supply of existing mortgage loans does not reach LLMIHs, even if they
          have sufficient purchasing power to access social housing through the ABC
          system.[23]19 Most of these households lack formal incomes and make low use of
          bank services, which hinders their eligibility to receive loans from the financial
          system under current conditions. In addition, limited financial education in these
          segments of the population translates into strong distrust of the formal financial
          system, mainly due to the lack of knowledge about terms and conditions and the
          scoring processes.[26]

1.11      At present, there is also a limited supply of financial products20 that effectively
          foster improvement processes or incremental building, despite the substantial
          growth potential of this financing market.21 Accordingly, households resort to their
          savings and/or personal loans (which can have interest rates of up to 80%) to
          improve their homes.[28] Also, from acquisition to completion of the home the
          self-build process currently takes 16 years, so access to credit for improvement



17    Mortgage debt relative to GDP is 28.5% for Chile, 8.2% for Colombia, and only 6.7% for Peru.[19]
18    The number of mortgage loans per 1,000 inhabitants is 79 for Chile, 28.3 for Colombia, and only 8.41 for
      Peru.[20]
19    For example, the cost that they pay for land without any infrastructure or services is often higher than the
      standard 10% down payment in housing programs.[24] On average, families that engage in self-building
      invest US$405 per month and about US$50,000 in total over about 16 years starting from
      acquisition/illegal occupation of the land to completion of the home.[25]
20    Existing home improvement products include: (i) the Techo Propio program for home improvement; (ii) the
      NCMV for improving an existing home; (iii) consumer loans offered by several municipal savings banks;
      and (iv) lines of credit used for home improvement provided by private banks (Mi Banco, BBVA, BANBIF,
      and Pichincha).
21    Currently, 2.9 million urban homes are in the self-build process.[27]
                                                      -6-



         could accelerate this process and lead to a decent solution in a more reasonable
         period of time.[29]

1.12     At the same time, under the ABC approach the FMV's housing programs lack
         adequate targeting to serve LLMIHs on a large scale, thereby reproducing the bias
         toward higher-income households.[30] As it stands, while households with
         incomes of less than four times the minimum wage represent 70.3% of all urban
         households,[31] loans to this population originated by the FMV through IFIs
         account for only 23.4% of its outstanding portfolio (US$645,475,744).[32],22
         despite the fact that they have a lower arrears rate than average.23 In this
         connection, there are opportunities to optimize the programs’ parameters by
         defining the value of subsidies as an inverse function of household income levels,
         unifying programs by market segments, and reducing the number of housing
         ranges that can be financed. Added to this are the information barriers associated
         with the dissemination of existing programs.24

1.13     Determinant 2. Low production of affordable formal housing targeting
         LLMIHs. The supply of new housing in Peru is insufficient to meet the demand
         arising from the annual formation of new households. Between 2007 and 2017, an
         average of 129,877 formal and informal homes were built per year, yet 149,821
         households were formed.[34] An estimated 260,000 homes would need to be
         produced per year: 220,000 for new households and 40,000 to fill the shortfall in
         stock in 10 years.[35] In total, 75% (190,000 homes) of this demand relates to
         LLMIHs.[36] However, the market produces only 45,000 formal units per year,[37]25
         which are mostly accessed by the high-income population.26 This contributes to a
         growing quantitative deficit and fosters informality. In addition, the scarcity and high
         cost of urban land and weak regulation limit social housing production.[39] [40]

1.14     Gender and diversity gaps. In terms of gender distribution in access to credit for
         home purchases, only 11.1% of the LLMIHs that took out mortgages have a female
         head of household, whereas 88.9% of households with the same level of income
         have a male head of household.[41] However, FMV has gender-disaggregated
         data indicating that mortgage lending in its programs remained equitably split
         between female- and male-headed households between 2017 and 2024,
         averaging 49%. As for diversity, 22.8% of the total number of heads of household
         who took out mortgage loans self-identified as Quechua, 5.3% as
         Afro-descendant, 1.8% as Aymara, and 1.8% as Indigenous Amazonian.[42] In
         this regard, the FMV does not have records of loans to households belonging to
         these populations—since this breakdown is not included in the IFI loan application

22   Relevant portfolio as at June 2024.
23   The arrears rate for all loan transactions under the NCMV program is 4.63%, and the rate among the
     LLMIH segment is 4.30%, slightly lower than the program average but higher than the general arrears
     rate for all mortgages in the country’s financial system (2.88%), making this population a low-risk segment
     for mortgage lending.
24   Overall, 27% of municipios are unaware of the Techo Propio program's structure and offerings, and only
     18% state that they are aware of projects run under this program in their community. This reveals the lack
     of coordination between the MVCS and local governments to promote and use housing subsidies.[33]
25   Out of a total of 130,000 new homes per year.
26   In the Lima metropolitan region, which is home to 29.9% of the total population, home construction for
     LLMIHs (2019-2023) fell from 2,303 to 562 units per year, and its share also fell from 7.8% to 3.5% with
     respect to total supply.[38]
                                                   -7-



         form—or        communication      strategies   targeting    Indigenous   peoples,
         Afro-descendants, or persons with disabilities. However, the Integrator BBP does
         benefit persons with disabilities, although only some IFIs implement and promote
         it on their platforms.

1.15     Climate change gaps. Household energy use accounts for approximately 30% of
         total energy sector emissions—the second largest share. In 2019, the residential
         and commercial sector accounted for about 6% to 8% of energy sector emissions
         (6,569 tons of CO₂ equivalent).[43] In recent years, Peru has seen a moderate
         increase in emissions from the residential sector due to urban growth and
         increased energy demand, although these figures are being mitigated in part by
         the adoption of more efficient and cleaner technologies.[44]

1.16     In terms of vulnerability to the effects of climate change, in the absence of effective
         mechanisms for formal housing production, most of the homes produced informally
         are located in high-risk areas; this trend will increase in the future in the event of
         extreme weather events.[45] For example, between 2017 and 2021, 64% of urban
         expansion in Lima and Callao took place in areas exposed to one or more hazards,
         such as high slopes, landslides, or mudflows.[46] Nationally, between 2003 and
         2023, 145,592 homes (formal and informal) were destroyed and 1,864,635
         damaged by climate-related events[47]—a trend that is expected to continue to
         increase unless housing units are located outside these areas.

1.17     Program strategy. Given the institutional and market failures that affect the
         housing sector in Peru and a difficulty in accessing finance that limits LLMIH
         access to adequate housing (Determinant 1),27 this operation will seek to expand
         the supply of home loans (relevant portfolio), improving the targeting of this
         population through defined eligibility criteria. To address the housing deficit
         problem (paragraphs 1.1 to 1.5), the strategy looks to promote the development of
         more inclusive financing markets and encourage greater participation by the
         private sector and the FMV to discourage informal occupancy and provide
         preventive and mitigating measures aimed at LLMIHs. The operation resources
         will exclusively target LLMIHs through eligible IFIs, diversifying solutions for: (i) the
         purchase of adequate housing, built and sold by the private sector under market
         conditions; and (ii) home improvements with technical assistance through a new
         loan product to be developed by the FMV.28

1.18     In addition to the project, a nonreimbursable technical cooperation
         (ATN/CV-21221-PE; ATN/OC-21222-PE) was prepared to support the FMV’s
         institutional strengthening and enhance the impact and scale of housing products
         and programs for LLMIHs. In particular, it will support updates to regulations and
         policies to reduce existing barriers, the strengthening of climate change



27   Resources from this operation will not be used to address Determinant 2. This determinant will be
     addressed through: (i) technical support from technical cooperation PE-T1593 (ATN/CV-21221-PE;
     ATN/OC-21222-PE), including activities such as support for the implementation of a construction loan;
     and (ii) additional efforts external to the operation, such as the approval of the land management and
     public land operator regulations under the Sustainable Urban Development Law, by the MVCS.
28   This operation will help lay the groundwork to create a guarantee fund to back mortgage loans for
     low-income households, a measure currently under study by the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF).
                                                                                    -8-



       considerations, and actions targeting female-headed households, Indigenous
       peoples, Afro-descendants, and persons with disabilities (see paragraph 1.24).

                                                                       Figure 2: Theory of change


                                                                                      Subcomponent 1.
                                                                                      Financing for home
                                              Determinant                            purchases for LLMIHs
                                                1. Limited                                                                           Outcome. LLMIH                     Impact.
                                                supply of                                                                           access finance for               Expand access
                                              financing for                                                                          home purchases                   to adequate
                                                                                    1.1. Program                                         or home                        housing
                                                LLMIHs to                           resources earmarked
                                                 access                                                                               improvements                  solutions in Peru
                                                                                    to provide financing for                          with technical
                                                adequate                            LLMIHs to purchase
                                                 housing                                                                                assistance
             Problem                                                                homes
            LLMIHs in                           solutions
            Peru face
           difficulties in                                                                                                                                         1. LLMIH
            accessing                                                                  Subcomponent 2.                                                             beneficiaries of
            adequate                                                                   Financing for home                           1.1 LLMIHs that                loans with a
              housing                                                                   improvement for                             accessed financing             reduced
             solutions                                                                      LLMIHs                                  for adequate                   quantitative
                                                                                                                                    housing solutions as           housing deficit
                                                                                                                                    a result of program            2. LLMIH
                                                                                    2.1. Program                                    support                        beneficiaries of
                                                                                    resources earmarked                             1.2. Relevant                  loans with a
                                                                                    to provide home                                 portfolio of the FMV           reduced
                                              Determinant                           improvement financing                           for LLMIH access to            qualitative
                                                  2. Low                            for LLMIHs                                      housing                        housing deficit
                                               production                                                                           1.3. Financing for
                                              of affordable                                                                         LLMIH access to
                                                  formal                                                                            adequate housing
                                                 housing                                                                            solutions extended
                                                targeting                                                                           to women
                                                                                                                                                                Long-term impact.
                                                 LLMIHs
                                                                                                                                                                 Together with the
                                                                                     PE-T1593                                                                     aforementioned
                                                                                     -Amendment of                                                                 conditions, this
                                                                                     eligibility conditions                                                     program will develop
                                                                                     -Amendment of             Assumption 3. LLMIHs apply                          markets for the
                                                                                     subsidy parameters        for loans                                             beneficiary
                       Efforts supported                                                                                                                             population.
                   by technical cooperation
                    PE-T1593 to fulfill the
                         assumptions



                                                                                                                 Assumption 2. Improved              Assumption 5. The LLMIHs
                                                                                                               mechanisms for documenting            accessing home loans live in
                                                           Assumption 1. The FMV                              the informal income of LLMIHs                 those homes
                                                          successfully implements the
                                                           new construction loan and
                                                          mechanisms to improve the                            Assumption 3. Between the
                                                                                                               new amounts of the subsidy              Assumption 6. LLMIHs
                                                              credit scoring of the
                                                                                                              and the loan, LLMIHs are able         accessing home improvement
                                                           population with irregular or
                                                                                                                to cover the housing costs             loans use the money to
                                                               informal incomes
                                                                                                                                                         improve their homes
                                                                                                              Assumption 4. LLMIHs apply
                                                                                                                      for loans

                                                              Assumption 7. With World
                Additional efforts external to                  Bank support, the MVCS                         Assumption 8. Affordable
                       the operation                          approves the regulations of                     housing production is spurred
                                                                 the land management                          by greater access to loans for
                                                              instruments and public land                       builders and households
                                                                   operator under the
                                                                   Sustainable Urban
                                                                   Development Law




1.19   Underdeveloped mortgage markets stand as a barrier to improving living
       conditions, especially for the low-income population.[48] Therefore, the benefits of
       expanding the availability of financing for adequate housing solutions are directly
       related to the benefits generated by access to adequate housing. Making changes
       in housing infrastructure has major effects on vulnerable families’ quality of life in
       areas such as physical health [49], mental health,[50] cognitive development in
       children,[51] satisfaction with quality of life,[52] household functionality,[53] and
       school absenteeism,[54] among others.

1.20   Bank experience. The Bank has supported the housing sector in Peru since the
       1960s (PE0067). The most recent operation in this sector was the Housing Sector
       Support Program (1461/OC-PE), which was approved in 2003 and introduced the
       BFH granted by the Techo Propio program; this intervention is expected to
                                            -9-



       enhance its efficiency and progressiveness. In the last five years, the Bank
       supported the MVCS and the FMV with knowledge transfer and technical
       assistance (ATN/CV19177PE; ATN/OC18604PE; ATN/FM-16452-PE; and
       ATN/CV-20648-PE). IDB Invest is providing financing to three Peruvian
       developers to build social housing, one of them through a subsidy (Viva 13466-01;
       Los Portales 12468-01; Los Portales II 13823-01; and Menorca 12531-01).

1.21   In addition, the Bank has experience in several countries in financing new housing
       through second-tier banks (3853/OC-PR; 5352/OC-ES; 5910/OC-EC) and in
       improving housing in Paraguay (3538/OC-PR; 4700/OC-PR), Uruguay
       (1186/OC-UR), Argentina (AR-O0005), and Brazil (5765/OC-BR; 5732/OC-BR;
       3630/OC-BR; 2482/OC-BR). The Bank has vast experience in structuring
       financing programs to reach a larger number of beneficiaries with more flexible and
       accessible terms of credit, such as in the experiences in Argentina (AR-X1004;
       4804/OC-AR) and Brazil (5765/OC-BR; 5732/OC-BR; 3630/OC-BR;
       2482/OC-BR). In addition, the Bank's participation can guide the development of
       new lines of credit, innovative financing models, or even public-private
       partnerships that multiply this program’s reach, as in Brazil's experiences
       (5765/OC-BR; 5732/OC-BR; 3630/OC-BR; 2482/OC-BR). In programs such as
       EC-U0001 and ES-O0009, the integration of knowledge between the Connectivity,
       Markets, and Finance Division and the Housing and Urban Development Division
       made it possible to make agile adjustments in the Program Operating Regulations,
       resulting in their satisfactory performance. These experiences in housing finance
       and productive finance projects validate the program's strategy, demonstrating the
       Bank's complementarity of knowledge and experience in the housing and capital
       markets sectors and extending the reach toward low-income families.

1.22   Lessons learned. The program design incorporates lessons learned from the
       monitoring and evaluation of Bank operations in the sector, including: (i) previous
       operations with second-tier banks demonstrate that they are effective in
       addressing market failures and promoting market development when they adopt
       comprehensive approaches; accordingly, it was decided to structure this global
       credit program with the FMV by considering the various financing instruments and
       subsidies, incentives, and relevant actors; (ii) in Ecuador (4788/OC-EC), for
       example, lessons were learned about the importance of serving the population
       without access to credit, diversifying housing solutions, and working with new
       financial agents, which contributed to the design of this program as one targeted
       to low-income households with the ability to save and pay; and (iii) based on the
       Housing Sector Support Program (1461/OC-PE), the need was identified to
       develop appropriate mechanisms for this population segment that include
       microcredit for improvement with assistance from technical entities, and not only
       for home purchases, which is why a pilot program for home improvement is
       included in the program.

1.23   Nonfinancial additionality. Although the dimension of access to finance is the
       most significant, there are other institutional and legal barriers that have an impact
       on the problem. The value added of the Bank's involvement in financing this
       program can be seen both in the activities prior to design of the operation and in
       the activities to be performed during execution, which will ensure the program’s
       sustainability. The Bank has previously provided support through technical
       cooperation ATN/CV-19177-PE; ATN/OC-18604-PE, which supported the
                                           - 10 -



       preparation and approval of the National Housing and Urban Planning Policy, the
       Sustainable Urban Development Law, and a proposal to implement the public land
       operator. The project also enabled the preparation of an in-depth analysis of the
       housing value chain, which identifies the main causes of the housing deficit and
       puts forward a set of strategies, policies, and regulatory adjustments to boost
       access to adequate housing solutions for the most vulnerable households,
       including the reform of the subsidy system, incentives for greater placement of
       mortgage loans with LLMIHs, and new products for home improvement, among
       others. In addition, through technical cooperations ATN/FM-16452-PE and
       ATN/CV-20648-PE, the IDB supported the government in designing
       transit-oriented development projects that will generate urban land for housing for
       different socioeconomic levels, located in areas close to mass public transport
       stations.

1.24   During the execution phase, in addition to the program’s financing resources,
       technical assistance (ATN/CV-21221-PE; ATN/OC-21222-PE) will be provided to
       the MVCS and the FMV to strengthen their capacities and reduce the main barriers
       that limit LLMIH access to financing for adequate housing solutions. The
       nonfinancial additionality will be reflected mainly in the following activities to
       improve and diversify existing housing products and programs and optimize their
       implementation: (i) review of the current FMV-administered housing subsidy
       system to improve its targeting and progressivity, as well as the efficiency of public
       spending; (ii) structuring of new models and tools that encourage IFIs to expand
       their participation in housing finance extended to the population with irregular or
       informal incomes, such as alternative credit scoring systems for households
       without formal income and lending models with fiduciary guarantees to back
       unpaid or delayed loan installments, while also including diverse populations;
       (iii) development and piloting of a new financing product for home improvements;
       (iv) creation of a sustainability baseline for social housing; (v) dissemination
       actions for FMV programs through communication pieces targeting female heads
       of household and diverse populations, such as Indigenous people,
       Afro-descendants, persons with disabilities, and the migrant population;
       (vi) training activities with IFIs to improve their ability to serve LLMIHs, including
       the implementation on their platforms of the Integrator BBP for persons with
       disabilities; and (vii) the preparation of a study on the challenges and gaps in
       access to financing for adequate housing solutions for the diverse population
       (Indigenous people, Afro-descendants, and persons with disabilities) and migrant
       population and the design of service delivery strategies to be implemented. These
       activities will not only help correct existing market failures by expanding credit for
       home purchases and improvement, but will also have a broader impact on the
       improved design and execution of public policies in the sector. In the long run, all
       these efforts are expected to contribute to the development of credit markets for
       LLMIHs.

1.25   Parallel to IDB assistance, the World Bank is providing complementary support.
       While the IDB will be focusing primarily on strengthening access to finance for low-
       and lower-middle-income sectors, the World Bank is supporting: (i) actions to
       reduce the risk of this loan portfolio through MEF-provided technical assistance in
       housing finance, which includes the creation of a guarantee fund for mortgages;
       and (ii) actions to boost the production and efficient use of urban land through
                                                    - 11 -



         technical assistance provided to the MVCS in preparing the Sustainable Urban
         Development Law regulations relating to land management.

B.       Objectives, components, and cost

1.26     Objective. The general development objective is to help expand access to
         adequate housing solutions for low- and lower-middle-income households
         (LLMIHs) in Peru. The specific objective is to broaden access to financing for
         adequate housing solutions for LLMIHs.

1.27     Sole component. Financing support for adequate housing solutions
         (US$300,000,000). Program resources will be used for the FMV to provide
         financing for adequate housing solutions29 through its portfolio of lending products
         for home purchases and improvements in urban areas,30 exclusively targeting
         households with incomes up to four times the minimum wage, following a resilient
         and inclusive approach. Program resources will be channeled through sub-loans
         through eligible IFIs, using existing lending products and associated subsidies.31,32
         The outputs resulting from the financing granted under this component will benefit
         from the technical support delivered through technical cooperation PE-T1593
         (optional link 7), for operational support, which will generate mechanisms and
         incentives to expand the placement of mortgage loans with LLMIHs.33

1.28     Subcomponent 1. Financing for home purchases (US$260,000,000). This will
         help reduce the quantitative deficit by providing financing for mortgage loans
         through IFIs to final beneficiaries for the purchase of new or used homes located

29   The average expected loan for new homes is estimated at US$29,000 and for home improvements at
     approximately US$5,000. To reach these amounts, the loan is complemented by a subsidy and
     household savings. The average value of the homes purchased using program funds is US$42,582.
     Accordingly, subloans for home purchases (70% of the value of the home on average) must be
     complemented with a subsidy (11%) and household savings (19%). The estimated average value of
     the subsidy for Subcomponent 1 is US$5,025. For Subcomponent 2, the subsidy will be US$3,283 (see
     optional link 1). Following an analysis of the items for potential improvement (walls, flooring, roofing,
     structural reinforcement, and expansion), it is estimated that US$9,000—resulting from the loan, plus
     the subsidy and savings—will cover the improvement costs. The maximum loan amounts will be
     US$50,000 for home purchases and US$20,000 for home improvements.
30   At present, the FMV has the following portfolio of mortgage products active: NCMV and complementary
     Techo Propio financing.
31   IFIs supervised by the Superintendency of Banking, Insurance, and Pension Fund Managers (SBS)
     that meet the eligibility criteria stipulated in the Program Operating Regulations may participate in the
     program. Program funds will be earmarked for LLMIH lending and complemented by a direct subsidy
     from the State, depending on the program that they access. For the Techo Propio program,
     beneficiaries will receive the BFH, and for the NCMV program, they will receive the BBP plus the
     Integrator BBP. The amounts of BBP and BPH subsidies are regulated by the MVCS and are updated
     annually by Supreme Decree, considering factors such as changes in the consumer price index (CPI)
     and the average increase in the basic daily wage paid to construction workers. In 2024, the BBP
     subsidy provided between US$2,000 and US$7,079 to purchase homes costing between US$17,737
     and US$93,447. The BFH subsidy provided between US$11,791 and US$13,146 to purchase homes
     costing between US$14,474 and US$34,342. In both cases, the applicable subsidy is determined in
     inverse relation to the cost of the home to be purchased (see optional link 5).
32   A guarantee may be established on the parent property for the construction of housing projects in the
     case of future benefits.
33   The technical support delivered through technical cooperation PE-T1593 (ATN/CV-21221-PE;
     ATN/OC-21222-PE) will address issues identified in the determinants of the problem such as lack of
     formal income, lack of information, and distrust of LLMIHs in the financial system, among others.
                                                     - 12 -



         outside nonmitigable risk zones. At least 45% of the subcomponent's resources
         will be earmarked for subloans to purchase green homes. Green homes will meet
         sustainability criteria equivalent to at least EDGE Level 1.34 In addition, 50% of the
         beneficiary households will be headed by women.

1.29     Subcomponent 2. Financing for home improvements (US$40,000,000). This
         will help reduce the qualitative deficit by financing home improvement loans and
         the pilot of a new financial product for home improvement with technical assistance
         outside nonmitigable risk zones. The Program Operating Regulations will describe
         the eligibility conditions for each type of intervention such that sustainability is
         guaranteed.

1.30     Outcome indicators. The operation's outcome indicators are as follows:
         (i) number of LLMIHs that accessed financing for adequate housing solutions;
         (ii) financing for LLMIH access to adequate housing solutions extended to women;
         and (iii) relevant portfolio of the FMV for LLMIH access to adequate housing
         solutions.

1.31     Beneficiaries. The operation looks to directly serve 16,979 urban LLMIHs, with
         beneficiaries gaining access to loans to purchase new or used homes
         (8,979 loans) or make home improvements (8,000 loans). In addition, 50% of the
         beneficiary households will be headed by women. The operation is expected to
         serve a total of 55,352 people,35 who will have better housing conditions. Due to
         the revolving effect, the operation is expected to serve an additional estimated
         43,042 home improvement loans and 14,589 new home loans.36

1.32     Eligibility of final beneficiaries. The program will exclusively benefit urban
         households with monthly incomes below four times the minimum wage. With
         respect to Subcomponent 1, the program will establish as eligibility criteria that
         neither the applicant nor his or her spouse or legally recognized partner can be the
         owner or co-owner of another home in the country. For Subcomponent 2,
         beneficiaries may not be owners or co-owners of another home in the country,
         other than the home to which the financing will be applied. Details on eligibility and
         prioritization criteria will be defined in the Program Operating Regulations.

1.33     Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the IDB Group Institutional
         Strategy 2023-2030: Transforming for Scale and Impact (CA-631) and aligns with
         its three objectives: (i) reducing poverty and inequality by providing equitable
         access to social housing; (ii) addressing climate change by financing the purchase
         of green housing; and (iii) bolstering sustainable regional growth by encouraging
         private sector participation in social housing finance. The program is also aligned
         with the following areas of operational focus: (i) biodiversity, natural capital, and

34   EDGE is a green building certification system focused on making buildings more efficient. Level 1
     means that a building has achieved savings of at least 20% in energy, water, and embodied energy in
     materials.
35   In 2022, average household size is estimated at 3.26 people.
36   The program will finance long-term housing loans that the FMV will continue to place in the same
     population. Amortization of the original principal, along with a portion of the interest, will help finance
     new loan transactions. From the start of the program across an operational horizon of 20 years, over
     57,000 additional households are expected to benefit from the mortgage or home improvement loans,
     tripling the impact of the Bank’s resources (see optional link 1, paragraph 4.1).
                                                     - 13 -



         climate action; (ii) gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups;
         (iii) social protection and human capital development; (iv) productive development
         and innovation through the private sector; and (v) sustainable, resilient, and
         inclusive infrastructure, by promoting formal housing that incorporates
         sustainability considerations. The program aligns with the Housing and Urban
         Development Division's strategic vision for the housing sector and is consistent
         with the Housing and Urban Development Sector Framework Document
         (GN-2732-11) by financing access to formal housing. The program is also
         consistent with the IDB Group Country Strategy with Peru 2022-2026 (GN-3110-1)
         through its strategic objective to improve the coverage and quality of basic
         services. The program is aligned with the government’s priorities as set out in the
         General Government Policy 2021-2026 and the 2030 National Housing and Urban
         Development Policy. Specifically, the program contributes to priority objective 3 of
         the National Housing and Urban Development Policy by "expanding access to
         adequate housing, prioritizing the population in a situation of poverty or social
         vulnerability," within the framework of service 17 "promotion of affordable
         mortgage loans" and service 23 "improvement of urban and rural housing,
         prioritizing the population in a situation of poverty or social vulnerability." Lastly,
         the operation is consistent with the Gender and Diversity Sector Framework
         Document (GN-2800-13) in its dimension 5 (improving economic opportunities and
         expanding women’s access to housing services, credit, and titles) and is aligned
         with the IDB Group's Gender and Diversity Action Plan 2022-2025 (GN-3116-1).

1.34     Paris alignment. This operation has been analyzed using the Joint Multilateral
         Development Bank Assessment Framework for Paris Alignment and the IDB
         Group Paris Alignment Implementation Approach (GN-3142-1). It has been found
         to be: (i) aligned with the adaptation target of the Paris Agreement based on a
         simplified analysis; and (ii) aligned with the mitigation target of the Paris
         Agreement based on a specific analysis. Alignment was based on consideration
         of the following elements: (i) under the Program Operating Regulations, at least
         45% of Subcomponent 1 will be earmarked for mortgages to purchase homes that
         meet sustainability criteria at least equivalent to EDGE Level 1; (ii) under the
         Program Operating Regulations, the energy efficiency of the gas appliances to be
         financed under the operation will be guaranteed; (iii) all housing solutions to be
         financed are located outside nonmitigable risk zones; and (iv) through the technical
         cooperation (ATN/CV-21221-PE; ATN/OC-21222-PE), the FMV will be supported
         in developing a sustainability baseline for social housing that will be an integral
         part of the housing policy.

1.35     Climate finance. An estimated 39.36% of the operation’s total amount counts as
         climate financing according to the joint methodology of the multilateral
         development banks for tracking climate finance since it finances access to housing
         that achieves at least 20% savings in energy, water, and embodied energy in the
         materials used.37

1.36     Prioritized gender and diversity alignment activities. One outcome indicator is
         defined as 50% of financing going to women, which will enable the FMV to continue
         closing the gap in access to credit for female-headed LLMIHs. In addition, through

37   Equivalent to an available national or international green building certification, even if the certification
     process is not carried out.
                                           - 14 -



       project (ATN/CV-21221-PE; ATN/OC-21222-PE, a study on the challenges and
       gaps in access to financing for adequate housing solutions for the diverse
       populations and a population-adapted communication strategy (women,
       Indigenous peoples, Afro-descendants, and persons with disabilities) will be
       prepared, and the Integrator BBP will be implemented for persons with disabilities
       on the IFI platforms.

1.37   Synergies with the IDB Group. This operation seeks to maximize synergies
       within the IDB Group and correct market failures from the public sector by
       expanding demand for adequate housing solutions. With IDB Invest’s Corporate
       Division, there are collaboration opportunities linked to the three clients that have
       already been financed and that rank among the leading real estate developers in
       the country, as well as with the new prospects that mainly target population
       segments prioritized by this operation. In effect, expanding financing to LLMIHs
       through this operation will help promote a greater supply of social housing aligned
       with environmental sustainability criteria. In addition, new synergies such as rent-
       to-own models will be sought, which would be innovative in Peru. Coordination is
       under way with the Financial Institutions Division to mobilize more resources and
       maximize the impact of this operation on two fronts: (i) direct complementary
       financing from IDB Invest to the FMV to expand access to credit for affordable
       housing for middle-income segments of the population; and (ii) coordination with
       the IFIs that currently have projects with IDB Invest in the structuring phase and
       that could potentially be beneficiaries of this operation through the FMV, in order
       to make complementary use of funds, without overlapping with the IDB Group
       resources. Collaboration with IDB Lab will develop alternative credit scoring
       systems for segments that do not have access to bank services.

C.     Viability analysis

1.38   Technical viability. Based on an analysis performed using the Institutional
       Capacity Assessment Platform (ICAP), the program is considered viable in view of
       the FMV's capacity and experience in implementing housing finance lines of credit.
       The FMV has demonstrated satisfactory performance in the execution of projects
       with international cooperation funds in the last three years. The personnel in all
       responsible technical and financial departments have sufficient capacity,
       experience, and time to manage new operations.

1.39   Socioeconomic viability. In order to determine whether the program will produce
       economic returns, the project's cost and economic viability was analyzed using the
       cost-benefit analysis, which monetizes all the income generated and expenses
       incurred in executing the program, while determining whether the benefits of
       carrying out the credit program are greater than its costs. The intervention is
       assumed to start in 2025; to take into account the program's long-term effects,
       benefits are estimated for a 20-year period using a 12% discount rate. The results
       suggest that the program's net return for the period amounts to US$79.4 million.
       The program's benefit-cost ratio is estimated at US$1.2 per US$1 invested, with
       an internal rate of return of 14.5%. In addition, several sensitivity analyses were
       performed, which demonstrate that the program will continue to be socially and
       economically viable, even when more conservative and demanding values are
       assumed for various parameters of the analysis.
                                            - 15 -




1.40   Socioenvironmental viability. In accordance with the Bank's Environmental and
       Social Policy Framework and based on the assessments made during the due
       diligence process, this operation is classified under the “FI” (Financial Intermediary)
       category, where the executing agency acts as an intermediary in the distribution of
       funds and, therefore, assumes delegated responsibility for assessing and managing
       the environmental and social risks and impacts of eligible activities.

1.41   The Bank's due diligence review sought to determine the operation's
       socioenvironmental viability and focused on evaluating the executing agency's
       environmental and social policies and procedures and its commitment to, capacity
       to, and track record in applying them, as well as identifying the measures needed
       to strengthen its environmental and social risk and impact management system.
       The socioenvironmental viability is presented in the Environmental and Social
       Review Summary (ESRS), which will be included in the Program Operating
       Regulations and will define the program’s environmental and social requirements.
       No adverse social or environmental effects are expected as a result of the eligible
       activities.

1.42   As part of the operation preparation process, the executing agency will develop
       and implement an environmental and social management system in line with the
       level of environmental and social risks of the portfolio and eligible activities. This
       system will incorporate the relevant principles of Environmental and Social
       Performance Standards 1 (Assessment and Management of Environmental and
       Social Risks and Impacts), 2 (Labor and Working Conditions), and 10 (Stakeholder
       Engagement and Information Disclosure).

1.43   Institutional and financial viability. The ICAP analysis found no significant
       institutional weaknesses. However, a series of recommendations were identified,
       as follows: (i) a specialized program team (SPT) should be created under the
       Finance Division, which will be responsible for the program's execution,
       management, and overall coordination and will act as a direct point of contact with
       the Bank. It will also be responsible for the financial and accounting management
       of the operation; (ii) the executing agency should be trained on the Bank's
       fiduciary, monitoring, and evaluation policies; and (iii) the program Operating
       Regulations should be approved to define the institutional coordination
       mechanisms, the execution strategy for each line of credit, and the roles and
       responsibilities of the FMV's various functional areas, including the SPT.

                      II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.     Financing instruments

2.1    Financing structure and modality. Given its nature as a form of financial
       intermediation, this loan has been structured as a global credit program for
       US$300 million from the IDB’s Ordinary Capital. This instrument is the most
       appropriate to expand access to housing finance to LLMIHs with the ability to pay,
       through IFIs. Complemented by the Bank's technical assistance, this program has
                                                       - 16 -



          the potential to strengthen the FMV's ability to provide financing to this segment
          and to expand and develop housing finance markets in Peru.

                                   Table 1. Estimated costs of the program (US$)38

          Components                                                        IDB            Total           %
          Sole component. Financing support for adequate                 300,000,000     300,000,000           100
          housing solutions

          Subcomponent 1. Financing for home purchases                   260,000,000     260,000,000       86.67

          Subcomponent 2. Financing for home improvement                  40,000,000      40,000,000       13.33

          Total                                                          300,000,000     300,000,000           100
          * The costs per subcomponent or main activity are indicative (see details in required link 1).


2.2       Disbursement schedule. Based on expected demand and prior experience with
          this type of instrument, the execution and disbursement period will run for five
          years as from the effective date of the loan contract to be entered into by the Bank
          and the Republic of Peru.

                                        Table 2. Disbursement schedule (US$)39

         Component             Year 1         Year 2        Year 3         Year 4       Year 5         Total
         Sole component       57,085,597     62,708,903    68,282,209     61,654,056   50,269,235   300,000,000
         Subcomponent 1       57,085,597     59,358,903    61,632,209     49,154,056   32,769,235   260,000,000
         Subcomponent 2                  0    3,350,000     6,650,000     12,500,000   17,500,000    40,000,000
         Total                57,085,597     62,708,903    68,282,209     61,654,056   50,269,235   300,000,000
         Percentage              19.03%         20.90%          22.76%       20.55%       16.76%       100.00%


B.        Environmental and social risks

2.3       In accordance with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework
          (GN-2965-23), this operation is classified as financial intermediation with a
          moderate environmental and social risk rating. The financial intermediaries will
          transfer funds through subloans based on the program components to finance
          home purchases or home improvement projects equivalent to the Bank's category
          “C,” and projects classified as category “A” or “B” under the Bank's classification
          system will be excluded. These eligibility criteria are presented in the Program
          Operating Regulations.

2.4       The operation’s disaster and climate change risks are also considered low. The
          program supports mortgage loans for LLMIHs, which will finance home purchases
          or improvements. In addition, the program will not finance subprojects classified


38    The distribution of percentages is the result of an estimate of the use of resources of each subcomponent.
      Execution details will be included in the Program Operating Regulations.
39    Program execution may begin once eligibility has been reached and is not contingent on changes in the
      schedule of subsidies. The expectation is that 19% will be executed in the first year, not counting the
      impact of technical assistance, which is already reflected in the disbursement schedule. The
      subcomponent 2 reform will help scale up execution beginning in the second year.
                                                 - 17 -



          as category “A” or “B” under the Bank's classification system. These eligibility
          criteria are presented in the Program Operating Regulations.

C.        Fiduciary risks

2.5       The fiduciary risk is considered to be low. However, certain actions were identified
          as a result of the ICAP analysis, relating to the following: (i) the creation of internal
          coordination mechanisms between the Finance Division and other bodies involved
          in program management, as well as the interaction with the MEF for disbursement
          requirements, for which an SPT will be created within the FMV structure and the
          respective governance and coordination arrangement will be described in the
          Program Operating Regulations; and (ii) the training of FMV personnel on the
          Bank's monitoring and fiduciary policies and tools in order to comply with the
          disclosure requirements throughout program execution.

D.        Other key issues and risks

2.6       This operation’s economic and financial risk is medium-high since, if exchange rate
          conditions become unfavorable in the short term and volatility persists, then an
          imbalance in the program accounts could occur, since the Bank's loans are
          denominated in U.S. dollars. Loans to the end borrowers will be disbursed in local
          currency. Since it is regulated by the Superintendency of Banking, Insurance, and
          Pension Fund Managers (SBS), the FMV must meet coverage ratios that mitigate
          this risk. The FMV may request a currency conversion of the Bank so that
          disbursements are denominated in local currency.40 In addition, the IDB will ensure
          that the FMV is apprised of strategies to hedge this risk in coordination with other
          financial institutions willing to hold U.S. dollar positions locally.

2.7       Another risk is a potential reduction in the allocation of financial resources for
          affordable housing subsidies, which would directly affect lending by the IFIs and
          would require the goals and activities planned at the start of project execution to
          be rescheduled. In order to mitigate this risk, the FMV would conduct planning and
          monitoring of affordable housing disbursements and establish a mechanism for
          coordination with the MCVS and the MEF for the analysis of subsidy requirements
          and their connection with the program’s expected results and disbursements.

2.8       Sustainability of the operation. The execution of the credit operation supported
          by technical cooperation (ATN/CV-21221-PE; ATN/OC-21222-PE) and the
          Peruvian government’s other complementary initiatives will together contribute to
          promoting the development of housing finance markets that better serve LLMIHs.
          Addressing market failures, broadening targeted financing, and strengthening
          housing policies are expected to lead to a crowding-in effect that will expand the
          private sector’s participation and enhance its capacity to serve low-income
          households. The operation will expand the demand for and supply of credit to low-
          income households to buy homes built and sold by the private sector under market
          conditions. The operation will also support the creation of a new lending product
          for the FMV that will expand the financing market for households facing a

40    In the framework of the Financing Program for Women Entrepreneurs in Peru (5596/OC-PE),
      disbursements denominated in local currency have already been considered, which diversifies the
      country’s disbursement options.
                                            - 18 -



      qualitative deficit to make nonstructural or structural improvements to their homes.
      Also notable is the counterpart's commitment to continue improving the regulatory
      framework, such as the Sustainable Urban Development Law land management
      regulations, which will in the medium term strengthen the program's sustainability.
      Creating conditions for greater private sector participation once market failures
      have been corrected and LLMIH access to credit expanded will have a systemic
      impact on Peru’s housing market.

                    III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements

3.1   Borrower and executing agency. The borrower will be the Republic of Peru, and
      the executing agency will be Fondo MiVivienda (FMV). The FMV is part of the local
      financial system and, therefore, is authorized to engage in financial intermediation
      activities permitted by law. It operates as a second-tier bank and is governed by
      Law 28579. Since its creation in 1998, its core business has been the promotion
      and financing of housing throughout the country, channeling funds to lenders
      through IFIs. The FMV is owned by the National Fund for Financing State Business
      Activity (FONAFE) and is supervised by the Superintendency of Banking,
      Insurance, and Pension Fund Managers (SBS) and the Superintendency of the
      Securities Market.

3.2   Execution mechanism. As the executing agency, the FMV will be responsible for
      the program’s technical, administrative, socioenvironmental, fiduciary, and
      operational execution, including overall coordination and resource management.
      For the execution of program resources, the FMV, within the scope of the Finance
      Division, the Commercial Division, and the Real Estate and Social Projects
      Division, will set up a specialized program team (SPT) as indicated in the Program
      Operating Regulations. The SPT will coordinate with and rely on the FMV's
      functional areas.

3.3   To extend subloans, the FMV will act as an intermediary institution of the resources
      to the eligible beneficiaries through the IFIs and will be responsible for transferring
      the resources and monitoring the program accounts in its role as executing
      agency. The FMV will be responsible for implementing the following procedures
      relating to the use of the Bank's financing resources, which will be included in the
      Program Operating Regulations to be approved by the Bank, including:
      (i) definition of the attributes and conditions of the financial products; (ii) selection,
      evaluation, accreditation, and monitoring of the financial and socioenvironmental
      performance of the eligible subloans; (iii) application of eligibility criteria, resource
      allocation and collection, monitoring and supervision of beneficiaries and
      projects/investments; and (iv) instruction for all stakeholders on the program's
      requirements and conditions, including breaches. To this end, the FMV's Finance
      Division will be in charge of program management and act as the focal point
      vis-à-vis the Bank, including all the activities described in the Program Operating
      Regulations and the monitoring and evaluation plan.
                                                   - 19 -



3.4       IFI eligibility. Authorized IFIs that have a current line of credit under FMV
          programs and meet the eligibility criteria set out in the Program Operating
          Regulations41 may participate.

3.5       Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the
          loan. The following will be special contractual conditions precedent to the
          first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower, through the Ministry of
          Economy and Finance (MEF), and the executing agency have entered into an
          agreement, and this is in force, for the transfer of proceeds from the loan
          and the obligations of the parties with respect to execution of the program;
          and (ii) the executing agency has approved the Program Operating
          Regulations, and these are in force, in accordance with the terms and
          conditions previously agreed on with the Bank, which include clauses
          relating to socioenvironmental issues based on the environmental and
          social review summary (ESRS). These conditions are justified since: (i) the
          Program Operating Regulations contain basic criteria and requirements for
          program execution; and (ii) the borrower/FMV agreement formalizes the
          mechanisms to transfer resources and obligations between the borrower and the
          executing agency.

3.6       Procurement. Since the program is structured as a global credit operation and
          does not consider the procurement of goods or consulting services, its resources
          will be used exclusively to extend loans as defined in the program Operating
          Regulations. The provisions of paragraph 3.13 of the Policies for the Procurement
          of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (GN-2349-15) and, consequently,
          current commercial or private sector practices will apply, without prejudice to the
          contents of Section I of these policies.

3.7       Disbursement. The loan proceeds may be disbursed through the advance of
          funds or reimbursement of expenses modalities. For advances of funds, the FMV
          will request the disbursement of funds from the Bank based on a financial
          programming supported by the program’s actual liquidity needs for up to 180 days.
          Disbursements will be substantiated with the transfers that the FMV makes to the
          IFIs for at least 80% of the total cumulative balances pending substantiation, using
          the Bank's forms.

3.8       Financial management and audits. Financial management is governed by the
          guidelines set out in document OP-273-12. The fiduciary agreements and
          requirements (Annex III) set out the financial management, planning, and
          supervision framework applicable to the operation. The FMV will submit annual
          and final financial reports for the program, audited by a Bank-eligible external audit
          firm contracted by the FMV in accordance with the terms of reference agreed on
          with the Bank, even if the cost of the audit is financed using FMV resources.
          Audited financial reports for the program will be submitted within 120 days
          following the closing date of each financial year, and final audited financial
          statements will be submitted within 120 days following the date of the last
          disbursement. Program audits will be financed with own resources of the FMV.

41    The program Operating Regulations will set out eligibility criteria aimed at promoting the access of
      low-income households to financing for adequate housing solutions, such as the implementation of the
      Integrator BBP to issue the NCMV loans.
                                             - 20 -



3.9    Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the
       provisions set out in the loan contract and in the program Operating Regulations,
       which will be subject to the Bank's no objection and will include at least: (i) the
       organizational arrangement for program execution, including the SPT's roles and
       responsibilities; (ii) the guidelines for financial, audits (such as the scope of audited
       financial statements), procurement, and environmental and social processes; and
       (iii) the description of the mechanisms for coordination, monitoring, and evaluation
       of the program's physical and financial progress, both within the FMV and with the
       MEF, in the case of disbursements. The Program Operating Regulations will
       contain the eligibility criteria for beneficiaries, the terms and conditions of subloans,
       information and reporting requirements on financial conditions, and other
       parameters or restrictions that will govern the use of program resources.

B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results

3.10   Monitoring. The executing agency will monitor and control project management,
       including: (i) half-yearly monitoring reports on the achievement of objectives for the
       indicators in the Results Matrix, physical and financial progress of the outputs and
       the annual work plan, compliance with environmental and social safeguards, risk
       assessment, and the updating of planning and monitoring tools; (ii) the issue of the
       program’s audited financial statements; and (iii) the preparation of the project
       completion report as detailed in the monitoring and evaluation plan.

3.11   Evaluation. The program provides for a midterm evaluation, covering technical,
       administrative, and financial issues as well as issues relating to the operation's
       effectiveness, so as identify from an early stage whether the program's specific
       objective will be achieved and, if not, to make the necessary adjustments to ensure
       its achievement, once 50% of the loan has been disbursed or three years have
       elapsed since the loan contract came into force (whichever occurs first). At the end
       of the operation, a final evaluation will verify achievement of the proposed
       objectives and determine their attribution; a qualitative evaluation will validate the
       theory of change within the context of Peru and, subsequently, an impact
       evaluation will measure the contribution to the general objective; and an economic
       evaluation will be conducted to enable an ex post economic analysis. At closing, a
       final evaluation will be conducted in accordance with the Bank's guidelines to
       generate inputs for the project completion report.

C.     Post-approval design activities

3.12   Resources will be dedicated from technical cooperation ATN/CV-21221-PE;
       ATN/OC-21222-PE) to support technical studies related to: (i) the optimization of
       housing subsidy parameters; (ii) the development of mechanisms to reduce risk
       and/or capture the savings capacity of households with informal incomes; (iii) the
       structuring of a new home improvement product; (iv) the creation of a baseline for
       sustainable social housing; and (v) the strengthening of the FMV's communication
       capabilities with a focus on low-income and vulnerable groups.
                                                                                                                                                                                  Annex I - PE-L1293
                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 1




                                                                        Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                  Summary             PE-L1293
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Institutional Strategy Alignment


                                                                                               -Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action
                                                                                               -Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups
                                                                                               -Social protection and human capital development
 Operational Focus Areas
                                                                                               -Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure
                                                                                               -Productive development and innovation through the private sector




 [Space-Holder: Impact framework indicators]

2. Country Development Objectives


                                                                                                                       Strengthen environmental management with a focus on
  Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                    GN-3110-1         sustainability and climate change/
                                                                                                                       Improve social inclusion.



                                                                                                                       The intervention is not included in the 2024 Operational
  Country Program Results Matrix
                                                                                                                       Program.



   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                          Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                               9.8
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                            2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                          3.5
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                       3.8
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                          10.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                   1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                 3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                       2.5
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                         2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                              1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                          6.1
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                        0.6
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                              5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                Medium Low
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                             FI
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems


                                                                                                                       Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting, External
                                                                                                                       Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)




                                                                              Non-Fiduciary


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                         Yes                       ATN/CV-19177-PE,ATN/OC-18604-PE
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project



Evaluability Assessment Note: The general objective of the program is to contribute to improving access to adequate housing solutions for low- and middle-low-income
households in Peru. The specific objective is: (i) to expand access to financing for adequate housing solutions for low- and middle-low-income households.

The project presents a comprehensive diagnosis that identifies the main determinants. The outcome indicators included in the results matrix are SMART (specific, measurable,
achievable, relevant, and time-bound) and have appropriate verification means.

The economic analysis was conducted separately for subcomponent 1, which finances the acquisition of housing, and subcomponent 2, which finances housing improvements,
achieving internal rates of return of 14.3% and 15.1%, respectively, with an aggregate internal rate of return of 14.5%. The benefits considered the value of the housing and its
appreciation over time as sources of increased wealth for beneficiaries, and imputed rent as a measure of the benefits from consuming housing services. In addition to the
described benefits, given the defined timeframe for the implementation of the investment project (20 years), it was considered that the initial capital of the operation could,
through a revolving mechanism, finance a considerable number of new credit operations by recycling the capital resources. The analysis includes reasonable assumptions and
an appropriate sensitivity analysis in the form of a base scenario and a conservative scenario.

The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan proposes a mid-term evaluation, which will identify progress in product and outcome indicators, and a final evaluation, which will consist of
a before-and-after evaluation, an ex post economic analysis, a qualitative analysis, and a quantitative impact evaluation with attribution, leveraging the discontinuity in the
scoring that determines whether a household's credit application is accepted.
                                                                                                                                                                   Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 5



                                                                           RESULTS MATRIX

 Program objective: The specific objective is to broaden access to financing for adequate housing solutions for low- and lower-middle-income households (LLMIH). Achieving
 this objective will contribute to the general development objective of helping expand access to adequate housing solutions for LLMIHs in Peru.



                                                                    GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

General development objective: Help expand access to adequate housing solutions for low- and lower-middle-income households (LLMIHs) in Peru

                                                                                  Expected
                                                         Baseline     Baseline                                    Means of
       Indicators            Unit of measurement                                   year of          Target                                      Comments
                                                          value         year                                     verification
                                                                                 achievement

 1. LLHMIH                 LLMIH beneficiaries of           0          2024           2031           N/A       Ex post survey     See Required link 2 The baseline will be
    beneficiaries of       loans with a reduced                                                                                   confirmed within the framework of the
    loans with a reduced   quantitative housing                                                                                   kick-off workshop, in coordination with
    quantitative housing   deficit/LLMIH beneficiaries                                                                            the Office of Strategic Planning and
    deficit                of loans with quantitative                                                                             Development Effectiveness (SPD).
                           housing deficit decreased

 2. LLHMIH                 LLMIH beneficiaries of           0          2024           2031           N/A       Ex post survey     See Required link 2 The baseline will be
    beneficiaries of       loans with a reduced                                                                                   confirmed within the framework of the
    loans with a reduced   qualitative housing                                                                                    kick-off workshop, in coordination with
    qualitative housing    deficit/LLMIH beneficiaries                                                                            the Office of Strategic Planning and
    deficit                of loans with qualitative                                                                              Development Effectiveness (SPD).
                           housing deficit decreased
                                                                                                                                                                                    Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 2 of 5



                                                                          SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

    Specific development objective: Broaden access to financing for adequate housing solutions for low- and lower-middle-income households (LLMIHs)

                                          Baseli    Base-
                          Unit of                                                                                                  End of           Means of
      Indicators                           ne        line      Year 1       Year 2         Year 3        Year 4        Year 5                                                 Comments
                        measurement                                                                                                project         verification
                                          value     year
1.1 LLMIHs that       Number of              0       2024         -            -1          8,150             -         16,979       16,979     FMV report               Adequate housing
    accessed          households                                                                                                                                        solutions include new
    financing for                                                                                                                                                       home purchases and
    adequate                                                                                                                                                            home improvements.
    housing                                                                                                                                                             See required link 2
    solutions as a
    result of program
    support
1.2 Relevant           US$               645,47      2024         -            -        833,552,453          -       945,475,7 945,475,74 FMV report                    Adequate housing
    portfolio of the                     5,744                                                                          44          4                                   solutions include new
    FMV for access                                                                                                                                                      home purchases and
    to adequate                                                                                                                                                         home improvements.
    housing                                                                                                                                                             This indicator measures
    solutions for                                                                                                                                                       the program's impact on
    LLMIHs                                                                                                                                                              expanding the FMV's
                                                                                                                                                                        portfolio of loans to
                                                                                                                                                                        LLMIHs through IFIs.
                                                                                                                                                                        See required link 2
1.3 Financing for      Financing for     50%         2024         -            -            50%              -          50%          50%       FMV report               Adequate housing
    LLMIH access to    LLMIH access                                                                                                                                     solutions include new
    adequate           to adequate                                                                                                                                      home purchases and
    housing            housing                                                                                                                                          home improvements.
    solutions          solutions                                                                                                                                        See required link 2
    extended to        extended to
    women              women/
                       Financing for
                       access to
                       adequate
                       housing
                       solutions
                       extended to
                       LLMIHs



1         The program is expected to provide 8,979 loans for home purchases (new or used) and 8,000 loans for home improvement (paragraph 1.31 of the loan proposal).
                                                                                                                                                                            Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3 of 5


                                                                                    OUTPUTS

   Subcomponent 1: Financing for home purchases

                                          Base-   Base-
                          Unit of                                                                                         End of            Means of
      Indicators                           line    line    Year 1      Year 2       Year 3       Year 4        Year 5                                                  Comments
                        measurement                                                                                       project          verification
                                          value   year

1.1 Program                  US$           0      2024    57,085,597   59,358,903   61,632,209   49,154,056   32,769,235 260,000,000       FMV report           See Required link 2 This
    resources                                                                                                                                                   output will benefit from the
    disbursed to IFIs                                                                                                                                           technical support provided
    and earmarked to                                                                                                                                            through PE-T1593, which
    provide financing                                                                                                                                           will generate mechanisms
    for LLMIHs to                                                                                                                                               and incentives to expand
    purchase homes                                                                                                                                              the placement of
                                                                                                                                                                mortgage loans with
                                                                                                                                                                LLMIHs. See optional link
                                                                                                                                                                7

Milestone 1.1.1.        Financing for      0      2024        -           -            -           -           45%          45%        FMV report, which
Financing for housing   housing with at                                                                                                shows that a
with at least 20%       least 20%                                                                                                      minimum of 45% of
savings in water and    savings in                                                                                                     the financing went
embodied energy in      water and                                                                                                      to housing with at
the materials used      embodied                                                                                                       least 20% savings
                        energy in the                                                                                                  in energy, water,
                        materials                                                                                                      and embodied
                        used/Total                                                                                                     energy in the
                        financing                                                                                                      materials used
                                                                                                                                       equivalent to an
                                                                                                                                       available national
                                                                                                                                       or international
                                                                                                                                       green building
                                                                                                                                       certification, even if
                                                                                                                                       the certification
                                                                                                                                       process is not
                                                                                                                                       carried out.
                                                                                                                                              Annex II
                                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 5


                                       Base-   Base-
                           Unit of                                                                  End of        Means of
      Indicators                        line    line   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                        Comments
                         measurement                                                                project      verification
                                       value   year

1.2. Population-         Number of      0      2024      0        1        0        0        0        1       Communication       See required link 2
     adapted             strategies                                                                           strategy document
     communication                                                                                                                This output will be funded
     strategy (female                                                                                                             by technical cooperation
     heads of                                                                                                                     PE-T1593.
     household,
     Indigenous
     people, Afro-
     Peruvians, and
     persons with
     disabilities)
     developed and
     implemented

1.3. Dissemination        Number of     4      2024      0        0        0        0       14        14      FMV report          See Required link 2
     activities with IFIs activities
     to promote the                                                                                                               This output will be funded
     implementation of                                                                                                            by technical cooperation
     the Integrator BBP                                                                                                           PE-T1593.
     in their platforms

1.4. Study prepared on Number of        0      2024      0        1        0        0        0        1       Study document      See Required link 2
     the challenges    studies
     and gaps in                                                                                                                  This output will be funded
     access to                                                                                                                    by technical cooperation
     financing for                                                                                                                PE-T1593.
     adequate housing
     solutions for
     Indigenous
     people, Afro-
     Peruvians,
     persons with
     disabilities, and
     migrant
     populations
                                                                                                                                                       Annex II
                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 5



  Subcomponent 2: Home improvement

                                                Base-
                          Unit of   Base-line                                                                    End of       Means of
     Indicators                                  line   Year 1   Year 2      Year 3       Year 4      Year 5                                       Comments
                        measurement  value                                                                       project     verification
                                                year

2.1 Program                 US$         0       2024      0      3,350,000   6,650,000   12,500,000   17,500,00040,000,000   FMV report     See required link 2
    resources
    disbursed to IFIs                                                                                                                       This output will benefit
    and earmarked                                                                                                                           from the technical
    to provide home                                                                                                                         support provided through
    improvement                                                                                                                             technical cooperation
    financing for                                                                                                                           PE-T1593, which will
    LLMIHs                                                                                                                                  enable the structuring of
                                                                                                                                            a new lending product for
                                                                                                                                            improvement. See
                                                                                                                                            optional link 7
                                                                                        Annex III
                                                                                      Page 1 of 5



                          Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements

Country: Peru         Division: HUD            Operation No.: PE-L1293        Year: Sept/2024

Executing agency: Fondo MiVivienda (FMV)
Operation name: Program to Promote Social Housing in Peru

                    I.    FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1. Use of country systems in the operation (any system or subsystem approved
   subsequently could be used for the operation, under the terms of the Bank’s validation).

    Budget                  Reports                   Information           National
                                                      system                competitive
                                                                            bidding
    Treasury                Internal audit            Shopping              Others
    Accounting              External control          Individual            Others
                                                      consultants


2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

      Special             The executing agency will be Fondo MiVivienda (FMV), a State-
      features of         owned company governed by private law created in 1998 under the
      fiduciary           National Fund for Financing State Business Activity (FONAFE) and
      execution           attached to the Ministry of Housing, Construction, and Sanitation,
                          which is supervised by the Superintendency of Banking, Insurance,
                          and Pension Fund Managers (SBS) in Peru. Its principal activity is
                          the promotion of and financing for the purchase, improvement, and
                          construction of social housing. Program execution will use the
                          FMV's current structure, concentrated in the Finance Division,
                          which will coordinate with the institutional areas involved in
                          execution, will be responsible for managing the program's technical,
                          operational, and fiduciary issues, and will be the counterpart vis-à-
                          vis the Bank.


3. Fiduciary capacity

 Fiduciary capacity      An analysis was performed using the Institutional Capacity
 of the executing        Assessment Platform (ICAP) to evaluate the FMV's fiduciary
 agency                  capacity and determined that the fiduciary risk is low. However, the
                         following actions were proposed to be performed prior to program
                         execution: (i) create the specialized program team (SPT) within the
                         FMV's own organizational structure for internal coordination with
                         other FMV agencies and with the Ministry of Economy and Finance
                         (MEF) for program disbursements; and (ii) establish the necessary
                         procedures for compliance with the eligibility criteria for the use of
                         the IDB-provided resources. Both will be detailed in the Program
                         Operating Regulations to be approved beforehand by the Bank. In
                         addition, training will be provided on the Bank's operational and
                                                                                       Annex III
                                                                                     Page 2 of 5


                       fiduciary policies and procedures because, although the FMV has
                       extensive experience in advancing the program's purposes, it has
                       not executed IDB financing in the past.


4. Fiduciary risks and risk response

    Risk                                             Level of
                              Risk                                     Risk response
 taxonomy                                              risk

 Economic     If exchange rate conditions Medium-               The IDB will keep the FMV
 and          become unfavorable in the short high              apprised about strategies
 financial    term and volatility persists, then                to hedge this risk and will
              an imbalance in the program                       remain             sufficiently
              accounts could occur, since the                   connected       with     other
              IDB loans are denominated in                      financial institutions willing
              U.S. dollars and loans to end                     to    hold     U.S.      dollar
              borrowers are expected to be                      positions locally.
              disbursed mostly in local
              currency.


5. Policies and guidelines applicable to the operation: Financial Management Guidelines
   for IDB-financed Projects (OP-273-12), Disbursement Instructions, Audited Financial
   Reporting Instructions, and External Audit Management. Policies for the Procurement
   of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (GN-2349-15) and Policies for the Selection
   and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB (GN-2350-15).
6. Exceptions to policies and guidelines: Not applicable

      II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

 Special contractual     See Executive Summary and paragraph 3.5 of the proposal for
 conditions              operation development.
 precedent to the
 first disbursement:
 Exchange rate:          For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the
                         parties agree that the exchange rate to be used will be the rate
                         stipulated in Article 4.10(b)(i). For the purpose of determining the
                         equivalent value of expenditures incurred in local currency as
                         charges against the local counterpart or for the reimbursement of
                         expenditures chargeable to the loan, the agreed-on exchange rate
                         will be the exchange rate on the effective date on which the
                         borrower, the executing agency, or any other person or legal entity
                         given the authority to incur expenses, makes the respective
                         payments to the contractor, vendor, or beneficiary.
 Type of audit:          The program's audited financial reports will be prepared by an
                         external audit firm acceptable to the IDB on an annual basis, within
                         120 days after the close of each financial year, and 120 days after
                         the expiration of the original disbursement period or extensions
                         thereof. The terms of reference will be previously agreed on with
                         the Bank.
                                                                            Annex III
                                                                          Page 3 of 5


   III. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

Procurement     The project is structured as a global credit program and,
supervision     therefore, the funds are provided to the FMV for the rediscounting
                of eligible credit operations through IFIs, which allocate these
                resources to legal entities and individuals carrying out activities
                compatible with the Program Operating Regulations (second-tier
                operations). The provisions of paragraph 3.13 of the Policies for
                the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB
                (GN-2349-15) and, consequently, current commercial or private
                sector practices will apply, without prejudice to the contents of
                Section I these policies.
Records and     The FMV’s Finance Division will be in charge of keeping the
files           program files and records. In order to prepare and file the reports
                of this program, the official disbursement request forms must be
                used, in which the list of the subloans that are the object of the
                rediscounted loan must be recorded with the financing of the
                program.

      IV. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Programming     The FMV has an operations manual that defines budgetary and
and budget      financial procedures, including accounting and treasury. The
                Finance Division is responsible for managing program resources.
                The FMV's budget administration is independent, i.e. it is not
                included in the national administrative budget. The FMV will
                manage the IDB funds through a transfer made by the MEF
                through a subsidiary agreement. The FMV has the legal capacity
                to administer loans with external financing.
Treasury and    Disbursements of program resources channeled by the FMV to
disbursements   accredited IFIs to issue eligible subloans, through the COFIDE
                trustee, which will validate the relevance of transfers, will
                constitute the expenditure for the purposes of justification vis-à-
                vis the IDB. Disbursements will be committed and made to the
                FMV on a half-yearly basis in accordance with IDB policies.
                Disbursements will be made based on a committed portfolio
                (reimbursements) or a projected portfolio (advances) of at least
                80%. In all cases, the portfolio of subloans to be recognized by
                the program will be subject to review by the IDB in order to
                proceed with the disbursement. Reimbursement requests will be
                accompanied by a list of eligible rediscounted loans, as
                established in the Program Operating Regulations. The FMV will
                prepare the disbursement schedule annually. The programming
                that justifies the disbursement will cover periods of up to six
                months. The IDB will make disbursements to the treasury single
                account, from which the resources will then be transferred to an
                FMV account for program use. Since the MEF is the joint and
                several guarantor of the operation, it will authorize the
                disbursements that the FMV requests of the IDB.
                                                                                  Annex III
                                                                                Page 4 of 5



Accounting,        The program accounting records will be kept using the FMV's
information        accounting system, integrated for the different areas of planning,
systems, and       budgeting, accounting, and treasury. The financial statements
reporting          are extracted from the Sistema Integrado de Gestión
                   Administrativa (Integrated Administrative Management System).
                   The Finance Division is responsible for keeping the accounting
                   records and generating the financial statements of the program
                   and the appropriate third parties, following the rules issued by the
                   SBS and stipulated by FONAFE. The program's financial
                   statements will be prepared separately in accordance with the
                   Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects
                   (OP˗273˗12) and the Bank’s instructions for audited financial
                   reports and external audit management.
Internal control   The FMV has an internal audit unit and internal control body that
and internal       contribute to improving corporate control management. The
auditing           internal audit unit discharges its duties independently with
                   hierarchical dependence on the FMV board of directors, which
                   are for providing assurance and consultation to improve the
                   entity's operations. It is governed by the provisions of the General
                   Law of the Financial and Insurance Systems and the charter law
                   of the SBS and the internal audit regulations.
External           As the governing body of the National Control System, the Office
control and        of the Comptroller General of the Republic outsources the
financial          external audit of the projects to Bank-eligible independent audit
reports            firms. Eligible independent audit firms are periodically evaluated
                   by the Bank to ensure that they are of high quality.
                   The external audit will verify compliance with the eligibility criteria
                   set out in the Program Operating Regulations, for which the type
                   of engagement to be commissioned to the auditor will be agreed,
                   either a financial audit or reasonable assurance engagement.
                   The terms of reference will be approved by the Bank.
                   The independent audit firm will be selected and contracted in
                   agreement with the FMV and the Office of the Comptroller
                   General of the Republic. The process will be carried out following
                   the Bank's policies and for the entire execution period, including
                   extensions to the final disbursement period. The program auditor
                   may be the same independent audit firm that audits the FMV's
                   institutional financial statements, provided it is a Bank-eligible
                   independent audit firm. External audit costs will be covered using
                   the FMV’s own resources.
                   Management of the program's audit is governed by document
                   OP-273-12 and the IDB's instructions for instructions for audited
                   financial reports and external audit management.
                                                                               Annex III
                                                                             Page 5 of 5



Financial        Support will be provided during project execution through on-site
supervision of   visits to the executing agency’s offices, participation in the launch
the operation    workshop and other training sessions, the review of the audited
                 financial statements, and any other reviews that may be set up in
                 coordination with the project team leader. The frequency of these
                 activities is determined based on the risk associated with project
                 execution. The portfolio will also be reviewed with the FMV twice
                 per year.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/24



                          Peru. Loan ____/OC-PE to the Republic of Peru
                            Program to Promote Social Housing in Peru



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Republic of Peru, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing to
cooperate in the execution of the Program to Promote Social Housing in Peru. Such financing will
be for the amount of up to US$300,000,000 from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital
and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions
of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                               (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CAN/EZIDB0000366-862165579-22810
PE-L1293
