                                                                                       PUBLIC
                                                                     SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                         ARGENTINA




                  SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION PROGRAM



                                          (AR-L1306)




                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Felipe Vera, Project Team
Leader (CSD/HUD); Ignez Tristao, Project Team Co-leader (SCL/SPH); Veronica Adler,
Diego Arcia, Dianela Avila, Mariana Poskus (CSD/HUD); Cecilia Ares (CSC/CAR); Roberto
Laguado (FMP/CAR); Analía La Rosa (FMP/CCH); Melissa Barandiaran (VPS/ESG); Julia
Miguez Moráis (VPS/ESG); Paloma Acevedo (CSD/HUD); Jennifer Doherty (CSD/CCS);
Natalia Benasso (VPC/CAR); Jorge Oyamada (INE/WSA); Edwin Malagon (INE/ENE);
Andrea Monje (SCL/GDI); Claudia Vásquez (SCL/LMK); and Alonso Chaverri-Suarez
(LEG/SGO).




This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank's Board of Executive
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus
superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                    CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY


I.     PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1

       A.    Background, problem to be addressed, and rationale ................................... 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 9
       C.    Key results indicators ................................................................................. 11

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11

       A.    Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11
       B.    Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 12
       C.    Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 13
       D.    Other risks and key issues .......................................................................... 13

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 15

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 15
       B.    Summary of monitoring and evaluation arrangements ................................ 17
                                                   - ii -



                                                ANNEXES
PRINTED ANNEXES

Annex I        Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM)
Annex II       Results matrix
Annex III      Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                  LINKS

REQUIRED

1. Multiyear execution plan / Annual work plan (AWP)
2. Monitoring and evaluation plan
3. Environmental and social management report (ESMR)
4. Procurement plan

OPTIONAL

1. Economic analysis of the program
2. Draft Operating Regulations
3. Analysis of program compliance with the Public Utilities Policy
4. Representative project sample
5. Typology of neighborhoods
6. Diagnostic assessment of gender inequality and overburdened services in informal neighborhoods
7. Climate change diagnostic assessment
8. Program vertical logic
9. FOPISU project cycle
10. Annualized financial progress on outputs
11. Lessons learned
12. Economic viability
13. Environmental and social analysis (ESA) and environmental and social management plan (ESMP) for
    the representative project sample, including consultation reports
14. Resettlement plan for the representative project sample
15. Environmental and social management framework (ESMF)
16. Supplementary footnote information
17. Bibliography
18. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF)
                                     - iii -



                               ABBREVIATIONS


AWP        Annual work plan
DGPECI     Dirección General de Proyectos Especiales y Cooperación
           Internacional [Office for Special Projects and International Cooperation]
ENES       Encuesta Nacional de Estructura Social [National Social Structure
           Survey]
ESMF       Environmental and social management framework
ESMR       Environmental and social management report
GOM        Global multiple works operation
ICAS       Institutional Capacity Assessment System
MSyDS      Ministry of Health and Social Development
PROMEBA    Barrio Improvement Program
RENABAP    Registro Nacional de Barrios Populares [National Registry of Informal
           Neighborhoods]
SEDRONAR   Secretaría de Políticas Integrales sobre Drogas de la Nación Argentina
           [National Secretariat for Comprehensive Drug Policies]
SISU       Secretaría de Integración Socio Urbana del MSyDS [Secretariat for
           Social and Urban Integration under the MSyDS]
UEPEX      Unidad Ejecutora de Préstamos Externos [external loan execution unit]
                                                   PROJECT SUMMARY

                                               ARGENTINA
                                  SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION PROGRAM
                                               (AR-L1306)

                                             Financial Terms and Conditions
  Borrower:                                                                  Flexible Financing Facility(a)
  Argentine Republic                                        Amortization period:                       25 years
  Executing agency:                                         Disbursement period:                       5 years
  The borrower through the Ministry of Health
                                                            Grace period:                              5.5 years (b)
  and Social Development (MSyDS)
                                  Amount
           Source                                     %     Interest rate:                             LIBOR-based
                                   (US$)
                                                                                                       (c)
  IDB (Ordinary                                             Credit fee:
                               50,000,000          100
  Capital):                                                 Inspection and supervision fee:            (c)


                                                            Weighted average life (WAL):               15.25 years
  Total:                       50,000,000          100
                                                            Currency of approval:                      U.S. dollar
                                                      Project at a Glance
  Program objective/description: Promote social and urban integration of the country’s vulnerable
  neighborhoods, prioritizing those included in the National Registry of Informal Neighborhoods (RENABAP).

  Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: (i) MSyDS approval and entry
  into force of the program Operating Regulations on terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph
  3.6). See Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR) for other special contractual
  conditions precedent to the first disbursement.
  Special contractual condition for execution: Before transferring loan proceeds to a beneficiary province
  or municipio under the program, the MSyDS will sign an agreement with the relevant province or municipio
  establishing the obligations regarding the execution of the resources and the activities of the respective
  project, including the obligation to comply with the provisions of the loan contract and the program Operating
  Regulations, as well as the arrangements for operation and maintenance of the works, as applicable
  (paragraph 3.7). See Annex B of the ESMR for other special contractual conditions for execution.

  Exceptions to Bank policies: None.
                                                      Strategic Alignment
  Challenges:(d)                                 SI                            PI                             EI

  Crosscutting themes:(e)                      GD                             CC                              IC
(a)
      Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting
      changes in the amortization schedule as well as currency, interest rate, and commodity conversions. The Bank will
      take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)
      Under the flexible reimbursement options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted
      provided that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date
      as documented in the loan contract.
(c)
      The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors
      as part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies.
(d)
      SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(e)
      GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional
      Capacity and Rule of Law).
                    I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem to be addressed, and rationale
1.1       Argentina is one of the most urbanized countries in Latin America, with more than
          92% of the population residing in towns of more than 2,000 inhabitants [1].1 The
          growth of Argentina’s cities, as elsewhere in Latin America, has been
          characterized by expansive, diffuse development, with areas of limited social mix
          and limited mix of uses. In the last decade, the density of the country’s main urban
          centers decreased by 10.8%, while the urban area growth rate rose from 1.22% to
          1.8% per year.2 This accelerated expansion created greater demand for local and
          provincial governments to increase the provision of quality services and
          infrastructure, making it more difficult for provinces and municipios to ensure a
          quality habitat for all.3
1.2       The country has for decades been contending with significant housing deficits,4 as
          a result of the formal market’s insufficient response to the rise in demand. It is
          estimated that Argentina’s housing deficit affects 3.8 million households,5 at least
          2.1 million of which face problems related to housing quality (qualitative deficit).6
          These shortcomings have hit the lower-income sectors: it is estimated that 49.2%
          of the deficit is concentrated in the two lowest income quintiles.7 Consequently, the
          population that is not served by the formal market in solving its housing needs has
          responded by resorting to informal urbanization and self-help construction [2]. The
          population residing in these neighborhoods faces numerous limitations in terms of
          increasing its human development. These limitations interact with and reinforce
          one another, creating a “poverty trap” that cannot be overcome through an isolated
          approach.
1.3       In 2016, in an unprecedented effort to measure and understand the informal
          habitat and the status of shantytowns (villas) and unregulated settlements, the
          government joined forces with civil society organizations to conduct a national
          survey, which led to the creation of the National Registry of Informal
          Neighborhoods (RENABAP).8 According to the definition adopted for the survey,
          an informal neighborhood is any neighborhood consisting of at least eight families
          grouped together or living contiguously and where more than half the population
          lacks ownership title to the land and regular access to at least two of the three
          basic services (running water system, electricity with residential meter, and/or
          sewer network). This is the first official mapping and characterization survey of

1    Optional link 17 contains the bibliographic references identified by the bracketed number [#].
2    Over the 2010-1016 period, 78% of the expansion in the country’s 33 largest urban centers was for
     residential uses. For more information, see optional link 16.
3    These requirements have been addressed through a coordinated effort by various government programs
     (optional link 16).
4    According to a World Bank 2016 document, 230,000 households are created annually in Argentina, and
     the formal market only manages to produce 190,000 units per year.
5    The government works to cover the housing deficit by producing new housing through the Institutos
     Provinciales de Vivienda [Provincial Housing Institutes].
6    According to data from the National Statistics and Census Institute.
7    Households in the two lowest income quintiles show a qualitative deficit rate almost twice that of the
     average for Argentina (IDB Group Country Strategy with Argentina 2016-2019).
8    Decree 358/2017 provides formal recognition of the RENABAP (optional link 16).
                                                     -2-




          informal settlements in Argentina. The RENABAP identified 4,416 informal
          neighborhoods housing approximately 935,000 families, for a total of close to
          4 million people living in vulnerable conditions.
1.4       These neighborhoods are characterized by a lack of urban and social integration.
          In urban terms, they are not part of land-use planning efforts and are marked by
          precarious land tenure status, resulting in an adverse impact on the quality of life of
          their inhabitants. This situation has limited residents’ access to quality
          infrastructure, facilities, and public services, helping to create poverty,
          marginalization, and social fragmentation.9 The registry shows that 55% of informal
          neighborhoods predate the year 2000, while 26% sprang up in the first decade of
          the century and 19% between 2010 and 2016. In general, these urbanizations
          have come into being in peripheral areas on contaminated residual soil and are
          exposed to floods and heat waves that have intensified in recent years as a
          consequence of climate change.10
1.5       The diagnostic assessment shows that informal neighborhoods face barriers to
          urban development due to: (i) weak land-use planning, since these neighborhoods
          are not included in urban planning instruments [23,24]; (ii) insecure tenure, since
          more than 50% of their residents lack ownership title; and (iii) limited access to
          basic services;11 according to RENABAP data, it is estimated that 93.81% of
          households lack access to the formal running water system, 98.81% lack access to
          the formal sewer network, and 70.69% lack access to the formal electricity grid. At
          the same time, there is a shortage of public spaces and recreational areas,
          hindering social cohesion and limiting the possibilities for development. For
          example, only 24% of informal settlements in Argentina have squares or parks [3].
          The survey shows that informal neighborhoods tend to be located in urban fringe
          areas,12 where the population is particularly sensitive to public transportation
          inefficiency.13 In addition, these neighborhoods have limited access to
          telecommunication services, restricting digital connectivity for their residents.14
1.6       Residents of informal neighborhoods face barriers to human capital accumulation.
          According to data from the National Social Structure Survey (ENES) (2015), only
          38% of adults aged 25 to 45 have completed high school, compared to 61%
          nationwide. The main limitations are: (i) low effective coverage of basic health
          services (only 30% of the population received at least one basic health service
          over the past 12 months);15 (ii) limited access to child development and early
9    Decree 358/2017.
10   Urban expansion has been characterized by informal settlements in low-lying and flood-prone areas
     (optional link 16) [12].
11   Basic services are understood to refer to a running water system, electricity with residential meter,
     and/or sewer network.
12   See optional link 16.
13   The lack of transportation coverage and limited accessibility in marginal areas contribute to the rise in
     sociospatial inequalities. Between 2016 and 2017, there were approximately 7,200 deaths due to unsafe
     roads [45].
14   The program will establish a baseline for use in the initial diagnostic assessment and for subsequently
     measuring the outcomes (optional link 16).
15   Estimates made through studies of gender gaps in informal neighborhoods, applying the definition of
     informal neighborhood to data from the ENES (2015). The estimates were based on data from the
     SUMAR plan for the population of the areas included in the representative project sample.
                                                      -3-




          stimulation services (80% of children aged 0-4 do not attend child care centers);16
          (iii) early use of psychoactive substances (according to the National Secretariat for
          Comprehensive Drug Policies (SEDRONAR), it starts an average of two years
          earlier than in the rest of the nation’s population);17 and (iv) low educational level
          (according to the National Social Structure Survey (ENES), only 15.5% of young
          people aged 18 to 24 in informal neighborhoods attain higher education, compared
          to 29.7% nationwide).18
1.7       In addition, residents of informal neighborhoods are vulnerable in terms of
          employment due to their low skill level and productivity, which affects their
          income.19 According to the RENABAP, 44.5% of adults in these neighborhoods are
          economically inactive (including housewives, full-time students, retirees and
          pensioners), 39.4% are in a vulnerable employment situation (22% have a job with
          no retirement contributions, 9.4% are precariously self-employed, and 8% are
          unemployed), and only 16.1% have a registered job.
1.8       In terms of the capacities of local governments, there are serious territorial
          management weaknesses.20 While the municipal governments are responsible for
          land-use planning, in most cases they fail to utilize all available planning
          instruments to guide the development of their territory, giving rise to uncontrolled
          growth and high informality rates.21 In addition, the municipios have financial
          limitations and low revenue collection capacity, hindering their ability to make
          investments in informal neighborhoods. For example, in the 1993-2013 period,
          while national and provincial tax collection grew by more than 70% in relation to
          the gross domestic product, municipal taxes, duties, and contributions grew by less
          than 20%.22 This exacerbates the lack of local capacity to address demand for
          services and infrastructure as well as to mitigate the negative impacts of
          informality.23
1.9       There is evidence that the implementation of public management at the
          subnational level becomes more efficient and sustainable as social capital is
          strengthened and coordination between public agencies and civil society is
          reinforced.24 Subjective community networks are an indicator for measuring this
          situation, since they describe the interrelationship level of participants. Thus,
16   Idem.
17   Internal data provided to the MSyDS by the National Secretariat for Comprehensive Drug Policies
     (SEDRONAR). See optional link 16.
18   The average dropout age is 15; in the case of women, the rates of unwanted teenage pregnancy are an
     aggravating factor.
19   The main areas of activity are: construction, 41.5%; neighborhood commerce, 7.3%; work on public
     roads, 5.9%; waste-picking (cartoneros) and similar, 4.2%; textiles, 4.0%; and food preparation 4.0%
     (optional link 16).
20   The difficulties experienced by the municipios in charge of managing Argentine cities are related to their
     limited competencies, low capacity, and limited fiscal autonomy (optional link 16) [47].
21   Balan, (2016). Capacidades Estatales en las Provincias Argentinas. Universidad Di Tella.
22   Most municipios depend on legal authorization from the provinces to develop alternative resource-
     generation instruments such as surplus capture [47].
23   Experts identify greater problems [6,7], see optional link 16.
24   Using the methodology for social network analysis, the MSyDS estimates the network’s “amplitude”
     (number of nodes) and “density” ratio (ratio of existing relationships to possible relationships among
     nodes) [46].
                                                       -4-




          greater network density denotes higher social capital and better coordination with
          governmental actors and civil society organizations. As a diagnostic mechanism,
          the Ministry of Health and Social Development (MSyDS) has begun to explore
          mapping the informal neighborhoods’ social fabric and community organizations,
          as well as the existing relationships in the subjective community networks. For a
          sample of RENABAP neighborhoods,25 the densification of the subjective
          community networks is calculated at 43%, indicating that more than 50% of the
          possible relationships can still be strengthened.
1.10      With regard to gender issues in informal neighborhoods (2015),26 there is a gap in
          the distribution of responsibilities for the care of dependents and the time devoted
          to unpaid activities. In informal neighborhoods, 67% of women aged 24 to 65
          address the demand for direct care of children and/or persons with disabilities. In
          the case of men, this proportion drops to 41.7%. Argentine women devote 42
          hours per week to unpaid tasks, compared to 17 hours per week in the case of
          men, and 24, 32, and 36 hours in the case of women in Brazil, Colombia, and
          Uruguay, respectively.27 These responsibilities limit women’s access to income-
          generating activities.28 These data show the importance of recognizing and
          understanding the specific needs of women regarding their role as caregivers
          (whether tending to small children, senior adults, or persons with disabilities) and
          of implementing actions that can alleviate this work overload, especially in contexts
          of material and economic deprivation, so as to contribute to reducing the gender
          gaps.29
1.11      With regard to the problem of climate change, 45% of informal neighborhoods are
          located in areas subject to some type of environmental risk.30 This occupancy
          pattern puts greater pressure on factors that aggravate the effects of floods and
          the vulnerability of the population [9,10]. In addition, basic services in informal
          neighborhoods are more exposed and vulnerable to storms, heat waves, and other
          phenomena [11,12].31
1.12      Rationale. The Government of Argentina, through the MSyDS, requested a loan
          operation to promote social and urban integration of informal neighborhoods, with
          a view to providing innovative and comprehensive responses in terms of
          infrastructure, human and productive development, urban planning, and land
          tenure security. Since the program will finance works that are similar to, but
          physically independent from, one another and the viability of which is not
          contingent on the implementation of a given number of the planned works, it has
          been structured as a global multiple-works operation (GOM).

25   For the list of neighborhoods used in calculating the densification percentage, see optional link 16.
26   See optional link 16.
27   CEPALSTAT, 2013. Average time devoted to paid and unpaid work.
28   The activity rate of women aged 24 to 65 living in informal neighborhoods is 61.5%, 30% lower than that
     of men and 7% lower than that of women in the same age living in formal neighborhoods (optional
     link 16).
29   Optional link 6
30   See optional link 16.
31   Over the 1960-2010 period there was a rise in average temperature in most of the country. See optional
     link 16.
                                                       -5-




1.13      The Social and Urban Integration Program will prioritize the RENABAP
          neighborhoods, where it will adopt a comprehensive intervention model that will
          seek to provide basic infrastructure to coordinate existing State social programs
          and services, using various models to address the specific deficits of each
          neighborhood. The MSyDS classifies the universe of informal neighborhoods
          under four types (optional link 5)32 based on level of risk and degree of
          consolidation. The types are: (i) non-urbanizable informal neighborhoods;33
          (ii) informal neighborhoods that are urbanizable with restrictions;34 (iii) informal
          neighborhoods that may be subject to interventions through various operations
          without the need of special investments to mitigate environmental risks and with
          minimal needs of population resettlement;35 and (iv) new urbanizations on parcels
          located within the neighborhood’s extended perimeter.36 The program will focus on
          neighborhoods classified as the third of these types and allowing for a
          comprehensive intervention.37
1.14      The program seeks to integrate informal neighborhoods into their environment,
          promoting channels to link them to the urban, social, and productive fabric of the
          formal city. It will begin by strengthening the social fabric through an early,
          intensive, and targeted delivery of social services for the human and productive
          development of the beneficiaries and for the physical improvement of the
          neighborhoods.38 By providing infrastructure, the program will seek to improve
          access to basic services and quality of life for their population. In addition, by
          strengthening the human and productive capital, the program expects to improve
          the social mobility of these communities and, in the long term, help to break the
          intergenerational cycle of poverty and thus prevent the creation of new informal
          settlements. Figure 1 summarizes the program’s theory of change and optional
          link 8 shows the vertical logic for each specific objective.




32   Details on the types identified by the Secretariat for Social and Urban Integration (SISU).
33   Those subject to an environmental risk affecting more than 30% of their surface area and requiring the
     relocation of an equivalent percentage of their population (optional link 5 i).
34   Neighborhoods subject to risks that affect less than 30% of their surface area and for which the risk
     mitigation and management measures are proportional to the priorities in the cities in which they are
     located (optional link 5 ii).
35   This type is in turn divided into three subtypes: (i) 3a- central; (ii) 3b- urban; and (iii) 3c- urban fringe
     (optional link 5 iii and optional link 12).
36   Intended to develop solutions consisting of lots with services to house the population voluntarily

     relocated due to interventions in neighborhoods of other types (optional link 5 iv).
37   Specifically, the program will target three subtypes known as 3a, 3b, and 3c, from which different lessons
     may be drawn.
38   This aims to solve the three key problems of neighborhood improvement programs, as set out in the
     Urban Development and Housing Sector Framework Document (document GN-2732-6). For details, see
     optional link 16.
                                            -6-



                     Figure 1. Diagram of the program’s theory of change




1.15   Evidence of effectiveness of the interventions. The following evidence on
       neighborhood improvement effectiveness is worth noting due to its relevance for
       the design of the program. The quasi-experimental evaluation of the Rio de Janeiro
       Urban Upgrading Program, “Favela-Bairro” in Brazil [25] showed an improvement
       in access to services, infant mortality, literacy, and income, as well as in general
       well-being (under a hedonic price model) [26]. There are other rigorous evaluations
       that focus on specific aspects of the effectiveness of some of the components of
       these programs.
1.16   Regarding the effects of property titling, a study conducted in Argentina [27] found
       that the delivery of property title increases investment in the home, children’s
       education, and access to credit markets, while at the same time resulting in
       improved health for children in the beneficiary households [28]. In addition, quasi-
       experimental studies of titling interventions in Peru [29, 30, 31] show improvements
       in private household investment, access to credit markets, and job offerings. With
       regard to the provision of infrastructure, an experimental study in Morocco [32]
       found that a connection to the formal water system improves health, mental well-
       being, use of time, employment outcomes, and relationships among the
       beneficiaries. Another experimental study, in Mexico [33] showed that paving the
       street improves investment in the home, employment outcomes, household
       consumption, and satisfaction with the government. Similarly, a quasi-experimental
       evaluation of road improvement in Brazil [34] revealed a 6% improvement in the
       quality of life of residents, making it a highly cost-effective intervention.
1.17   There is evidence that expanding effective coverage of certain social services,
       such as primary health care and child care, generates high social returns. In the
       former case, an expansion in the coverage of health prevention and promotion
                                               -7-




         services leads to a reduction in preventable hospitalizations and morbimortality
         [35,36]. In the latter case, evaluations show that child care services have positive
         effects on both long- and short-term child development measurements [37,38]. The
         evidence regarding tutoring is limited, but a qualitative study of tutoring in the
         context of Argentina suggests that it is an instrument that favors inclusion [44].
1.18     With regard to the effectiveness of job productivity programs, rigorous job training
         programs in vulnerable neighborhoods [39, 40, 41] yield positive effects in terms of
         job outcomes for some segments of the population. An impact evaluation using
         quasi-experimental methods found that the Business Development Support
         Program (operation 989/OC-AR) yielded significant positive outcomes for the
         employment level and wages of the beneficiary MSMEs [42, 43].
1.19     Sector experience. This program will build on the capacities developed through
         the neighborhood improvement programs in the region and through the social and
         productive development programs. In the area of neighborhood improvement, the
         Bank has experience in Argentina at the national and subnational levels. In terms
         of operations entailing national execution and provincial and municipal
         subexecution, the Bank has worked on PROMEBA (CCLIP AR-X1004), a remedial
         program that has upgraded informal neighborhoods throughout the country. In
         addition, the Bank has supported the city of Buenos Aires through the Urban
         Integration and Social and Educational Inclusion Program in the Autonomous City
         of Buenos Aires (operation AR-O0005), working at the subnational level through a
         comprehensive intervention model. In the region: Favela-Bairro (operation
         BR-0250) in Brazil, Neighborhood Improvement Program in Uruguay (CCLIP
         UR-X1003), and others. In terms of production, the Bank has experience in
         Argentina fostering the development of small productive units (MSMEs) and the
         creation of new businesses by providing technical and financial assistance
         (operations 989/OC-AR, 1884/OC-AR, and 2923/OC-AR). On the social side, the
         Bank has for years been working with the MSyDS on various programs that have
         generated key lessons for the design of this program. This includes the MSyDS’s
         work experience in the Program to Support the National Early Childhood Plan and
         the Policy for Universalization of Early Childhood Education (operation
         4229/OC-AR), strengthening the national network of early childhood facilities, and
         the Hacemos Futuro [Forging Our Future] program, focused on training the most
         vulnerable segments of the population to join the workforce (operation
         4648/OC-AR). There are two related technical cooperation operations39 that will
         deliver inputs to strengthen execution, including a guide for the inclusion of climate
         change issues in infrastructure, property title regularization strategies, and
         development of new management models.
1.20     Lessons learned. The Bank has been implementing comprehensive
         neighborhood improvement programs for approximately 20 years40 and has
         conducted numerous evaluation studies [19, 20, 21] which confirm the programs’
         positive impacts on quality of life but at the same time underscore the need to
         place greater emphasis on participatory work, address the issue of citizen security,
         and improve social capital. These lessons may be consulted at optional link 11.
39   Support to GEF Project: ATN/OC-14155-AR; Support for the Preparation of the Urban and Social
     Integration Program: ATN/OC-17140-AR.
40   List of programs in optional link 16.
                                             -8-




1.21   Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional
       Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and with the Corporate Results
       Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the development
       challenges of: (i) social inclusion and equality, by reducing the housing deficit,
       expanding access to urban services for all segments of the population, increasing
       the number of people who benefit from health services, and increasing the number
       of children living in poverty who receive early childhood development services; and
       (ii) productivity and innovation, by strengthening the neighborhood’s productive
       units and their link to economic activities in the city and developing human and
       economic capital. In addition, the program is aligned with the following crosscutting
       themes and is consistent with the following Sector Framework Documents:
       (i) Gender and Diversity (document GN-2800-8), by facilitating titling in the name
       of, or shared by, women, developing safe public spaces, promoting women’s
       employability, and expanding the coverage of social services that facilitate
       women’s economic empowerment; and (ii) Climate Change (document
       GN-2835-8), including the Integrated Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation and
       Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable Energy (document GN-2609-1), by
       engaging in climate change adaptation and mitigation activities such as LED public
       lighting and resilient infrastructure, and by investing an estimated 30.2% of the
       operation’s resources in these activities in accordance with the joint methodology
       of the multilateral development banks for tracking climate change adaptation
       finance. These resources contribute to the IDB Group target of increasing financing
       for climate-related projects to 30% of total operational approvals by the end of
       2020. The operation is also consistent with the following Sector Framework
       Documents: Health and Nutrition (document GN-2735-7), by promoting and
       incentivizing the use of health services; Social Protection and Poverty (document
       GN-2784-7), by promoting the delivery of services that favor comprehensive
       development of the vulnerable population and fostering the reinforcement of child
       care and development services; Labor (document GN-2741-7), by seeking to
       expand access to formal employment and ensure equality of opportunities; and
       Urban Development and Housing (document GN-2732-6) (paragraph 1.14); and it
       is aligned with the Sector Strategy on Institutions for Growth and Social Welfare
       (document GN-2587-2) through the institution-strengthening component. Lastly,
       the program is aligned with the IDB Group Country Strategy with Argentina 2016-
       2019 (document GN-2870-1), through its contribution to the priority area of poverty
       and inequality reduction and to job creation by proposing improved habitat and
       access to basic services in informal neighborhoods and by promoting prevention
       and early detection of noncommunicable chronic diseases, closing of the coverage
       gap in early childhood care services, and increased employability of the population
       and women’s participation in the job market. The operation is included in the 2019
       Operational Program Report (document GN-2948).
1.22   Compliance with the Public Utilities Policy (document GN-2716-6). The
       program meets the policy’s conditions of financial sustainability and economic
       evaluation and is consistent with its principles (optional link 3). In addition, the
       interventions to be financed meet criteria of: (i) social sustainability, by promoting a
       formal connection to public utilities, enabling families to have access to a reliable
       and affordable service through a low-income rate; (ii) financial sustainability, by
       providing a cost-efficient service through a connection to the distribution networks;
       and (iii) environmental sustainability, by not creating significant impacts on the
                                                    -9-




          environment and promoting efficient use of water and energy. Furthermore, both
          the energy and water sectors have an adequate institutional structure, with entities
          responsible for policy and planning as well as for utilities regulation, setting rates
          that recover the cost of services and targeted subsidies;41 and private-sector
          participation, promoting transparency in the delivery of services (running water,
          sanitation, electricity, and gas).
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.23      The objective of the operation is to promote the social and urban integration of the
          country’s vulnerable neighborhoods, prioritizing those included in the RENABAP.
          The specific objectives of each component are as follows:
1.24      Component 1. Land-use planning and land-tenure security (US$2.0 million).
          The specific objective of this component is to incorporate the area within the
          informal neighborhoods into the land-use planning processes for inclusion in urban
          planning, ensuring land-tenure security and promoting property title regularization.
          The component will finance primarily: (i) technical and legal studies;
          (ii) development of a draft ordinance for amendment of urban codes; (iii) expenses
          related to the communities’ participation in the processes of preparing plans;
          (iv) survey maps; (v) demarcations; (vi) cadastral inclusion of new parcels;
          (vii) legal regularization of lots as needed to transfer property title; and (viii) family
          assistance in titling, with a gender approach. Under this component, an effort will
          be made to incorporate new technologies, such as blockchain titling, survey
          actions, and community mapping.
1.25      Component 2. Human and productive development (US$6.0 million). This
          component is divided into two strategic subcomponents:
          a. Subcomponent 2.1: Human development. The specific objective is to
             enhance the presence of governmental agencies and civil society
             organizations in the neighborhood, expanding the coverage of, and
             community participation in, social programs. The subcomponent will finance
             primarily: (i) social diagnostic assessments and studies of gaps in existing
             social services (e.g., mapping of early childhood centers, healthcare
             establishments, schools), with a gender perspective; (ii) development of
             intervention plans; (iii) health and environmental campaigns on priority issues
             and coordination with other promotion or prevention actions or initiatives;
             (iv) training of health workers; (v) campaigns, facilities, and operations on
             issues such as health, the environment, sports, recreation, and culture;
             (vi) training caregivers; (vii) upgrade of community centers; (viii) school
             dropout awareness campaigns; (ix) tutoring for young people on priority
             subjects; (x) training, education, and implementation of mechanisms for
             preventing and addressing substance abuse; and (xi) design and
             implementation of an ongoing awareness-raising, dissemination, and
             promotion strategy for gender policies. The subcomponent may also finance
             temporary structures such as stands and stalls for providing social services.42

41
     See optional link 16.
42   Structures similar to those currently enabling actions under the program “El Estado en tu barrio” [The
     State in Your Neighborhood] will be considered eligible expenditures under this item. See optional link
     16.
                                                          - 10 -




          b. Subcomponent 2.2: Productive development. The specific objective is to
             promote the development of human capital and economic activities in the
             neighborhood, with a focus on linking them to economic activities in the city.
             The subcomponent will finance primarily: (i) social and productive diagnostic
             assessments of the neighborhood and its environment; (ii) intervention plans
             by neighborhood; (iii) technical and/or financial assistance for new productive
             units and the strengthening of existing productive units; (iv) mentoring and
             training in skills related to local job market demand;43 and (v) improvement of
             infrastructure associated with the neighborhood’s productive apparatus. A
             gender approach will be adopted, seeking to boost the economic
             empowerment of women.
1.26      Component 3. Urban infrastructure (US$39.5 million). The specific objectives
          are to: (i) promote household connection to formal public services; (ii) improve the
          accessibility and connectivity of urban road and pedestrian networks; and
          (iii) strengthen social capital through community facilities and public spaces that
          ensure the neighborhoods’ integration into the structures of their respective cities.
          The component will finance primarily: (i) baseline diagnostic assessment;
          (ii) formulation of final project designs, including the technical documents to set up
          the bidding terms and conditions and technical specifications for comprehensive
          project works and their preliminary studies; (iii) construction of drinking water,
          sewer, storm drainage, gas distribution,44 electricity, public lighting, and
          telecommunications service networks; (iv) construction of household water and
          sewer connections; (v) construction of mobility systems such as road and
          pedestrian networks; (vi) construction of safe public spaces and green areas,
          fostering the use of digital technologies and mapping in their design; and (vii) smart
          urban facilities, community facilities, such as multipurpose rooms, meeting centers,
          social service delivery centers, and the required associated climate change
          mitigation and adaptation works, such as LED public lighting, green infrastructure,
          and resilient design of public spaces.45 The program will finance new housing if any
          resettlement is required.
1.27      Component 4. Strengthening of governmental and community institutions:
          (US$1.5 million). The objective of this component is to promote a more efficient
          implementation of neighborhood integration plans. To this end, the component will
          seek to improve the institutional capacities of, and the links between, governmental
          and civil society actors. This is expected to optimize the sustainability of the
          interventions in the neighborhoods. The component will finance primarily:
          (i) studies and consulting services in preparation for the formation of urban and
          social integration roundtables; (ii) expenses arising from the formation of urban and
          social integration roundtables, including the cost of workshop space and travel
          costs for participants; (iii) training of community leaders, civil society organizations,
          and governmental actors; (iv) dissemination events, communication campaigns,
          and meetings associated with the neighborhood integration roundtables and with
          the neighborhood integration plan validation and monitoring process; and
          (v) expenses for the subexecution units associated with program management.

43   See optional link 16.
44   In areas of the country in which there is coverage.
45   Identified actions that will favor inclusion are listed in optional link 16.
                                                   - 11 -




1.28      Administration and supervision (US$1.0 million). Includes administration
          expenditures; specific consulting services required to support program
          management from the central unit; external auditing expenditures; and consulting
          services for program monitoring and evaluation.
C.        Key results indicators
1.29      Approximately 5,000 families residing in about 14 informal neighborhoods will
          benefit from the program. The impact indicator to evaluate the urban and social
          integration of the informal neighborhoods will be the vulnerability index based on
          the SIEMPRO46 Social File and the urban and social integration indicator. The
          expected outcomes are to: (i) incorporate the area within the informal
          neighborhoods into the land-use planning processes and ensure land tenure
          security; (ii) improve the presence of governmental agencies and civil society
          organizations in informal neighborhoods, expanding the coverage of, and
          community participation in, social programs; (iii) promote the development of
          human capital and economic activities in the neighborhoods; (iv) promote
          household connection to formal public services; (v) improve accessibility and
          connectivity to urban road and pedestrian networks; (vi) strengthen social capital
          through the use of community facilities and public spaces; and (vii) improve the
          institutional capacities of, and the links between, governmental and civil society
          actors. Annex II, the Results Matrix, lists the indicators for measuring the extent of
          the outcomes and specific objectives and their projected values.
1.30      Economic viability. A cost-benefit analysis of a representative project sample was
          performed for an economic evaluation of the program. This evaluation was based
          on a comparison of incremental costs and benefits at economic prices in with- and
          without-project scenarios (optional link 12). The analysis of the sample, performed
          using a 12% annual discount rate, yielded a net present value of US$1,184,277
          and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 21%. In addition, the sensitivity analysis
          showed that the operation can support a 10% increase in investment and yield an
          IRR of 14.3%.

                           II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       Cost and financing. This operation will be financed by means of a US$50 million
          loan from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital. Table 1 shows the distribution of resources.




46   SIEMPRO is the Spanish-language acronym for Sistema de Información, Evaluación y Monitoreo de
     Programas Sociales [Social Program Information, Evaluation, and Monitoring System]. See optional link
     16.
                                              - 12 -




                       Table 1. Estimated program costs (in millions of U.S. dollars)
       Components                                                         IDB         Total      %
        1. Land-use planning and land tenure security                         2.0       2.0      4.0
        2. Human and productive development                                   6.0       6.0     12.0
        3. Urban infrastructure                                             39.5       39.5     79.0
        4. Strengthening of governmental and community institutions           1.5       1.5      3.0
        Administration and supervision                                        1.0       1.0      2.0
        Total                                                                  50        50      100

2.2   Technical considerations. The representative project sample that was analyzed
      consists of three projects with complete technical designs for an amount of
      US$16.4 million, which represents 32.8% of the planned financing. The projects
      included in this representative sample are located in the province of Corrientes;
      they are: (i) Punta Taitalo, which encompasses 274 lots and 236 families within a
      well-defined area of 18 hectares, categorized as 3c; (ii) Río Paraná, which
      encompasses 436 lots and 448 families within a well-defined area of
      18.8 hectares; and (iii) Dr. Montaña, which encompasses 1,050 lots and
      327 families within an area of 17 hectares, categorized as 3b.
2.3   Eligibility criteria. Eligibility will apply to the country’s provinces and municipios
      that have neighborhoods included in the RENABAP and classified as type 3
      (optional link 5) according to the MSyDS definition, which will be included in the
      program Operating Regulations. A neighborhood will be eligible if it meets the
      following conditions: (a) it is located in areas not affected by environmental risk
      and/or regulatory restrictions; (b) it is located on government-owned land where
      title conditions make it feasible to legalize land tenure; and (c) obtaining basic
      residential services (water, sanitation, and power) is technically feasible.
2.4   This operation will be structured as an investment loan using the global multiple-
      works operation (GOM) modality (paragraph 1.12). The estimated timeframe for
      the material commencement of works will be no later than six months prior to the
      end of the original disbursement period, to ensure that interventions can be started
      in the informal neighborhoods during most of the execution period. The program
      will be disbursed over a five-year period from the effective date of the loan
      contract, as shown in Table 2.

                      Table 2. Disbursement schedule (in millions of U.S. dollars)
                   Financing/Year                1         2       3       4        5         TOTAL
                        IDB                     11.8      21      8.7     5.9      2.6          50
                         %                       24       42      17       12       5          100


B.    Environmental and social risks
2.5   In accordance with the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy
      (Operational Policy OP-703), this program has been classified as a category “B”
      operation. Its adverse environmental and/or social impacts are expected to be
      moderate and subject to existing mitigation measures. Since this is a GOM, an
      environmental and social management framework (ESMF) and an environmental
      and social analysis (ESA) have been prepared along with their respective
                                           - 13 -




      environmental and social management plan (ESMP), including a resettlement plan,
      for the three projects in the sample (Dr. Montaña, Río Paraná, and Punta Taitalo
      neighborhoods in the city of Corrientes). According to the ESA, the main impact is
      the relocation of 142 families whose dwellings are in environmental risk areas or in
      areas adversely affected by the projects’ works (102 in the Dr. Montaña
      neighborhood, 47 in Río Paraná, and 9 in Punta Taitalo). The resettlement plan
      includes a socioeconomic census of all those adversely affected and identifies the
      different types of impacts and compensation options: rehabilitation works for the
      affected dwelling, which remains on the same lot (34 cases); construction of a new
      home on the same lot (20 cases); or construction of a new home on a different lot
      in the same neighborhood (104 cases). All resettlement will take place within the
      same neighborhood to avoid disrupting the social fabric of the families involved.
2.6   From 11 to 13 April, the ESA/ESMP and the ESMF were consulted with the
      residents of the three neighborhoods in the sample. The resettlement plan was
      submitted to two rounds of consultations with those affected. In the first round, held
      on 11 April in the Dr. Montaña neighborhood, on 12 April in Río Paraná, and on
      13 April in Punta Taitalo, all individuals included in the census of those affected by
      the resettlement were invited. The second round, held on 22 April in all three
      neighborhoods, was held with the committee of representatives of affected
      individuals formed during the first round. The concerns of consultation participants
      are essentially related to the compensation options and the participants’ specific
      situations. There was no stated opposition to or dissatisfaction with the projects
      from any participant.
2.7   Since the program acts on socially sensitive areas, there is a risk that the
      community may not participate in formulating the projects. To mitigate this risk,
      projects will be prioritized in jurisdictions in which there is an organized community
      and residents are available to work.
C.    Fiduciary risks
2.8   Based on the risk analysis and taking the findings of the ICAS assessment into
      account, the following fiduciary risks have been identified: (i) restrictions on fiscal
      headroom adversely affecting the budget available for investments, to be mitigated
      by allowing the participating provinces to incur debt by signing subsidiary
      agreements, which will also be a contractual condition for execution; (ii) the
      MSyDS’s lack of prior experience in the procurement of Bank-financed
      infrastructure works; and (iii) the difficulty of ensuring proper fiduciary management
      (disbursements, appropriate control environment, and timely procurement
      management) in view of the potential for operational overload, to be mitigated by
      hiring fiduciary staff or support firms for specific interventions. There are no
      expected waivers of or exceptions to Bank policies.
D.    Other risks and key issues
2.9   Aside from the environmental, social, and fiduciary risks, the following additional
      risks have been identified: (i) macroeconomic and fiscal sustainability risk: should
      the restrictions on fiscal headroom continue at the national and provincial levels,
      this could affect the scope of the program and its execution timeline. To mitigate
      this risk, projects in jurisdictions with fiscal headroom will be given priority;
      (ii) public management and governance risk: (a) the MSyDS’s possible lack of prior
                                                - 14 -




         experience in executing infrastructure programs financed by the Bank could give
         rise to delays in the program implementation timeframes. To mitigate this risk, the
         executing agency team will be strengthened through additional staff for specific
         interventions and will train and supervise the subexecuting agencies, and the hiring
         of competent and properly trained staff will be its performance indicator; and (b) in
         the event of shortcomings in communications between the various government
         levels (national, provincial, and municipal), the program implementation timeframes
         could be adversely affected. To mitigate this risk, the program’s project cycle
         (optional link 9) envisages mechanisms for keeping all three government levels
         and the community informed.
2.10     Prioritization criteria. Provinces and municipios will be prioritized in accordance
         with their institutional, financial, and legal capacity to enter into agreements with
         the MSyDS and assume the responsibility of executing the specific projects. In
         addition, priority will be given to informal neighborhoods in which: (i) the area of
         intervention is part of a local strategic project; (ii) the intervention generates
         positive impacts on the urban and social environment; (iii) there is an organized
         community and residents are available to work on the project; and (iv) there has
         been a prior social intervention by the MSyDS. All projects are required to meet all
         program criteria and technical requirements.
2.11     The intervention strategy will be outlined in the neighborhood integration plans,
         which will be the main investment coordination instrument and where the various
         national and subnational actors (ministry, province, municipio), together with the
         community, will agree on the investments to be made, which will already have
         been aligned with municipal plans in execution in each informal neighborhood.47
         The neighborhood integration plans will incorporate priority investments in social
         programs and infrastructure on a coordinated basis and will define strategies for
         the program’s actions and presence in the territory, helping to intensify State action
         in the targeted informal neighborhoods. To this end, the following tasks will be
         carried out: (i) urban planning recommendations to incorporate informal
         neighborhoods into the municipal planning instruments; (ii) definition of strategies
         to address tenure security; (iii) definition of social and productive approach
         strategies that will build on existing programs and initiatives (such as El Estado en
         tu Barrio [The State in Your Neighborhood] or Salud en tu Barrio [Health in Your
         Neighborhood]), enabling the delivery of social services from the outset of the
         program; (iv) design of infrastructure works and reduction of environmental
         vulnerability; (v) prefeasibility studies of infrastructure services; (vi) preliminary
         projects for infrastructure interventions; (vii) definition of actions for community
         reinforcement; and (viii) strategies to ensure the sustainability of the investments,
         such as by preparing the communities or signing sustainability agreements. The
         civil society organizations may carry out a part of the above-described tasks, and
         the specific mechanism governing their participation will be described in the
         program’s Operating Regulations. The neighborhood integration plans will be
         developed taking into account the importance of fostering the inclusion of issues
         such as gender equality and climate change48 in program planning and

47   Optional link 5.
48   A work team has been created in the context of the operation under the sustainable construction
     roundtable. See optional link 16.
                                                - 15 -




         implementation. The following eligibility criteria will be included in the program
         Operating Regulations: infrastructure projects will comply with the Public Utiltiies
         Policy and wil have a rate of return similar to that reflected in the representative
         project sample. In addition, in formulating the plans, priority will be given to actions
         that contribute to resolving gender problems identified in the Diagnostic
         assessment of gender inequality and overburdened services in informal
         neighborhoods (optional link 6).
2.12     Sustainability of the interventions. One of the benefits of the program is the
         greater emphasis to be placed on working with the community via social projects,
         which represent the guiding principle of the operation. This will lead to greater
         empowerment of the community and the local governments, as well as to an
         improvement and consolidation of the relationship between the two. Thus, the
         intent is to train the communities for when the program is ended to ensure greater
         ownership and care of the works carried out under the program. Similarly, the
         program calls for transferring the responsibility for maintenance of the works to the
         service providers (electricity and water companies, etc.) by means of investment
         sustainability agreements.

                        III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.       Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1      The Argentine Republic will execute the program through the Ministry of Health
         and Social Development (MSyDS), which will act by means of the Urban and
         Secretariat for Social and Urban Integration (SISU) as the entity responsible for
         program coordination and for technical supervision of the individual projects. In
         turn, the Office for Special Projects and International Cooperation (DGPECI) will
         support the SISU and be responsible for fiduciary management (including financial
         management and procurement planning) and monitoring of the program, as well as
         other tasks. The duties and responsibilities of each of the areas of the MSyDS
         involved in executing the program will be described in the program Operating
         Regulations.
3.2      The activities included in the various components may be carried out in
         decentralized fashion, with the beneficiary provinces and municipios49 acting as
         subexecuting agencies.50 The projects will be formulated and managed by the
         subexecution units, which will be responsible for the procurement processes,
         certification of progress on the works, financial monitoring, payments, and other
         tasks, all of which will be described in the program Operating Regulations. Prior to
         starting these tasks, the institutional capacity of each subexecution unit will be
         evaluated by the executing agency. In addition, the MSyDS may also execute
         projects directly.
3.3      The MSyDS will sign agreements with the program’s beneficiary provinces and
         municipios for execution of the individual projects and transfer of the loan
         proceeds. These agreements will include a requirement to comply with the

49   The Autonomous City of Buenos Aires is included for purposes of the program.
50   An ICAS assessment will be conducted to determine the institutional capacity of the subexecuting
     agencies. See optional link 16.
                                          - 16 -




      provisions of the loan contract and the program Operating Regulations, and
      arrangements for the operation and maintenance of the works, as applicable. The
      loan proceeds, depending on the national and provincial fiscal headroom, may be
      transferred to the beneficiary provinces and municipios as: (i) reimbursable
      resources (loans) or as (ii) nonreimbursable resources.
3.4   The provinces and municipios may provide financing for land-title regularization,
      undertakings by productive units, and household connections in accordance with a
      mechanism (e.g., fund managed by housing institutes) that will be subject to
      access conditions, eligibility criteria, and other operational considerations to be
      described in the program Operating Regulations. Before committing resources for
      such financing, the MSyDS will be required to update the program Operating
      Regulations with the Bank’s prior no objection, so as to include the operational
      regulations applicable to the financing mechanism as an annex thereto.
3.5   The program Operating Regulations will include the following: (i) programming and
      management of the projects financed under the program, including the project
      cycle; (ii) criteria for prioritizing provinces and municipios and for eligibility of
      informal neighborhoods; (iii) financial execution of the program; (iv) monitoring,
      evaluation, and reporting; (v) modalities of linkages with and responsibilities of
      subexecuting agencies, when applicable; (vi) access conditions, eligibility criteria,
      and other operational considerations for financing that may be granted by
      provinces and municipios using program resources; and (vii) environmental and
      social management requirements, including those set forth in the program’s ESMF.
3.6   A special contractual condition precedent to the first loan disbursement will
      be MSyDS approval and entry into force of the program Operating
      Regulations on terms previously agreed upon with the Bank. This condition is
      necessary to ensure that, through the program Operating Regulations, there is the
      operational framework necessary to start up program execution.
3.7   As a special contractual condition for execution, before transferring loan proceeds
      to a beneficiary province or municipio under the program, the MSyDS will sign an
      agreement with the relevant province or municipio establishing the obligations
      regarding the execution of the resources and the activities of the respective
      project, including the obligation to comply with the provisions of the loan contract
      and the program Operating Regulations, as well as the arrangements for operation
      and maintenance of the works, as applicable. This condition is necessary so the
      respective municipio or province legally commits to use the resources in
      accordance with the applicable contractual conditions and program Operating
      Regulations.
3.8   Financial management and procurement. Annex III contains the fiduciary
      arrangements for execution in terms of disbursement modalities, financial
      administration and procurement systems, and auditing arrangements. The loan
      proceeds will be disbursed in the form of advances of funds, the frequency of
      which will be determined on the basis of the financial programming and its
      consistency with other planning and financial instruments, such as the annual work
      plan (AWP) and the procurement plan. The Bank may advance more funds,
      preferably on a six-monthly basis, provided that at least 70% of all previously
      advanced funds has been accounted for. This percentage is due to the complexity
      of the program’s execution, including a funds flow circuit that involves
                                          - 17 -




       subexecution units in all provinces and the concomitant fragmentation of
       processes and expenses, which could considerably delay the receipt and analysis
       process. The procurement of works, goods, and consulting services will be
       undertaken in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and
       Goods Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for Selection
       and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). For a
       description of procurement mechanisms for achieving the objectives of Component
       II, see Annex III-(A) Procurement execution, paragraphs 4.2(b) and 4.8.
3.9    Retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively finance, as a charge against
       the loan proceeds, up to US$10 million (20% of the proposed loan amount) in
       eligible expenditures incurred by the borrower prior to the approval date of the
       operation for the procurement of works, goods, consulting and nonconsulting
       services, and social interventions in the informal neighborhoods targeted by the
       program, provided that requirements substantially similar to those established in
       the loan contract have been met. Such expenditures will have been incurred on or
       after 15 March 2019 (the project profile approval date), but will under no
       circumstances include expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan
       approval date.
3.10   Audits. During the execution period, the DGPECI will submit audited financial
       statements for the program on an annual basis, pursuant to the requirements
       established by the Bank in its policies. The audited financial statements will be
       submitted within 120 days after the close of the fiscal year. The closing audit
       reports for the program will be delivered within 120 days after the last
       disbursement. Audits for this program may be conducted by the Auditoría General
       de la Nación [National General Auditing Office] or an independent auditing firm
       acceptable to the Bank.
B.     Summary of monitoring and evaluation arrangements
3.11   The executing agency will have an execution monitoring system in place that will
       make it possible to define the agreed upon output and outcome indicators at the
       project level, as well as the associated targets for each period. The program
       website will provide access to the files for the informal neighborhoods targeted by
       each project.
3.12   Program planning, updating, and monitoring of the execution actions will be carried
       out through instruments such as the Results Matrix, multiyear execution plan,
       AWPs, progress monitoring reports, annual reports, onsite supervision plan, and
       periodic updates of the risk matrix.
3.13   Fiduciary considerations will be monitored using country systems satisfactory to
       the Bank. All project transactions will be performed using the UEPEX system. The
       required financial reports are: (i) financial execution plan for the six months
       following the request for an advance; (ii) annual audited financial statements; and
       (iii) other reports that may be required by the Bank. Procurement will be monitored
       through the SEPA.
3.14   The midterm evaluation will focus on the program’s operational considerations and
       processes. The final evaluation will review these considerations, as well as the
       final achievement of output, outcome, and impact targets in accordance with the
       Results Matrix and a closing economic analysis of the intervention following the
                                  - 18 -




guidelines agreed upon with the Bank. An ex post impact evaluation will be
conducted (including causal attribution) to measure the degree of achievement of
the outcome and impact indicators. Details are included in the monitoring and
evaluation plan (required link 2).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Annex I - AR-L1306]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 1




                                                                                       Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                               Summary
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
1. IDB Development Objectives                                                                                                                                 Yes


                                                                                                            -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                            -Productivity and Innovation
   Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes                                                            -Gender Equality and Diversity
                                                                                                            -Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability




                                                                                                            -Beneficiaries receiving health services (#)*
                                                                                                            -Beneficiaries of on-the-job training programs (#)*
                                                                                                            -Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*
                                                                                                            -Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)*
                                                                                                            -Households with new or upgraded access to drinking water (#)*
   Country Development Results Indicators                                                                   -Households with new or upgraded access to sanitation (#)*
                                                                                                            -Roads built or upgraded (km)*
                                                                                                            -Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial
                                                                                                            tools to improve public service delivery (#)*
                                                                                                            -Children receiving early childhood development services targeted to the poor (#)*



2. Country Development Objectives                                                                                                                             Yes

                                                                                                                                           3.5 Improve the habitat and access to basic services, particularly
   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                                   GN-2870-1
                                                                                                                                           in lower-income regions.



   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                                     GN-2948              The intervention is included in the 2019 Operational Program.



 Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
 strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                                                Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                                      8.9
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                                   2.4
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                                                 4.0
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                                              2.5
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                                                 6.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                                          3.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                                        3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                                              0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                                                0.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                                     0.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                                 10.0
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                                               2.5
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                                     7.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                                         Medium
                                    Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                                           Yes
                                         Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks                                                           Yes
                           Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation                                                            Yes
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                                   B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                                           Financial Management: Budget, Accounting and Reporting.
                                                                           Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)                 Yes
                                                                                                                                           Procurement: Information System.




                                                                                            Non-Fiduciary



The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or
public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project



Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.


Evaluability Assessment Note: The general objective of the operation is to promote the social and urban integration of the “barrios populares” (BP) of Argentina. In order to achieve this objective,
the proposal defines the following specific objectives: (i) to incorporate the polygons of the BPs to the processes of territorial planning; (ii) improve the presence of government and civil society
organizations in the neighborhoods; (iii) promote the development of human capital and impulse economic activities in the neighborhood, (iv) promote the connection of families to formal public
services; (v) improve the accessibility and connectivity of urban roads and pedestrian networks; (vi) strengthen social capital through improving community facilities and public spaces.
The proposal diagnoses that the BPs are not integrated socio-urbanistically, which is a gap that can be improved with technical and legal studies to address problems of territorial ordering and
allocation of property rights. It is identified that the inhabitants of the BP both, have low levels of human capital and find it difficult to insert themselves productively in the labor market, with which the
implementation of programs of productive insertion, human capital investments and training are conceived as strategies to overcome these barriers. It is proposed to address problems of limited
access of the inhabitants of the BP to social services with demand studies that will allow dimensioning, designing and implementing investment projects in health, early childhood, and pregnancy
prevention (among others). It is proposed to invest in infrastructure to fill the gap in accessibility and connectivity to road and pedestrian networks, as well as access to basic public services, public
spaces and recreation facilities. The program will invest in studies, workshops and training to fill the existing gaps in the institutional capacity of subnational governments for the management of the
territory. The quantification of these needs is disaggregated, and their magnitudes expressed quantitatively.
The vertical logic is clear since the products can be straightforwardly connected with the achievement of results and, whenever those results are achieved it is to be expected that the objective of
promoting social and urban integration will be achieved. Although the ex ante cost-benefit analysis is complete, this analysis is based on estimates of a model built with insufficient data to credibly
estimate the economic benefits of the PISU program.
The monitoring will be carried out with data from a series of monitoring and evaluation reports that will be combined with statistical data (census of the neighborhoods and BP investment program
data). The program includes a non-experimental evaluation (propensity score matching methods) to estimate the effects of the program on the changes in housing prices. The evaluation plan
contemplates exploring innovative evaluation options to estimate the effects of the PISU program on employment opportunities of the beneficiaries using the “Audits Contract” method..
                                                                                                                                                                      Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 1 of 10



                                                                                    RESULTS MATRIX


    Program objective:                       The objective of the program is to promote social and urban integration of the country’s vulnerable neighborhoods, prioritizing
                                             those included in the National Registry of Informal Neighborhoods (RENABAP).



                                                                                    EXPECTED IMPACT

                                  Unit of                           Baseline      Year   Year   Year   Year   Year                         Means of
         Indicators                                Baseline                                                            Final target                          Comments1
                                 measure                              year         1      2      3      4      5                          verification

    IMPACT 1

    Neighborhood                Standard         Neighborhood 2019-2020                                               20% decrease        SIEMPRO          Synthetic
    vulnerability index         deviations          census                                                                              Social File data   vulnerability index
                                                                                                                                                           based on the
                                                                                                                                                           neighborhood
                                                                                                                                                           census
                                                                                                                                                           (expanded
                                                                                                                                                           SISFAM)




1      (#) For more details, see the monitoring and evaluation plan (required link 2).
Annex II
Page 2 of 10


                                                                     EXPECTED OUTCOMES

                                         Unit of
               Indicators                               Baseline     Baseline year   Final target           Means of verification                    Comments
                                        measure

 OUTCOME 1. Land-use planning and land tenure security: incorporate the area within the informal neighborhoods into the land-use planning processes
 for inclusion in urban planning, ensuring land-tenure security and promoting property title regularization.

 Informal neighborhoods added to
                                      Percentage of                                                 Website of Ministry of Interior, Urban
 the municipal land-use planning                            -          2019 - 2020      100%                                                   (#)
                                      neighborhoods                                                 Planning Secretariat, city codes by city
 instruments

 Families signing the
                                                                                                    Reports delivered by the
 administrative document that         Percentage of
                                                            -          2019 - 2020      100%        organizations/institutions assisting the   (#)
 launches the formal                     families
                                                                                                    families
 regularization process

 Families signing the
 administrative document that
 launches the formal                  Percentage of
                                                            -          2019 – 2020      30%         Same as above                              (#)
 regularization process, with title      families
 in a woman’s name or shared by
 men and women

 OUTCOME 2. Human development: enhance the presence of governmental agencies and civil society organizations in the neighborhood, expanding the
 coverage of, and community participation in, social programs.

                                                                                                    Administrative data from the SUMAR
 People with effective basic          Percentage of     Neighbor-                                   national health program and the
                                                                       2019-2020        50%                                                    (#)
 coverage                             the population   hood census                                  neighborhood census (health module,
                                                                                                    question S2)

 Unmet demand for early
 childhood (ages 1½ months to
                                                                                                    Results of neighborhood census
 4 years) care and rearing in         Percentage of     Neighbor-
                                                                       2019-2020        50%         (SISFAM child care and education           (#)
 public, private, or community        the population   hood census
                                                                                                    module)
 centers and for community and
 family assistance
                                                                                                                                                     Annex II
                                                                                                                                                  Page 3 of 10


                                       Unit of
           Indicators                                  Baseline    Baseline year   Final target           Means of verification                 Comments
                                      measure

                                                                                                  Mapping of actors and data provided
                                                       Mapping
Spaces related to the issue of        Number of                                                   by the urban and social integration
                                                       and field     2019-2020         42                                                 (#)
substance abuse                        spaces                                                     roundtable (human development and
                                                        work
                                                                                                  approach roundtable)

Consultations on substance
abuse attended by agents             Number of                                                    Data gathered by the urban and social
                                                          0          2019-2020        1,680
trained under the local protocol    consultations                                                 integration roundtable
designed by this intervention

Tutoring completed by school-
                                                                                                  Neighborhood census and
age youth at risk of dropping out   Percentage of
                                                          0          2019-2020        15%         administrative data from local
or who have dropped out of the      young people
                                                                                                  educational institutions
obligatory basic education cycle

                                                       Mapping
Spaces related to the issue of        Number of                                                   Data provided by the urban and social
                                                       and field     2019-2020         42
gender violence                        spaces                                                     integration roundtable
                                                        work

OUTCOME 3. Productive development: promote the development of human capital and economic activities in the neighborhood, with a focus on linking
them to economic activities in the city.

Productive units created by the                                                                   Subexecution units and DISP
program that remain in operation     Percentage of                                                monitoring team based on a monitoring
                                                          0          2019-2020        50%                                                 (#)
12 months after the conclusion of   productive units                                              plan for productive units at the
the productive project                                                                            neighborhood level

                                     Percentage of
Productive units formalized                               0          2019-2020        50%         Same as above
                                    productive units

Individuals joining the job
placement actions/processes         Percentage of
                                                          0          2019-2020        40%         Same as above
(performed by private or public        people
providers)

Productive units that mitigate       Percentage of
                                                          0          2019-2020        30%         Same as above
labor and environmental risks       productive units
Annex II
Page 4 of 10


                                            Unit of
               Indicators                                   Baseline     Baseline year   Final target          Means of verification                 Comments
                                           measure

    Social and productive projects
    implemented that promote
                                         Percentage of
    economic activities with climate                           0           2019-2020        30%         Same as above
                                           projects
    change mitigation and/or
    adaptation impact

    Women-led productive units                                                                          Same as above. Subexecution units
                                         Percentage of
    strengthened                                               0           2019-2020        30%         and DISP monitoring team based on a    (#)
                                        productive units
                                                                                                        monitoring plan for productive units

    OUTCOME 4. Urban infrastructure: (i) promote household connection to formal public services.

    Families formally disposing of
                                         Percentage of      Neighbor-
    wastewater six months after the                                        2019-2020        90%         (*)2                                   (#)
                                            families       hood census
    intervention

    Families making use of the
                                         Percentage of      Neighbor-                                   Neighborhood census. Information
    formal water service six months                                        2019-2020        90%                                                (#)
                                            families       hood census                                  from users’ meters.
    after the intervention

    Families with formal household       Percentage of      Neighbor-                      To be
                                                                           2019-2020                    (*), SISFAM
    natural gas connection                  families       hood census                   determined

    Families with formal household       Percentage of      Neighbor-
                                                                           2019-2020        40%         (*), SISFAM
    electric power connection               families       hood census

    OUTCOME 5. Urban infrastructure: (ii) improve the accessibility and connectivity of urban road and pedestrian networks.
    Index of accessibility and                              Neighbor-                                   (*), expanded SISFAM
    connectivity to road and                  SD                           2019-2020        +15%
                                                           hood census
    pedestrian networks
                                                                                                        Modified neighborhood census
    Families making use of internet      Percentage of      Neighbor-
                                                                           2019-2020        +30%        (SISFAM dwellings module, question
    service in the neighborhood             families       hood census
                                                                                                        B15).




2        (*) Neighborhood census. Housing module.
                                                                                                                                               Annex II
                                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 10


                                       Unit of
           Indicators                                Baseline     Baseline year   Final target           Means of verification          Comments
                                      measure

OUTCOME 6. Urban infrastructure: (iii) strengthen social capital through community facilities and public spaces that ensure the neighborhoods’
integration into the structures of their respective cities.

Families that report having used
                                    Percentage of    Neighbor-                                   Neighborhood census. Expanded
the neighborhood’s community                                        2019-2020        +40%
                                       families     hood census                                  SISFAM
and/or recreational facilities

OUTCOME 7. Strengthening of governmental and community institutions: promote a more efficient implementation of neighborhood integration plans.
To this end, the component will seek to improve the institutional capacities of, and the links between, governmental and civil society actors.

                                                      To be
Increase in density of the             Density      determined                                   Data yielded by UCINET software
                                                                    2019-2020        25%
community networks                   percentage        in the                                    based on field work
                                                     mapping

Municipios submitting
comprehensive urbanization
projects for informal
neighborhoods (not served by
the Social and Urban Integration
Program) to the Sistema de
                                    Percentage of
Identificación y Ponderación de                         0           2019-2020        20%         SIPPE
                                     municipios
Proyectos Estratégicos [Strategic
Project Identification and
Weighting System] (SIPPE) and
achieving level 3 out of all
municipios that participated in
the program
Annex II
Page 6 of 10


                                                                       OUTPUTS

                                  Unit of                Baseline    Year   Year   Year            Year    Final       Means of
           Outputs                            Baseline                                    Year 4                                         Comments
                                 measure                   year       1      2      3               5     target      verification

 Component 1. Land-use planning and land tenure security

 Diagnostic assessments of      Number of        0       2019-2020    5      9      -       -       -     14       Subexecution unit
 existing city land-use codes    reports                                                                           diagnostic reports
 performed

 Projects to modify existing    Number of        0       2019-2020    3      7      4       -       -     14       Subexecution unit
 city land-use codes carried     projects                                                                          projects
 out

 Technical and legal studies    Number of        0       2019-2020    5      9      -       -       -     14       Subexecution unit
 on tenure security              reports                                                                           reports
 performed

 Regularization projects        Number of        0       2019-2020    3      7      4       -       -     14       Subexecution unit
 carried out                     projects                                                                          project

 Operational guide to ensure    Number of        0       2019-2020    3      7      4       -       -     14       Operational guide
 tenure security submitted to    guides                                                                            prepared by the
 and validated by the                                                                                              subexecution unit
 community

 Families assisted in the       Number of        0       2019-2020    -     180    420     420     180    1,200    Subexecution unit    (#)
 regularization process          families                                                                          reports

 Component 2. Human and productive development

 Subcomponent 2.1 – Human development

 Diagnostic assessments          Number of       0       2019-2020    5      9      -       -       -       14     Subexecution unit
 performed per neighborhood      diagnostic                                                                        reports
 on existing social problems,   assessments
 extent of social services
 coverage, and unmet
 demand
                                                                                                                                                 Annex II
                                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 10


                                 Unit of                Baseline    Year   Year   Year            Year    Final       Means of
          Outputs                            Baseline                                    Year 4                                          Comments
                                measure                   year       1      2      3               5     target      verification

Projects for coordination       Number of       0       2019-2020    4      7      3       -       -      14      Subexecution unit
between the community and        projects                                                                         projects
social programs submitted
to and validated by the
community

Human development               Number of       0       2019-2020    -      -      -       -      14      14      Final report of the
projects completed               projects                                                                         urban and social
                                                                                                                  integration
                                                                                                                  roundtable

➔   Milestone: Number of        Number of       0       2019-2020   30     35     25      12      10      112     Six-monthly
    training and                 trainings                                                                        management report
    apprenticeship                                                                                                of the urban and
    opportunities                                                                                                 social integration
                                                                                                                  roundtable

Subcomponent 2.2 Productive development

Diagnostic assessments of       Number of       0       2019-2020    5      9      -       -       -      14      Subexecution units
the productive fabric by        diagnostic                                                                        and SISU
neighborhood and its           assessments
environment carried out
(with a gender perspective)

Comprehensive social and        Number of       0       2019-2020    3      7      4       -       -      14      Same as above
productive development            plans
plans designed
Social and productive           Number of       0       2019-2020    -      5     12      18       -      35      Same as above
projects implemented             projects
➔   Milestone: trained          Number of       0       2019-2020   140    490    560     210      -     1,400    Same as above         (#)
    individuals who complete     people
    the courses offered by
    the program
Annex II
Page 8 of 10


                                   Unit of                Baseline    Year   Year    Year             Year    Final       Means of
           Outputs                             Baseline                                      Year 4                                        Comments
                                  measure                   year       1      2       3                5     target      verification

 ➔   Milestone: trained           Number of       0       2019-2020   50     165     185      67       -      467     Same as above       (#)
     individuals who complete       men
     the courses offered by
                                  Number of       0       2019-2020   90     325     375      143      -      933
     the program,
                                   women
     disaggregated by gender
 ➔   Milestone: productive        Number of       0       2019-2020   10      20      35      33       -      98      Same as above
     units strengthened by the    productive
     program                         units
 ➔   Milestone: productive        Number of       0       2019-2020    -      3       6        5       -      14      Same as above
     units strengthened by the      men
     program, disaggregated
                                  Number of       0       2019-2020    -      2       12      14       -      28
     by gender
                                   women
 ➔   Milestone: productive        Number of       0       2019-2020    -       -      2        4       -       6      Same as above       (#)
     units created by the         productive
     program with climate            units
     change mitigation and/or
     adaptation impact
 Component 3. Urban infrastructure

 Urban diagnostic                 Number of       0       2019-2020    5      9        -       -       -      14      Subexecution unit
 assessments performed on         diagnostic                                                                          report
 the level of infrastructure     assessments
 coverage, facilities, and
 accessibility
 Final infrastructure project     Number of       0       2019-2020    -      3       4        5       2      14      Subexecution unit
 designs completed                 projects                                                                           report
 ➔   Milestone: final             Number of       0       2019-2020    4      6       4        -       -      14      Subexecution unit
     infrastructure project        projects                                                                           project
     designs presented and
     validated by the
     community

 ➔   Milestone: lots with         Number of       0       2019-2020   500    1,000   1,500   1,700    300    5,000    Work progress
     electric power                 lots                                                                              report
     connection installed
                                                                                                                                                  Annex II
                                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 10


                                   Unit of                 Baseline    Year   Year    Year             Year    Final       Means of
           Outputs                              Baseline                                      Year 4                                      Comments
                                  measure                    year       1      2       3                5     target      verification

➔   Milestone: lots with gas      Number of        0       2019-2020   500    1,000   1,500   1,700    300    5,000    Work progress
    connection installed            lots                                                                               report

➔   Milestone: dwellings with     Number of        0       2019-2020   500    1,000   1,500   1,700    300    5,000    Work progress
    formal household water        dwellings                                                                            report
    connections

➔   Milestone: dwellings with     Number of        0       2019-2020   500    1,000   1,500   1,700    300    5,000    Work progress
    household sewer               dwellings                                                                            report
    connections installed

➔   Milestone: linear meters      Number of        0       2019-2020   0.4     0.8     1.2     1.3     0.3      4      Work progress     (#)
    of street with storm          kilometers                                                                           report
    drainage built

➔   Milestone: linear meters      Number of        0       2019-2020   0.8     1.6     2.4     3.0     0.2      8      Work progress
    of street with LED public     kilometers                                                                           report
    lighting

➔   Milestone: neighborhoods      Number of        0       2019-2020    0      3       4        6       1      14      Work progress
    that have carried out a        projects                                                                            report
    telecommunication
    services project

➔   Milestone: road and           Number of        0       2019-2020   0.8     1.6     2.4      2      1.2      8      Work progress
    pedestrian networks built     kilometers                                                                           report

➔   Milestone: new or             Number of        0       2019-2020    0      0       2        3       1       6      Work progress     (#)
    upgraded public spaces         spaces                                                                              report
    that incorporate green
    infrastructure guidelines

➔   Milestone: urban facilities   Number of                2019-2020    8      13      15      12       2      50      Work progress
    installed                      facilities                                                                          report

➔   Milestone: community          Number of        0       2019-2020    -      1       2        2       -       5      Work progress
    facilities installed and/or    facilities                                                                          report
    upgraded
Annex II
Page 10 of 10


                                     Unit of                  Baseline    Year   Year   Year            Year    Final       Means of
           Outputs                                 Baseline                                    Year 4                                         Comments
                                    measure                     year       1      2      3               5     target      verification

 ➔   Milestone: supplementary      Number of          0       2019-2020    -      1      2       2       -       5      Work progress
     works completed                 works                                                                              report

 Component 4. Strengthening of governmental and community institutions

 Subexecution unit officials       Number of          0       2019-2020   15     25     20       5       5      70      SISU report
 trained in participatory           people
 management and
 organizational improvement
 of urban and social
 integration projects with a
 gender approach
 Civil society organizations     Number of civil      0       2019-2020    5     11      8       2       2      28      Same as above
 trained in participatory           society
 management and                  organizations
 organizational improvement
 of urban and social
 integration projects with a
 gender approach
 Governmental and                  Number of          0       2019-2020    2      3      2       -       -       7      Same as above        (#)
 community units receiving           units
 technical assistance
 Mapping of subjective             Number of          0       2019-2020    4      8      2       -       -      14      Mapping of actors/
 community network actors          mappings                                                                             SISU
 prepared using the network
 analysis methodology
 Events held in the context of     Number of          0       2019-2020    2      2      2       2       -       8      SISU report
 strengthening the urban and        events
 social integration roundtable
                                                                                        Annex III
                                                                                      Page 1 of 8




                             FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS



    Country:                      Argentina
    Project number:               AR-L1306
    Name:                         Urban and Social Integration Program
    Executing agency:             Ministry of Health and Social Development (MSyDS)
    Fiduciary team:               Roberto Laguado and Analía La Rosa (FMP/CAR)


                                        I.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

          The executing agency of the program will be the Ministry of Health and Social
          Development (MSyDS) through the Secretariat for Social and Urban Integration
          (SISU). The execution mechanism calls for decentralization through provincial and
          municipal interventions, with the provinces and municipios acting as subexecuting
          agencies in compliance with the Bank’s procurement policies.
          The Bank used the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) to evaluate
          the executing agency’s institutional capacity to plan, execute, and implement the
          program. Based on its findings, the fiduciary risk is considered medium.

                       II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT

          The MSyDS has experience with Bank projects, having executed the following
          operations: the Program to Support the National Early Childhood Plan and the
          Policy for Universalization of Early Childhood Education (operation 4229/OC-AR)
          and the Program to Support the Equity and Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net
          in Argentina (operation 4648/OC-AR). The ministry’s structure and responsibilities
          are set out in Decree 174/2018.1
          The SISU will have technical responsibility over the program, and its primary task
          will be to coordinate and supervise the urban and social integration projects.
          Together with the provinces and municipios, the SISU will identify, prioritize, and
          agree on the projects to be financed by developing neighborhood improvement
          plans as an investment planning and monitoring instrument (loan proposal,
          paragraph 2.11). The ministry’s Office for Special Projects and International
          Cooperation (DGPECI) will support the substantive area and be in charge of
          administrative coordination and financial supervision of the projects.
          The ICAS institutional capacity assessment performed on the MSyDS in its
          capacity as executing agency found a medium risk. This assessment and its
          findings take into account the challenges associated with an execution
          arrangement based on coordination of activities among various levels of execution

1    See note 50 in optional link 16.
Annex III
Page 2 of 8


        authority (national-provincial-municipal). In addition, the ICAS assessment
        includes a description of the points that need to be strengthened in order for the
        MSyDS to qualify as an optimal control environment.
        The program’s Operating Regulations will lay out the standard responsibilities of
        the subexecuting agencies. These responsibilities will also be included in an
        agreement or equivalent establishing compliance with the Bank’s policies and
        standards for fiduciary management of the resources.
        For execution of the operation, and based on the ICAS assessment, the following
        fiduciary risks have been identified: (i) restricted fiscal headroom affecting the
        budget available for investments, to be mitigated through the subsidiary
        agreements with the provinces, which will be a contractual condition for execution;
        (ii) lack of MSyDS experience in works procurement for Bank-financed
        infrastructure programs; and (iii) difficulties in ensuring proper fiduciary
        management (disbursements, appropriate control environment, and timely
        procurement management) in view of the potential for operational overload, to be
        mitigated by hiring additional fiduciary staff or support firms for specific
        interventions. There are no expected waivers of or exceptions to Bank policies.
        The recommended risk mitigation measures are as follows: (i) formalize the
        interagency support mechanisms by signing agreements to ensure fulfillment of
        the program objectives; (ii) review, improve, and ensure that the program
        Operating Regulations reflect administrative, fiduciary, and control environment
        procedures (including a financial and accounting chapter setting out the
        programming and budget, treasury, accounting and reporting systems,
        disbursement and cash flow, internal control and internal auditing, and external
        control processes) as well as specific responsibilities based on the execution
        arrangements (centralized or decentralized); (iii) update and/or develop relevant
        manuals, ministerial resolutions, or annexes to the program Operating Regulations
        for their proper functioning; (iv) encourage the filling of vacant positions so as to
        reinforce the control environment and address the rise in work volume and
        procurement processes; and (v) implement a fiduciary training plan for DGPECI
        staff and particularly for those in charge of decentralized execution.

              III. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS

3.1     The Bank may grant a new advance of funds when the executing agency has
        accounted for at least 70% of the cumulative advances not previously justified (see
        loan proposal, paragraph 3.8).
3.2     For purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions of the loan contract, the
        applicable exchange rate will be the rate provided in subparagraph (b)(i) of the
        aforementioned article. To determine the equivalence for reimbursement of
        expenditures chargeable against the loan, the agreed-upon exchange rate will be
        the prevailing rate on the first business day of the month in which the
        reimbursement request is submitted.
3.3     For purposes of Article 7.03 of the General Conditions, the external financial audit
        report and other reports identified, as of the date of execution of the loan contract,
        as necessary for supervising financial management of the program are the
        program’s audited financial statements. These financial statements are to be
                                                                                          Annex III
                                                                                        Page 3 of 8


         submitted to the Bank within 120 days following the close of each fiscal year of the
         executing agency during the original disbursement period and any extensions
         thereof, duly audited by external auditors acceptable to the Bank. The last of these
         audited financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days following
         the end of the original disbursement period or any extensions thereof. For
         purposes of Article 7.03(a) of the General Conditions, the fiscal year of the program
         is the period from 1 January to 31 December of each year.
3.4      In the context of program execution, the possibility has been envisaged of
         introducing a transfer mechanism to provide compensation (subsidies) for land title
         regularization, household connections, and strengthening of productive units.
         Similarly, plans call for exploring arrangements for the use of loans for land title
         regularization and household connections. These arrangements will be subject to
         the Bank’s procurement and financial management policies, on a case-by-case
         basis, once their scope has been determined and agreements have been signed
         with the relevant entities to the Bank’s satisfaction. In the case of loans, it is also
         suggested that the respective credit regulations be a special condition for the
         release of funds associated with the loans. The details for extending, recognizing,
         and auditing these subsidies and loans, as well as their recognition as eligible
         expenditures will need to be approved by the Bank and set out in the program
         Operating Regulations.

          IV. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

         The fiduciary agreements and requirements for procurement establish the
         provisions that will govern all procurement provided for under this program.
A.       Procurement execution
         The Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB
         (document GN-2349-9), of April 2011, and the Policies for the Selection and
         Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9), of April
         2011, will apply.
         a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for
            works, goods, and nonconsulting services2 generated under the program and
            subject to international competitive bidding (ICB) will use the Bank’s standard
            bidding documents (SBD). Contracts subject to national competitive bidding
            (NCB) will use national bidding documents agreed upon with the Bank.
         b. Procurement involving community participation. Procedures for community
            participation in procurement processes may be used to execute human
            development activities under Component 2, based on a basic survey of needs,
            followed by a selection of small-scale builders or contractors at the neighborhood
            level with a geographic presence in the neighborhood. These builders or
            contractors will be responsible for activities including the following: calculating
            and preparing an itemized budget for interventions on each dwelling, providing
            materials, managing the labor with community participation, and certifying the
            functional status of the infrastructure installed and built so as to promote

2    Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1:
     Nonconsulting services will be treated similarly to goods.
 Annex III
 Page 4 of 8


               knowledge transfer. The selection of small-scale builders and contractors will be
               based on unit-price/rate quotes (on a lowest-cost basis) and availability. The
               execution details will be set out in the program Operating Regulations.
          c. Selection and contracting of consultants. Consulting service contracts
             generated under the program will be executed using the standard request for
             proposals (RFP) issued by the Bank.
          d. Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants will be selected
             through competitive processes on the basis of their qualifications to do the
             work, comparing the qualifications of at least three candidates.
          The program sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical
          specifications for the procurement of goods or works and the terms of reference
          for the contracting of consulting services.
          Of the country subsystems approved by the Bank, the information system will be
          used for this program.

       Table 4.1 Threshold amounts for international competitive bidding and international shortlist
                 Works                                     Goods                      Consulting services
International     National      Shopping International      National     Shopping International     Shortlist
 competitive    competitive                  competitive competitive                advertising      100%
   bidding        bidding                      bidding       bidding                 consulting     national
                                                                                      services
                <25,000,000                               <1,500,000
>25,000,000                    <350,000* >1,500,000                      <100,000    >200,000      <1,000,000
                 >350,000                                   >100,000
  (*) Simple works and off-the-shelf goods for an amount below the ICB threshold may be procured through
  the shopping method.

 B.       Main procurement items

                                  Table 4.2 Procurement method and amounts
                                                            Procurement    Estimated        Estimated
                            Activity
                                                              method         date**        amount (US$)
 Infrastructure works and urban services                    NCB (several)                    38,000,000
 Early intervention works                                        S                              700,000
 Equipment to strengthen three subexecution units                S                              300,000
 Consulting services for works inspection                       CQS                             200,000
 Hiring of management service for installation of household
                                                                CQS                              150,000
 connections and home improvement
 Hiring of company for urban planning                           CQS                              200,000
 Company to support the land title regularization process       CQS                              200,000
 Social assistance                                               S                               250,000
 Hiring of technical teams to strengthen subexecution units     3CV                              125,000
 Consultants to form the local social team                      3CV                              180,000
 Consultant for the design, formulation, and implementation
                                                                3CV                              120,000
 of business plans
 Hiring of an expert consultant for tenure security studies     3CV                              180,000
 Hiring of an expert consultant for physical and legal
                                                                3CV                              165,000
 regularization of land parcels
 (**) Estimated date to be determined.
                                                                               Annex III
                                                                             Page 5 of 8


C.   Procurement supervision
     Procurement will be supervised as indicated in the procurement plan but generally
     ex ante, with the exception of shopping, consulting firms selected on the basis of
     qualifications, and individual consultants, which will be subject to ex post
     supervision. The ex post review visits will be conducted every 12 months. At least
     10% of the reviewed contracts will be subject to physical inspection during the
     program.
     The threshold amounts established for ex post review apply based on the fiduciary
     capacity for execution of the MSyDS as examined during the program design, and
     may be modified by the Bank should that capacity change.

                       Table 4.3 Thresholds for ex post review (US$)
                                                                       Individual
            Works                Goods           Consulting services
                                                                       consulting
          <7,500,000            <900,000               <600,000         <50,000


D.   Special provisions
     Measures to prevent prohibited practices. These are addressed in the
     provisions of the policies contained in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9
     regarding prohibited practices (lists of companies and individuals declared
     ineligible by multilateral agencies).
     Procurement arrangements based on community participation (document
     GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.17) may be implemented in the case of activities under
     Component 2. Similarly, in the case of these activities, services or technical and
     administrative support may be contracted from nongovernmental organizations or
     public or private agencies specialized in housing project management.
E.   Records and files
     The bidding process documents will be filed in the offices of the MSyDS as the
     entity with overall responsibility for program procurement. For ex post review
     purposes, records and files of all documents generated in the procurement
     processes will be kept duly ordered, classified, and updated. In the event that
     execution is modified in favor of a decentralized approach, process-related
     documents will continue to be kept at least in the same MSyDS offices, in addition
     to other original documents kept at the provincial level.
     Retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively finance, as a charge against
     the loan proceeds, up to US$10 million (20% of the proposed loan amount) in
     eligible expenditures incurred by the borrower prior to the approval date of the
     operation for the procurement of works, goods, consulting and nonconsulting
     services, and social interventions in the informal neighborhoods targeted by the
     program, provided that requirements substantially similar to those established in
     the loan contract have been met. Such expenditures will have been incurred on or
     after 15 March 2019 (the project profile approval date), but will under no
     circumstances include expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan
     approval date the IDB.
Annex III
Page 6 of 8


                               V. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

        The Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document
        OP-273-6) and the Financial Management Operational Guidelines for
        IDB-financed Projects (document OP-274-2) will apply.
A.      Programming and budget
        The executing agency will be responsible for the process of formulating and
        programming its annual budget and be in charge of taking all steps to consolidate
        the annual budget for approval. If there is a need to expand or reallocate items,
        the executing agency will request the changes and takes steps to secure their
        approval. Budgetary credits are executed through quarterly and monthly
        commitment quotas on an accrual basis, allocated by the National Budget Office
        (Ministry of Finance).
        The budget allocation should be made in advance to ensure that the operation is
        executed within the established time frame.
B.      Treasury
        Payments under centralized execution will be made through the DGPECI treasury
        at the MSDS. In the case of decentralized execution, it will depend on the
        arrangements set out in the specific agreements, which may provide for payments
        to be made through the DGPECI treasury or directly by the provincial execution unit.
        Disbursements will be made to the program’s executing agency pursuant to a
        detailed financial plan, the model for which has been agreed upon by the
        authorities of the Ministry of Treasury and Public Finance and the Office of the
        Chief of Cabinet.
C.      Accounting, information systems, and reporting
        The executing agency will use the external loan execution unit (UEPEX) system
        as its financial management system, which identifies the program funds as well as
        the sources of financing. The UEPEX system classifies program investments by
        expenditure matrix category in accordance with the chart of accounts approved by
        the Bank. Accounting records will be cash-based and will observe the International
        Financial Reporting Standards when applicable, in accordance with national
        criteria. The following financial reports will be required: (i) financial management
        plan for up to 180 days after the request for an advance; (ii) annual audited
        financial statements; and (iii) other reports as required by the fiduciary specialists.
        The DGPECI is responsible for the following activities in relation to the loan:
        (i) making accounting entries for execution of the program in the UEPEX system;
        (ii) preparing the disbursement requests and monitoring their approval and the
        respective credits in the bank accounts; (iii) checking the balances of the special
        accounts in dollars on a monthly basis and reconciling the program’s bank
        accounts; (iv) analyzing the accounting balances on a monthly basis and issuing
        the balances of reconciled amounts and balances in pesos and dollars;
        (v) preparing the financial reports required by the agencies; and (vi) preparing the
        financial statements for the loan and submitting them to the external auditors for
        preparation of the corresponding reports.
                                                                                    Annex III
                                                                                  Page 7 of 8


D.   Disbursements and cash flow
     Disbursements of loan proceeds and financial management of the loan will be
     carried out in accordance with the Bank’s policies and the provisions of
     paragraph 3.8 of the loan proposal. The funds requested from the Bank in the form
     of advances will be deposited in an account set up in dollars and will be converted
     to local currency in accordance with operating needs in an account set up in pesos
     for the exclusive use of the program. This account will be used for paying program
     expenditures and for investments, as planned. The executing agency should
     ensure strict and effective control of the use of advanced funds by means of
     mechanisms that allow it to confirm and reconcile the balances in its records with
     those for the same charges in the Bank’s records (LMS1 report).
     The Bank may advance more funds, preferably on a six-monthly basis, provided
     that at least 70% of all previously advanced funds has been accounted for. This
     percentage is due to the complexity of program execution, including a funds flow
     circuit that involves subexecution units in various jurisdictions and the concomitant
     fragmentation of processes and expenses, which will considerably delay the
     receipt and analysis process.
E.   Internal control and internal auditing
     The national body responsible for internal control is the Office of the Comptroller
     General of the Nation (SIGEN). The internal audit of each executing agency is
     performed by the Internal Audit Unit. That unit reports directly to the minister, and
     is responsible for performing audits and making recommendations in accordance
     with the authority conferred under Law 24,156 (Law on Financial Management and
     Control Systems, 30 September 1992). The MSyDS’s Internal Audit Unit will
     perform the program’s internal audits.
F.   External control: external financial auditing and program reports
     In 2011 the Bank concluded a diagnostic assessment of governmental auditing
     practices by the Auditoría General de la Nación [National General Auditing Office]
     (AGN) in accordance with the Bank’s guidelines to determine the development
     level of the public financial management systems. In light of the assessment’s
     findings, the AGN was validated as auditor of Bank projects.
     With a view to having flexibility and being able to adjust the loan portfolio to the
     AGN’s auditing capacity at any given time, it is recommended that both the AGN
     and independent auditing firms be contractually eligible to conduct program audits.
G.   Financial supervision plan
     The financial supervision plan will be designed on the basis of the risk and fiduciary
     capacity assessments carried out in accordance with the onsite and “desk” reviews
     planned for the program, as well as on the basis of the reports issued by the
     external auditors. It includes the scope of operational, financial, and accounting
     actions, compliance, and legality. In principle, plans call for one financial inspection
     visit per year; this frequency may be reviewed based on the program risk
     evaluation. Disbursements will be subject to ex post review.
H.   Execution arrangements
     The MSyDS will act through the SISU as the party responsible for program
     coordination and technical supervision of the specific projects. In turn, the DGPECI
Annex III
Page 8 of 8


        will support the SISU and will be responsible for the management of fiduciary
        considerations (including the planning of financial management and procurement)
        and program monitoring, as well as other tasks. The duties and responsibilities of
        each of the areas of the MSyDS involved in program execution will be specified in
        the program Operating Regulations, and the details of program execution are
        described in Chapter III of the loan proposal.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/19



     Argentina. Loan ____/OC-AR to the Argentine Republic. Social and Urban Integration
                                         Program



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Argentine Republic, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing to
cooperate in the execution of the Social and Urban Integration Program. Such financing will be
for an amount of up to US$50,000,000 from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will
be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the
Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                              (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2019)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1044359933-17787
AR-L1306
