                                                                                        PUBLIC
                                                                      SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE



                  DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                             BELIZE




      SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE URBAN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
                                    (BL-L1046 & BL-J0007)




         LOAN AND NON-REIMBURSABLE INVESTMENT FINANCING PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Martin Soulier Faure (CSD/HUD),
Project Team Leader; Ana María Sáiz (SCL/MIG), Alternate Team Leader; Denise Levy and
Omar Samayoa (CSD/RND); Gerard Alleng (CSD/CCS); Rodrigo Riquelme (INE/WSA); Hugo
Us Alvarez (SCL/GDI); Alejandra Catacolí and Adriana Zambrano (VPS/ESG); Brodrick Watson
and Christian Lunstedt (VPC/FMP); Ruthann Rivero (CID/CBL), Mónica Lugo (LEG/SCO);
Linsford Coleman (INO/IEN); Alison Elias, Mariana Sobral and Adela Dávalos (SCL/MIG);
Natalia Lopez, Sofía Del Castillo, Dianela Ávila, Silvia Pérez and Gabriel de Barros Torres
(CSD/HUD).

In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been
approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will
be made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version
                                                     CONTENTS


PROJECT SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 1


I.     PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ............................................. 1

       A.       Background, problems addressed, and justification............................. 2
       B.       Objective, components, and cost ....................................................... 13
       C.       Key Results Indicators ....................................................................... 16

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................ 19

       A.       Financing instruments ........................................................................ 19
       B.       Environmental and social safeguard risks ......................................... 20
       C.       Fiduciary risk...................................................................................... 21
       D.       Other risks and key issues ................................................................. 22

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN......................................................... 23

       A.       Summary of implementation arrangements ....................................... 23
       B.       Summary of arrangements for monitoring results .............................. 26
                                        - ii -



                                     ANNEXES

Annex I     Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM)

Annex II    Results Matrix

Annex III   Fiduciary Arrangements


                       REQUIRED ELECTRONIC LINKS (REL)

REL#1       Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) / Annual Operational Plan (AOP)

REL#2       Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements

REL#3       Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS)

REL#4       Procurement Plan


                       OPTIONAL ELECTRONIC LINKS (OEL)

OEL#1       Technical Analysis

OEL#2       Socio-Economic Viability

OEL#3       Migration Analysis

OEL#4       Operations Manual

OEL#5       Sustainability and Climate Change

OEL#6       Analysis of Compliance with Public Utilities Policy

OEL#7       Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF)
                                     - iii -



                               ABBREVIATIONS
BWS        Belize Water Services
CEU        Central Executing Agency
CTC        Corozal Town Council
EA         Executing Agency
ESMF       Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESRS       Environmental and Social Review Summary
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
ICAP       Institutional Capacity Assessment
IDB        Inter-American Development Bank
KBA        Key Biodiversity Areas
MED        Ministry of Economic Development
MFEDI      Ministry of Finance, Economic Development, and Investment
MPAS       Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework
MRTCDLLG   Ministry of Rural Transformation, Community Development, Labour,
           and Local Government
OM         Operations Manual
OW         Orange Walk
OWTC       Orange Walk Town Council
SIB        Statistical Institute of Belize
SPF        Safeguard Policy Filter
SP         San Pedro
SPTC       San Pedro Town Council
SSF        Safeguard Screening Form
TWG        Technical Working Group
                                                 PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                       BELIZE
                               SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE URBAN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
                                               (BL-L1046 & BL-J0007)
                                                      Financial Terms and Conditions
 Borrower, Beneficiary, and Guarantor                                     Flexible Financing Facility(b) – OC Resources
                                                                  Amortization Period:           25 years
 Belize
                                                                     Disbursement Period:                   5 years
 Executing Agency                                                    Grace Period:                          5.5 years(c)
 Ministry of Finance, Economic Development, and                      Interest rate:                         SOFR Based
 Investment (MFEDI)                                                  Credit Fee:                            (d)

              Source                  Amount (US$)            %      Inspection and supervision fee:        (d)

 BL-L1046:
                                          10,000,000          80
 IDB - Ordinary Capital (OC)                                         Weighted Average Life (WAL):           15.25 years

 BL-J0007: IDB – GRF(a)                    2,500,000          20
                                                                                                   Dollars of the United States of
                                                                Currency of Approval:
 Total:                                   12,500,000     100                                       America
                                                          Project at a Glance
 Project Objective/Description: The overarching goal is to contribute to the sustainable urban development of municipalities
 in northern Belize. The specific objectives are: (i) to improve access to selected urban services; (ii) to support local economic
 growth; and (iii) to facilitate the social and economic integration of vulnerable populations, such as migrant population and
 women (¶1.20).
 Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement:
 (i) Executing Agency (EA) has hired and/or appointed for the administration of the program at least the following key personnel:
 (a) a program manager, (b) a procurement officer, (c) a finance Officer, (d) an environmental and social specialist, and (e) a project
 engineer; (ii) EA has approved and put into effect the Operations Manual (OM), under the terms and conditions previously agreed
 with the Bank, which must include, among other elements, the environmental and social requirements; and (iii) a Project Steering
 Committee (PSC) has been established with high level representatives from at least the following entities: the Ministry of Finance,
 the MED, and the Ministry of Local Government (¶3.7).
 Special Contractual Clauses of execution:
 (i) The Borrower, or the EA, agrees to obtain, before the award of the corresponding contract for each of the works of the
 project, the legal possession of the properties where the respective work will be built, the easements or other rights necessary
 for its construction and use, as well as the rights over the waters required for the work in question. (ii) Prior to start works in a
 specific Town, Technical Working Groups (TWG) must be formally created through MOUs, previously agreed with the Bank, signed
 by the municipality, the Ministry of Economic Development (MED) and the Ministry of Rural Transformation, Community
 Development, Labour, and Local Government (MRTCDLLG), detailing responsibilities for the implementation and sustainability of
 the corresponding investments (¶3.8). For other special contractual clauses, see Annex B of the Environmental and Social Review
 Summary (ESRS).
 Exceptions to Bank Policies: None
                                                             Strategic Alignment
 Objectives(e):                                   O1 ☒                                O2 ☒                                  O3 ☒
 Operational Focus                                  OF2-G ☒
                                      OF1 ☒                        OF3 ☒         OF4 ☒                      OF5 ☒       OF6 ☒         OF7 ☐
 Areas(f):                                          OF2-D ☒
(a)
      Non-reimbursable financing. The GRF is the “IDB Grant Facility resources to continue supporting the efforts of the region to address
      ongoing and emerging migration challenges” (“IDB Grant Facility”). According to document GN-2947-26, the IDB financing structure for
      this operation includes a combination of a maximum of 20% of non-reimbursable (GRF) and 80% reimbursable (Ordinary Capital)
      resources. The GRF resources will be disbursed simultaneously and proportionately with the Ordinary Capital loan resources.
(b)
      Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option to request modifications to the amortization
      schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe protection conversions. In considering such requests, the Bank
      will take into account operational and risk management considerations.
(c)
      Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility (FFF), changes in the grace period are possible as long the Original
      Weighted Average Life (WAL) and the last payment date, as documented in the loan agreement, are not exceeded.
(d)
      The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during its review of
      the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies.
(e)
      O1 (Reduce poverty and inequality); O2 (Address climate change); and O3 (Bolster sustainable regional growth).
(f)
      OF1 (Biodiversity, natural capital and climate action); OF2-G (Gender equality); OF2-D (Inclusion of diverse population groups); OF3
      (Institutional capacity, rule of law, and citizen security); OF4 (Social protection and human capital development); OF5 (Productive
      development and innovation through the private sector); OF6 (Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure); and OF7 (Regional
      integration).
                                                      -2-



                   I.       PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problems addressed, and justification

1.1       Background. Governance in Belize operates on two levels: the national level,
          which encompasses Ministries, Departments, and Organizations with jurisdiction
          across the entire country, and the local level, which includes City Councils (such
          as Belize City and Belmopan), Town Councils (in urban centers with Township
          status), and Village Councils. The competencies and authority of Town Councils
          are outlined in Chapter 87 of the Substantive Laws of Belize. They are responsible
          for urban regulation (aligned with zoning plans), approving certain construction
          permits, overseeing city drainage and sanitation, managing local urban
          infrastructure, public spaces, and facilitating the development of new urban
          facilities 1. Municipalities also collaborate with the national level on various urban
          and social services, disaster risk management 2, and economic development,
          including tourism 3. Regarding national development strategies, the Government
          launched in 2023 the Plan Belize, Medium-Term Development Strategy 2022-2026
          (MTDS): “Transforming Belize to a more inclusive and Sustainable country”,
          proposing 271 programs or projects to implement in poverty reduction, economic
          transformation, trade deficit, citizen security, protection of the environment, and
          good governance.

1.2       Development Challenges. Belize has a population of approximately 410,000
          inhabitants (42.2% urban, nearly 172,000 people). 4 The population growth rate,
          1.52% per year (2021 estimate), is one of the highest in the region 5. Rapid
          population increase can exacerbate the challenge of ensuring that future
          development is sustainable and inclusive. 6 In the Global South, where cities
          accommodate population mostly through the expansion of their urban footprints
          rather than densification, urban growth occurs in a haphazard, unplanned manner
          (zoning and land-use regulations are more difficult to enforce), making cities less
          productive, less inclusive, less resilient, and less sustainable. 7 In Northern Belize,
          the population of the three major towns, Orange Walk (OW), Corozal and San
          Pedro (Ambergris Caye Island) 8, grew 13,4% since 2010 census (SIB; 2024).
          During the same period, household numbers have surged by approximately
          30.3%, more than doubling the population growth rate. These municipalities face

1     Ambergris Sustainable Master Plan (ATN/AC-19488-BL and ATN/OC-19487-BL): second report
      (multisectoral diagnosis) IDOM (2023).
2     Ministry of Sustainable Development, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management, the National
      Emergency Management Organization (NEMO), the Belize Red Cross Society, and, if applicable, the Coastal
      Zone Management Authority and Institute (CZMAI).
3     Ministry of Tourism and Diaspora Relations and Belize Tourism Board (BTB).
4     Statistical Institute of Belize (SIB) 2024, preliminary population counts from the 2022 Belize Housing and
      Population Census. Postcensal population estimates.
5     United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs: “Why population growth matters for sustainable
      development”; February 2022
6     United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs: “Why population growth matters for sustainable
      development”; February 2022.
7     Angel, S. (2023). Urban expansion: theory, evidence and practice. Buildings and Cities, 4(1), pp. 124–138.
      DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/bc.348.
8     Orange Walk, Corozal, and San Pedro, present urban populations of approximately 14,600, 10,000, and
      15,500, respectively. Urban inhabitants represent 26.8%, 22%, and 84.7% of the total population of each
      district (total population approximately 54,500; 45,500 and 18,300 respectively). Own estimations based on
      preliminary population counts from the 2022 Census.
                                                       -3-


          specific interconnected challenges as they strive for holistic and sustainable 9
          development: improving the provision of urban services, local economic diversity,
          and community integration, while also seeking to increase their resilience and
          capabilities across the board to manage growth effectively.

                                                       Figure 1. Location




            Source: IDOM (2023)


1.3       Deficit in selected urban services. 10 Expanded urban growth with inadequate
          coverage or efficiency in the provision of urban services have impacts in economic
          (i.e. loss of time of transport, financial instability), environmental (i.e. air and water
          courses pollution) and social (i.e. social segregation) sustainability. 11 Inadequate
          planning and management of urban footprint growth typically result in costly
          community infrastructure, the shortage of public open spaces, inadequate
          protection of ecological assets, and the proliferation of informal settlements without
          proper layout for streets, drainage works, and public facilities, among other (Angel
          S.; 2023). The surge of new households in OW, Corozal and San Pedro, required
          the construction of approximately 200 houses annually and the provision of
          essential urban services such as roads, sidewalks, public spaces, drainage
          systems, potable water supply, sewerage, waste management, public facilities,
          and sustainable mobility. Historical deficits and unplanned urban growth, along
          with inadequate monitoring capabilities, have resulted in deficiencies in the
          provision of urban services in the three cities (see Table 1). Naturally, these deficits
          are more noticeable in vulnerable areas 12. In this sense, the UN states that


9     In this document, the term “sustainable” is used in its broad sense, including environmental, social, urban,
      and economic/financial aspects.
10    Urban development literature generally refers to “urban services” to various essential infrastructures and
      facilities that contribute to the well-being and functionality of urban areas, encompassing a wide range of
      sectors, such as urban planning and governance, housing, water and sanitation, energy, healthcare,
      education, public safety, mobility, and recreation and culture facilities, among other.
11    Bueno-Suarez, C and Coq-Huelva, D: “Sustaining What Is Unsustainable: A Review of Urban Sprawl and
      Urban Socio-Environmental Policies in North America and Western Europe”; 2020.
12    In San Mateo, a vulnerable neighborhood of San Pedro with 2,329 inhabitants, there is no coverage of paved
      roads, sidewalks, sewage, stormwater drainage, bike lanes, street vegetation, nor public spaces (IDOM;
      2023).
                                                          -4-


          eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions is an indispensable requirement
          for economic, social, and environmental sustainable development. 13


                          Table 1. Selected Urban Services Indicators per Municipality
           Indicator                   Orange Walk(a)           Corozal(b)       San Pedro(c)            Belize City
           Paved roads                                                                                   42,3%(d)
                                       11,7%(d)                 7,7%(d)          8%
           (district)
           Drinking water(e)           87.6%                    81.4%            83%                     90%(f)

                                       0% (94,5%                                                         35%(f)
           Sewer System                                         0%               20%
                                       septic tanks)

                                       76% (15%                                                          n/a
           Drainage(g)                                          n/a              5.3% concrete
                                       concrete)
                                       3.96 sq mt/                               4.05 sq mt /            n/a
           Public spaces                                        n/a
                                       inhabitant                                inhabitant

           Qualified green                                                       0.8 sq mt /             3.8 sq mt/
                                       n/a                      n/a
           areas(h)                                                              inhabitant              inhabitant(f)
           Bike Lanes                  0 km                     0 km             0 km                    0 km
           (a)
                 Investment and Organizational Development Plan for Orange Walk (Economia Urbana; 2023).
           (b)
                 Corozal Town Municipal Development Plan (MDP; 2013).
           (c)
                 IDOM 2023.
           (d)
                 Annual technical report of the Ministry of Infrastructure Development and Housing (2021). Respectively,
                 Gravel roads are 56.8%; 84.4% and 89.5%; and earth roads 0.8%; 3.9 and 2.8%.
           (e)
                 Public or private piped into dwelling or yard (District’s totals); 2010 Census.
           (f)
                 Department of Environment - Belize.
           (g)
                 Permeable and impermeable drainage systems. Concrete drains such as half round drains,
                 underdrains, catch pits, precast concrete trap drains, and V-shape block drains.
           (h)
                 The World Health Organization recommended the availability of a minimum of 9 m2 of green space per
                 individual (Health Indicators of Sustainable Cities in the Context of the Rio+20 UN Conference on
                 Sustainable Development. WHO; Geneva, Switzerland: 2012).


1.4       Insufficient Economic Diversity. Traditionally, economic diversification has been
          used as a strategy to transform the economy from using a single source to multiple
          sources of income, with the objective to improve economic performance for
          achieving sustainable growth; for example, building resilience against fluctuations
          in extra-regional economic activity, reducing vulnerability to income loss due to
          volatility of product price on the international market, creating job opportunities and
          alleviating poverty. 14 Agriculture, primarily sugar cane farming and associated
          secondary activities, dominates the economies of Orange Walk (OW) and Corozal
          districts 15, with tourism emerging as a promising alternative for job creation and
          economic diversification, specially eco and cultural tourism (a type of tourism
          involving small to medium-sized operators, low environmental impact



13    UN resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
      Development”.
14    UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC): “The concept of economic diversification in the
      context of response measures”; 2016.
15    In continental northern Belize, where most sugarcane is grown, about 85% of the population depends on the
      sugar sector. The sector is estimated to account for about 4–5% of total GDP and 8% of total employment.
      (Can Belize cope with the new world sugar market? IMF 2016).
                                                       -5-


          infrastructure, and a recognition of local culture). 16 Tourism contributes over 15%
          of GDP and employs 12% of Belize’s workforce. 17 San Pedro, the most visited
          town, heavily relies on tourism, with an estimated 65% of its employed population
          engaged directly in tourism activities. 18 Despite substantial increases in tourist
          numbers in 2022, figures remain below 2019 levels, particularly in OW and
          Corozal. 19 To enhance competitiveness of the tourism sector, Belize needs not
          only better urban planning, land use regulation and access to urban services, but
          also to improve availability and quality of Belizean-made handicrafts and the
          commercialization of traditional products, and to deeper integrate local
          communities and artisans into the tourism value chain. 20 In OW for example, local
          vendors in the public market carry out their activities in poor conditions, exposed
          to the sun and rain, without solid flooring, drinking water or safe electricity. 21
          Another challenge raised by the NSTMP is to strengthen the distribution of tourism
          benefits to vulnerable groups, improving their training and knowledge to access to
          capital and markets 22. The skills gap in Belize is real, since economy shifts from
          labor intensive jobs of the agricultural sector to jobs in the services sector, which
          require interpersonal and digital skills. 23 Promoting tourism can help overcome
          economic diversification challenges and vulnerability, but municipalities must
          strengthen their ecosystems and offer incentives to attract private investment and
          develop commercial activities (Economía Urbana, 2023).

1.5       Socioeconomic inclusion of migrants, women and people with disabilities is
          crucial for sustainable development. According to the UN, investing in the most
          disadvantaged and excluded populations, which may include, among other,
          women, persons with disabilities, and migrants, is critically important for the
          effective achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. 24 In 2022, intra-
          regional migrants comprised approximately 12% of Belize's total population. 25
          Since 2016, the country has experienced significant and sudden migration influxes.
          Between 2019 and 2022, the population grew by 2.8%, primarily due to
          immigration 26 (See OEL#3). Recent migrants have settled in urban areas, shifting
          employment dynamics from agriculture to various income-generating activities


16    Economía Urbana, 2023; MDP, 2013.
17    Out of the 20,594 employees within the tourism industry, an estimated 5,027 are associated with Ambergris
      Caye (IDOM; 2023).
18    The Coastal Zone Management Authority & Institute (CZMAI) 2009: Revised Master Development Plan for
      Ambergris Caye.
19    According to the Belize Tourism Board (BTB tourism performance dashboard), the estimated visitors to these
      municipalities in 2022 were 3,732 (OW), 4,647 (Corozal), and 116,030 (San Pedro), representing 35.8% of
      the total visitors of the country. Figures showed a substantial increase from 2021 (61%, 85%, and 55%), but
      they are still below 2019 (-78%, -70% and -32%), especially in OW and Corozal.
20    Belize Tourism & Conservation Adaptation Plans and National Sustainable Tourism Master Plan for Belize
      2030 (NSTMP)
21    OW Town Council information and field visits.
22    In the vulnerable neighborhood of San Mateo, in San Pedro Town, almost 30% of the inhabitants work in the
      tourism sector, 24% in construction, 13% in services; and only 1.4% have tertiary studies (11.5% at national
      level).
23    Skills to shape the future: Employability in Belize (IDB; 2020)
24    Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2023, “Promoting social integration through
      social inclusion”.
25    IDB Calculation based on data from the Statistical Institute of Belize (SIB).
26    The percentage increase represents the change in the share of immigrant stocks for the period 2019-2022.
      IDB calculation based on data from the SIB.
                                                        -6-


          such as landscaping, construction, food vending, and merchandising observed in
          Corozal and Orange Walk. 27 Immigrants from El Salvador, Guatemala, and
          Honduras make up 17.4% of Belize’s total labor force (SIB, 2021). In San Pedro,
          where tourism drives the economy, the migrant workforce plays a crucial role in
          services provision. Training can help lessen the social and economic inequality in
          the country by providing people in disadvantaged communities with skills for
          gainful employment. 28

1.6       This rapid influx challenges urban services provision, placing strain on Belize’s
          infrastructure. 29 According to municipal reports, migrants predominantly reside in
          precarious settlements with limited access to urban services and stable
          employment. In San Pedro, 11% of houses are in slums, and 57% of occupied
          residential areas are low- to medium-quality neighborhoods (IDOM, 2023). In the
          San Mateo neighborhood, where 17.4% of the population is foreign-born,
          economic reasons primarily drive migration (62%). However, 92.3% of migrants in
          San Mateo are not interested or aware of migrant programs. For 57% of migrants,
          the priority is living in a community where everyone is treated equally, regardless
          of nationality (IDOM, 2023, sociodemographic survey in San Mateo
          neighborhood). Migrant integration and social cohesion remain significant
          challenges, with 57% citing language barriers as a major obstacle to integration,
          limiting access to skills development, employment, and social networks (Usher,
          2022).

1.7       While women represent about 51% of all migrants (SIB, 2021), Belize registered
          one of the lowest gender parity scores of Latin America and the Caribbean in 2023
          (0.696). 30 Even though women have higher levels of education than men, their
          labor-market participation, employment levels, and wages are lower than those of
          men (IDB, 2020). Unemployment rate in 2023 was 9.8% for women and 4.6% for
          men. 31 Although women's participation in the labor force has increased nationally
          (from 42.4% to 48.2% between 2020 and 2021), they still lag behind men (76.1%
          in 2021), particularly after marriage, 32 and they only earn 68% of the income of
          men. 33 Most women workers are occupied in services and sales, followed by
          elementary occupations (LFS Report 2021). Women-headed households are
          disproportionately represented in vulnerable housing situations (UNDP, 2007). In
          Belize, 27.6% of households are headed by women, often single-parent
          households, responsible for childcare and employment (CDB, 2016).

1.8       The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development pledges to leave no one behind,
          including persons with disabilities and other disadvantaged groups. 34 According to
          the 2010 Census, approximately 15% of the population of Belize has a disability
          (ECLAC 2014), in line with statistics worldwide. Across the LAC region, public


27    Usher, M. (2022). Migrant Workers and Opportunities in MSMEs. IDB.
28    State of Skills in Belize, International Labour Organization, 2020.
29    Even though there is an information gap about migrants’ access to basic services, surveys conducted by
      CID-Gallup in 2010, point out that access to water services by migrants is about 64%, significantly lower than
      the national average.
30    Global Gender Gap Report, World Economic Forum (WEF), 2023.
31    UN Women (Women Count- https://data.unwomen.org/country/belize)
32    As women get married, their labor participation decreases compared to unmarried women (44.4% compared
      to 53.8%), and is much lower than married men (79.1%). LFS Report 2021
33    Labor Market Gender Gap Index, Belize 2023.
34    UN “Disability and Development Report”; 2019.
                                                      -7-


          infrastructure poses many accessibility challenges for people with disabilities. 35 In
          Belize, the current legal framework lacks robust regulations ensuring infrastructure
          designs adhere to universal accessibility standards, thereby denying people with
          disabilities access to crucial services like education and healthcare. 36 Although
          most countries in LAC count on these provisions in national legislation, the
          accessibility of public facilities continues to be low for people with disabilities,
          because the requirements of the laws are not described in coherent and consistent
          regulations such as building codes, impeding the implementation of universal
          access (Breaking Barriers, WB 2021).

1.9       In general, Municipalities play a crucial role in receiving and integrating migrant
          populations, necessitating policies, measures, and short-term activities to address
          basic needs and provide access to integration initiatives and services. 37 However,
          Belizean municipalities lack specific plans to manage these services effectively
          and require support to develop them with a gender and inclusion approach.

1.10      Natural Risks and Climate Change Adverse Effects on Sustainable Urban
          Development. Across these challenges, Belize faces significant climate change
          risks, including hurricanes, flooding, rising sea levels, coastal erosion, coral
          bleaching, and droughts 38, alongside extreme temperature events. 39 Corozal
          Town, located in the low-lying Corozal district, is highly flood-prone, with ongoing
          coastal erosion threatening its sea wall integrity (MDP, 2013). Climate change
          exacerbates impacts of coastal hazards, such as erosion and flooding, on property,
          infrastructure, and communities. 40 Orange Walk, situated between wetlands and
          the New River, experiences annual floods affecting over 100 families. 41 Ambergris
          Caye is susceptible to hurricanes, floods, and other disasters. 42 While 58.2% of
          the Caye is affected by flood-prone areas, the main risks identified are storm surge,
          strong winds, and coastal erosion (IDOM, 2023). Mangrove forests are crucial for
          the environment, serving as natural barriers against erosion, storm surges, and
          coastal flooding while also purifying water. However, 7% of mangroves have been
          lost between 1980 and 2023 (IDOM, 2023). While the National Government
          handles disaster preparedness and response, municipalities play a key role in
          bolstering resilience through green infrastructure, sustainable planning, and
          proactive measures.

1.11      Program Design Strategy, lessons learned and effectiveness. In line with the
          Government Plan to transform Belize into a more inclusive and sustainable country
          (Plan Belize MTDS 2022-2026), and in accordance with the objective of the
          Country Strategy 2022-2025 to achieve robust, inclusive, and sustainable growth,
          government authorities seek assistance from the Bank to design and implement
          multisectoral and sustainable interventions to trigger the development of northern

35    Breaking Barriers, WB, 2021
36    “Marco legal de los derechos de las personas con discapacidad: América Latina y El Caribe”, Bregaglio, IDB
      2021.
37    OAS (2023). Reception and Integration of migrants and refugees in cities across the Americas. Organization
      of American States, Washington, D.C. USA.
38    IDB Country Strategy 2022-2025.
39    WB, 2023.
40    IDB BL-T1080 (ATN/MD-15572-BL and ATN/OC-15573-BL): Final Report “Bay Shoreline Management Plan:
      Planning for Climate Resilience” (2018).
41    Orange Walk Flood Mitigation Concept Note (Catalyst Solutions CG; 2022).
42    From 62 events that occurred in the past, 67% were hurricanes, 22% were floods, and the remaining 11%
      were epidemics and fires (DesInvetar Sendai developed by UNDRR; July 2023).
                                                       -8-


         Belize (BL-L1046) 43, and to improve social sustainability by integrating vulnerable
         migrant populations and host communities (BL-J0007). 44 Since the investment
         needs exceed the available resources 45, the Program will be used as a pilot project
         to learn by its implementation and be able to replicate good practices in future
         interventions. Besides the mentioned development challenges, the three major
         towns of northern Belize also present the opportunity to learn from three different
         urban typologies (coastal, island and inland) to improve future interventions in
         other urban areas of the country. Jointly work along with the Ministry of Rural
         Transformation, Community Development, Labour and Local Government
         (MRTCDLLG) 46, will reinforce the catalytic purpose of this Program, generating
         capabilities to replicate activities across the Country with own or external
         resources. The Program will complement current efforts of the Government in
         implementing the MTDS in these three towns. 47

1.12     Projects to implement under this Program, prioritized by the municipalities, aim to
         catalyzing sustainable urban development by enhancing selected urban services,
         improving resilience and social integration, and fostering local economy in
         vulnerable and prioritized areas of its cities, while concurrently reinforcing
         municipalities capabilities. The sustainable and inclusive interventions, such as
         neighborhood upgrading projects and improvements to public spaces and facilities,
         will be complemented with activities to strengthen municipal and national
         capabilities for guiding sustainable urban development (as AI tools developed by
         IDB’s Cities Lab). Most interventions will be maintained and operated by
         municipalities, with the responsibility for expanded water, sewage, and public
         lighting networks falling on Belize Water Service (BWS) and Belize Electricity
         Limited (BEL), respectively. 48 International evidence and lessons learned from the
         IDB Group’s experience support the effectiveness of the proposed interventions in
         improving urban infrastructure. 49




43   Request letter from the MFEDI (March 2023).
44   Additional request letter from the MFEDI (August 2023).
45   The “Strategic Plan for the Sustainable Development of Ambergris Caye” (IDOM; 2024; funded by BL-T1150)
     estimates in more than USD 200 million the cost of the investments needed to provide urban services to the
     expected urban footprint growth of the next 20 years in San Pedro and surroundings. This Program will fund
     approximately 1% of the investments needs identified. The “Investment and Organizational Development
     Plan” for Orange Walk (Economía Urbana; 2023) identified almost USD 30 million in investment needs in ten
     prioritized projects to implement in the short term. Corozal would be able to update its Municipal Development
     Plan from 2013 with support of this Program.
46   The Ministry of Local Government of the MRTCLLG is committed to strengthening local authorities to
     empower communities to address their development needs through policy development, guidance and
     support, with a view to reducing social, economic and environmental inequities.
47   The MTDS and the latest Public Sector Investment Program identifies ongoing, in pipeline, and proposed
     investments through 2026 in these three towns for a total of USD 175 million, funded by several sources
     (CABEI, CDB, EIB, and GCF, among other).
48   This commitment will be included in different agreements to be signed between the national government and
     each one of the municipalities, BWS and BEL.
49   An empirical study of the impacts of “Habitat”, a federal Mexican program that funded infrastructure
     investment to poor urban neighborhoods, found that the value of a square meter of land in treated
     neighborhoods increased by more than US$2 for every US$1 invested by the program (McIntosh, Alegría,
     Ordóñez, et al., 2018). A difference-in-difference empirical evaluation of road improvements in Campo
     Grande, Brazil, found that these improvements increased property prices by 6.1 percent, which translated
     into a return of US$4.25 per dollar invested (Acevedo, Hobbs, and Martinez, 2017).
                                                      -9-


                                       Table 2. Lessons learned and effectiveness

           Lesson                                  Incorporation into program design

           1. Local governments play a             Component I will support the usage of digital tools
              crucial role in integrating          for sustainable urban development and the
              climate change actions(a)            elaboration of sustainable zoning plans, including
                                                   climate change considerations, and coastal
                                                   management plans.

           2. Addressing urban                     Projects of the sample as the new public market
              challenges, including social         (OW), the initial interventions of the New River
              and infrastructure aspects           (OW), and the intervention in Corozal consider
              related to job creation,             facilities for local vendors, public-private
              requires a holistic and              development strategies, or migrants and women
              multisectoral approach to            employment and training, among other
              urban interventions(b)               considerations for an integral approach.

           3. Partnerships significantly           Interventions in the new river (OW) will be
              enhance the effectiveness            complemented with a private-public development
              of interventions(c)                  strategy implementation and a training program in
                                                   the municipal house of culture. Upgrading of San
                                                   Mateo Neighborhood will be complemented by a
                                                   new sports facility from a nearby church 50.

           4. Resident participation in            A codesign workshop with the community was part
              transforming their                   of activities for the preparation of the upgrading
              neighborhood improves the            intervention project in San Mateo Neighborhood.
              design and sustainability of         Public consultations were held in all Towns to
              the interventions(d)                 receive feedback from residents.

           5. Increasing the accessibility         Projects of the sample include the improvement of
              to public spaces generates           access to public space in a broad sense (sidewalks,
              important social and                 boardwalks, piers, sports facilities, playground,
              environmental benefits(e)            green areas, public market, etc.)

           6. Public spaces can generate           Projects of the sample include the creation or
              significant economic value(f)        upgrade of public spaces not only in vulnerable
                                                   neighborhoods but also in prioritized areas for
                                                   tourism attraction and economic development.

           7. Infrastructure and green             Projects of the sample considers sustainable
              space can be an effective            drainage systems, boardwalks, permeable
              and efficient means of               pavements, and floodable green areas.
              addressing flooding
              problems(g)

           8. Some key conditions should           The program considers generating information
              be met for migrants to be            materials to help migrants’ access to services,
              integrated, such as being            English courses for language integration,
              recognized and treated as            workshops, and training courses to develop skills in
              members of society, having           digital tools and financial education, among others.
              equal and fair job                   The program will also seek to train and to promote
                                                   the possibility of participating in construction,

50   No public land was available in San Mateo, so the project just considers temporal public spaces at the end of
     certain roads.
                                                          - 10 -


                                          Table 2. Lessons learned and effectiveness

          Lesson                                       Incorporation into program design
             opportunities, and having                 provision of services in commercial establishments
             equal access to services(h)               and sale of products in public market or stalls.

          9. A program management                      Creation of Technical Working Groups per Town,
             committee with                            with participation of national and local level, and
             representatives from                      consultation with other national entities as well as
             national authorities supports             service providers.
             coordination(i)
          (a)
                Such as how the Brazilian municipality of João Pessoa incorporated natural disaster risk reduction into
                its urban plan (IDB’s Housing and Urban Development Sector Framework Document, GN-2732-11 –
                HUD/SFD).
          (b)
                As demonstrated by the Colonial City of Santo Domingo’s success in revitalizing residential, commercial,
                and tourism activities through urban renewal and conservation, with active involvement from social and
                private stakeholders (HUD/SFD). The ex-post analysis of the program demonstrated tourism-related
                benefits in excess of US$25 million, as well as the creation of more than 400 new jobs (Banerjee et al.,
                2018; IDB’s Tourism Sector Framework Document).
          (c)
                Like in the Housing and Comprehensive Habitat Improvement Program in Nicaragua (HUD/SFD)
          (d)
                The experience emerging from projects in Brazil, Guyana, Suriname, and Nicaragua, among others,
                shows that early dialogue with future beneficiaries increases trust and credibility between executing
                agencies and communities. (HUD/SFD)
          (e)
                In Campinas, Brazil, the “A Paz em Língua de Brincar” (Peace through Play) program funded a series of
                inclusive parks, integrating children with and without disabilities, which helped further integrate society,
                providing important benefits for physical and mental health (Mastellaro; 2020). A study showed that
                increased tree cover by approximately 40% in New York City, Philadelphia and Baltimore reduced urban
                surface air temperatures by up to 6°C (Rosenzweig, Solecki, Parshall et al., 2009). (HUD/SFD)
          (f)
                The UN Habitat study “Developing Public Space and Land Values in Cities and Neighborhoods” showed
                that every $1 spent on park maintenance in Philadelphia generated nearly $100 in economic value.
          (g)
                In California, sustainable drainage actions reduced stormwater runoff by 89% to 99% (Xiao, McPherson,
                Zhang et al., 2017). In Curitiba, the use of permeable pavements, urban parks and green areas constitute
                effective solutions to manage water flows (Water and Sanitation SFD, IDB, 2017)
          (h)
                The IDB Group can propose flexible, holistic, and comprehensive solutions on livelihoods and jobs, on
                basic services, and on social cohesion and resilience. Labor intermediation programs can have a key
                role for migrants’ economic integration, offering job counseling, training, skills certification, and job
                placement services (GN-3021 Migration Action Framework Document)
          (i)
                With well-defined competencies, a schedule of meetings, and a focus on central strategic issues.
                (HUD/SFD)


1.13     Bank’s added value and synergies. The program will benefit from actions
         implemented and knowledge generated nationally from (i) several operations
         related to Blue Economy (5769/OC-BL; ATN/JF-19232-BL; and ATN/CO-19166-
         BL), especially in mangroves conservation and sargassum reuse; (ii) Sustainable
         Tourism Program II (3566/OC-BL), particularly with actions to promote disaster and
         climate resilience, and environmental sustainability in tourism destinations in
         Corozal and San Pedro; and (iii) Water Disinfection Program for Belize (5754/OC-
         BL and 5755/GR-BL), regarding the financial sustainability analysis of BWS and
         actions to implement in San Pedro such as network expansion, energy efficiency,
         smart metering piloting (which is expected to result in 10% savings for migrant
         households) and information campaigns. On the other hand, these Programs will
         benefit from the implementation of BL-L1046 with activities such as: (i) expansion
         of sewage network in San Pedro; (ii) mangroves restauration and conservation in
         Corozal and San Pedro; (iii) resilient interventions and studies, including the
         development of new tourism areas as the new River in OW. In addition, products
         from ATN/AC-19488-BL and ATN/OC-19487-BL “Support for Ambergris Caye
         Sustainable Development” are highly valuable for interventions in San Pedro. 51

51   As the Master Plan for the Sustainable Development of North Ambergris Caye and the Feasibility study for
     an integral intervention in San Mateo Neighborhood.
                                                     - 11 -


         Synergies within the IDB group were identified: (i) collaboration between four IDB
         divisions (i.e., housing and urban development, natural resources and rural
         development, climate change and sustainable development, and water and
         sanitation) in developing and implementing projects and studies; and
         (ii) collaboration with IDB Invest in the elaboration of the private-public strategy for
         the development of the New River area in OW 52. The IDB Group Bank's added
         value stems from its holistic and complementary approach to addressing complex
         urban challenges. Finally, meetings to exchange information regarding activities in
         preparation or implementation in Ambergris Caye for future synergies were held
         with the World Bank 53.

1.14     Strategic Alignment. The Program is consistent with the IDB Group Institutional
         Strategy: Transforming for Scale and Impact (CA-631) and is aligned with the
         objectives to: (i) reduce poverty and inequality, by improving vulnerable
         neighborhoods, creating inclusive and safe public spaces, and developing capacity
         building activities including migrants, women and people with disabilities;
         (ii) address climate change by strengthening local governments in sustainable
         planning and implementing resilient investments in urban areas subject to climate
         risk (51.54% of the resources of this operation will contribute to climate finance
         according to the Joint MDB Methodology for Climate Finance Tracking and 54.00%
         is the aggregate sum of green and climate financing according to the Green
         Financing Tracking Methodology of the IDB Group -GN-3101- see OEL#5); and
         (iii) bolster sustainable regional growth by executing resilient and inclusive
         infrastructure, modernizing local urban development management and by
         contributing to local economic growth, including the development of tourist areas,
         public facilities for local vendors and a public-private collaboration strategy. The
         Program is also aligned with the operational focus areas of: (i) biodiversity, natural
         capital and climate action; (ii) gender equality and inclusion of diverse population
         groups; (iii) institutional capacity, rule of law, and citizen security; (iv) social
         protection and human capital development; (v) productive development and
         innovation through the private sector; and (vi) sustainable, resilient, and inclusive
         infrastructure.

1.15     The program is aligned with the 2022-2025 Country Strategy for Belize (GN-3086)
         by the strategic objective of supporting the reactivation of critical economic sectors
         through the continued provision of services, improving their resilience to natural
         hazards and climate change. It also aligns with the four objectives of the Housing
         and Urban Development Sector Framework Document (GN-2732-14):
         (i) overcoming structural social exclusion by upgrading underserved and informal
         neighborhoods and expanding the provision of safe public spaces for all;
         (ii) promoting disaster and climate change resilience; (iii) boosting urban
         productivity by supporting comprehensive urban infrastructure, streamlining urban
         regulations, and promoting innovation in the built environment; and (iv) promoting
         good urban governance by strengthening fiscal and data management capacity.
         Moreover, this program aligns with the Migration Action Framework (GN-3021) by
         advocating for improved access to urban services for the migrant population,
         facilitating their integration into economic opportunities, and fostering social

52   IDB Invest is part of the implementation team and will collaborate with the development and execution of the
     strategy. The team expects to have a draft developed prior to the kickoff workshop.
53   Specifically, regarding BL-L1046, BL-T1150 “Support for Ambergris Caye Sustainable Development”,
     BL-L1043 “Water Disinfection Program”, and the “Blue Economy Project” and other activities in preparation
     funded by the World Bank.
                                            - 12 -


       cohesion with host communities. Finally, this operation also aligns with the first line
       of action of the Climate Change Sector Framework Document (GN-2835-10),
       adapting and building climate resilience, through the mainstreaming of climate
       change considerations in planning and specific design of infrastructure, at national
       and local level, improving disaster risk assessment, reduction and management,
       conserving and restoring natural ecosystems as mangroves, and using territorial
       approach to build climate resilience (strengthening municipal-level knowledge to
       gather new data, identify impacts and develop strategies to adapt to it).

1.16   This operation has been analyzed using the Joint MDB Assessment Framework
       for Paris Alignment and the IDB Group PAIA (GN-3142-1), which determines: (i) it
       aligns to the adaptation goal of the Paris Agreement (PA); and (ii) it universally
       aligns to the mitigation goal of the PA (OEL#5).

1.17   GRF eligibility. The IDB Grant Facility resources to continue supporting the efforts
       of the region to address ongoing and emerging migration challenges aims to help
       countries design interventions that provide migrants and their host communities
       with access to essential services, social services, and economic opportunities.
       Also, it benefits migrants and the local population by favoring inclusive
       development and fostering positive relationships between these groups. The
       program complies with the eligibility criteria to use GRF resources as per its
       Operational Guidelines (GN-2947-26) (See OEL#3): (i) Belize is eligible given that
       intraregional migration increased its population by 2.8% between 2019 and 2022,
       and is over five times the level required to qualify under Criteria 1 (0.5%); (ii) there
       are specific barriers that inhibit social and economic integration of migrants which
       require a comprehensive approach at the municipal level to bridge urban and social
       deficits; (iii) the operation is congruent with the thematic areas of access to
       essential services, social services, and economic opportunities; (iv) migrant and
       host communities are the potential beneficiaries, interventions focus on areas with
       high proportion of migrant population; and (v) the program is included in the
       country program.

1.18   Government Strategy. The program is in alignment with both national and
       international priorities. The Program aligns with the government’s five-year
       strategic management plan for Belize MTDP 2022-2026 “Transforming Belize to
       a more inclusive and Sustainable country”, in the topics of poverty reduction,
       economic transformation, and protection of the environment and natural resources.
       Regarding Horizon 2030, the National Development Framework for Belize, the
       program aligns with (i) the goal of economic resilience, contributing to developing
       a robust small business sector through supporting small vendors, especially
       women activities; and (ii) the strategies to achieve health, environmental and
       sustainable goals, incorporating environmental sustainability into development
       planning and providing public and green areas to promote healthy lifestyles. The
       program is also in alignment with the National Sustainable Tourism Master Plan of
       Belize 2030 (NSTMP) since it: (i) promotes tourism growth in continental northern
       Belize; (ii) promotes Public-Private Partnership or collaboration models for the
       development of tourism attractions as the New River (OW); (iii) contributes to the
       Sustainable Tourism Development Program, supporting vulnerable groups and
       land use planning with social and environmental safeguarding criteria; and
       (iv) contributes to cultural and nature-based tourism development through
       enchanting Belizean villages, developing traditional markets, fostering living
       cultural experiences (as handcrafts and gastronomy), and providing triggering
                                                        - 13 -


         interventions to develop eco-tourism and Mayan sites. 54 It also aligns with the
         National Climate Resilience Investment Plan, the 2014-2024 National
         Environmental Policy & Strategy, and its Updated Nationally Determined
         Contribution for 2021.

1.19     This operation significantly contributes to Belize’s climate goals by enhancing
         resilience in urban areas and coastal communities while strengthening institutional
         capacity for preventive measures and planning. The program also contributes to
         several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including SDG No. 1: “No
         Poverty”; SDG No. 5: “Gender Equality”; SDG No. 6: “clean water and sanitation”;
         SDG No. 8: “Decent Work and Economic Growth”; SDG No. 9: “Build resilient
         infrastructure”; SDG No. 10: “Reduce inequality within and among countries”; SDG
         No. 11: “Sustainable Cities and Communities”; and SDG No. 13: “Climate Action.”

B.       Objective, components, and cost

1.20     The overarching goal is to contribute to the sustainable urban development of
         municipalities in northern Belize. Components I and II aim to contribute to the
         following specific objectives: (i) to improve access to selected urban services, (ii) to
         support local economic growth; and (iii) to facilitate the social and economic
         integration of vulnerable populations, such as migrant population and women.

1.21     Component I. Institutional Strengthening for Sustainable Development
         (OC- US$550,000; GRF- US$150,000; Total US$700,000). Activities include:
         (i) elaboration of municipal institutional strengthening plans 55 and financing of its
         initial activities (such as specific individual consulting services 56 or acquisition of
         information technology equipment); (ii) preparation of municipal development
         plans or sustainable zoning plans with a gender approach and climate change
         considerations, coastal management plans, public-private collaboration plans, or
         sectoral plans; (iii) the implementation of digital tools for sustainable urban
         development; 57 and (iv) specific activities to support the integration of migrants and
         their host communities, with gender and inclusion approach. 58 Activities aim to
         strengthen municipalities to address not only challenges identified in terms of
         existing deficits in urban services, economic development, and social inclusion, but
         also the most important of its determinants, the unplanned and uncontrolled urban
         growth. This component will be complemented with a new TC for operational




54   The development of the New River area in OW has the potential to trigger eco-tourism activities and
     strengthen current Lamanai (Mayan archaeological reserve) river tours from OW.
55   Focusing on councils’ capacity to enhance its administrative and managerial functions, including
     tools/equipment, and training needs. This also includes councils’ capacity to utilize digital tools for:
     (i) geo-spatial mapping for councils’ assets (i.e., public spaces); (ii) digitization of municipal services; (iii)
     business mapping to support liquor license and trade license management; and (iv) GIS for property tax
     management, etc.
56   i.e., Local Economic Development Officer or IT specialist.
57   Among other initiatives, the program will encourage the use of the toolkit developed by IDB’s Cities LAB:
     (i) Automatic monitoring of land use changes; (ii) UrbanPy (library of functions to estimate accessibility to
     services); (iii) MAIIA (Mapping of Informal Settlements with Artificial Intelligence); and (iv) URSA (Urban
     Reporting based on Satellite Analysis, including historical and future urban footprint growth and land cover).
58   Such as design and dissemination of information materials to help migrants’ access to services, English
     courses for language integration, and workshops and training courses to develop skills in digital tools and
     financial education, among others.
                                                        - 14 -


         support 59 to assist the program implementation by elaborating pre-investment
         studies of eligible projects and assuring the readiness of projects to implement
         under Component II.

1.22     Component II. Sustainable Urban Investments (OC- US$8,450,000;
         GRF- US$2,350,000; Total US$10,800,000). The component will finance
         sustainable urban services’ investments, such as (i) public spaces and municipal
         facilities (i.e., public markets, accommodations for local vendors, tourist centers,
         kindergartens, primary health care and cultural centers) 60 and (ii) the provision of
         essential urban infrastructure (water, sewage, drainage, efficient public lighting,
         improvement of existing municipal roads 61, sidewalks, bike lanes, among others).
         Interventions will be implemented in vulnerable 62 neighborhoods and prioritized 63
         urban areas. Projects under this component will consider universal accessibility
         design 64 and specific activities aimed at integrating women and migrants with host
         communities, like participation during the construction phase, providing services in
         commercial premises, or as vendors using the new facilities in public areas and
         the public market, among others. Projects aim at addressing existing challenges in
         access to urban services, but at the same time prioritizing vulnerable people (social
         inclusion) and areas with potential in terms of local economy and tourism attraction.
         Information related to the projects that are part of the sample of the Program and
         could be funded by this component, such as the integral intervention in the
         vulnerable neighborhood of San Mateo or the initial interventions in public spaces
         of the New River area of OW, is presented in the following table (detailed
         information can be found in OEL#1).

                                              Table 3. Sample of Projects
                Resilient                                                                          Estimated cost
                                                        Components
              Intervention                                                                             (US$)
           COROZAL                                                                                         1,877,200
           Comprehensive         Mothers’ Park upgrading                                                     131,500
           public space
           expansion and         Children’s Park upgrading                                                   192,500
           upgrading(a)          Basketball court and Amphitheater area enhancement                          258,500

                                 Seaside Pathway                                                             165,000
                                 Fisherman’s Pier upgrading                                                   79,200
                                 Municipal pier upgrading and welcome center                                 225,500

                                 St. Paul’s Boardwalk (seawall protection)                                   825,000



59   Technical cooperation BL-T1168 (US$ 500,000) is expected to be approved by May 2024. During the first
     three months of implementation, technical assistance will support the development of detail-engineering
     drawing and specifications of materials for the Projects of the sample in OW and Corozal.
60   Buildings will comply with sustainable building certification standards like EDGE or equivalent.
61   Not representing capacity expansion.
62   Vulnerability is characterized by socio-economic factors and natural risks. It is specified in the program’s
     operations manual.
63   The operation will prioritize areas that contribute to local economic development, facilitate the integration of
     migrants, and address urban deficits.
64   The universal design approach implies planning for diverse needs from the initial phases of the project, such
     that the final project/environment will be accessible and user-friendly to a diverse population, particularly
     people with disabilities. This is done by designing infrastructure in a way that removes barriers to participation,
     such as tactile paving to support wayfinding for persons with visual disabilities and interior and exterior spaces
     that provide adequate gradation and space for wheelchairs.
                                        - 15 -




ORANGE WALK                                                           4,614,500
Initial            1. Two new public spaces connected by shared
interventions of      street(b) interventions
the River Walk        a. Tourist Park                                  528,000
Development
Strategy              b. Independence Park upgrading                   231,000
                      c. Main St., Church St., and Park Street        1,160,500
                         restoration

                   2. Naranjal Street upgrade over the New River(c)   1,001,000

New Public
Market and         Construction of market infrastructure              1,144,000
multipurpose
public space.
                   Sports Complex                                      550,000
                                                  - 16 -


        SAN PEDRO                                                                                  2,422,234
        Integral            Phase 1: Pavement, drainage, water supply,                             2,422,234
        intervention in     sewage(d), public lighting, public space, sidewalks,
        the San Mateo       pedestrian, and cyclist bridge
        neighborhood




                                                                              TOTAL                8,913,934
               a) Activities/investments: piers refresh, tourism facilities, street vendors facilities,
                  playground, basketball court, amphitheater, tree planting, public lighting, public restrooms,
                  and new boardwalk as seawall protection.
               b) Activities/investments: sidewalk widening, public lighting, stormwater retrofit, and tree
                  planting.
               c) Activities/investments: permeable pavement, drainage, boardwalk, tree planting, public
                  lighting, facilities for street vendors.
               d) Projects of the sample consider the improvement in sewage coverage in San Pedro in
                  approximately 206 new connections, increasing total connections from 1,222 to 1,428 (from
                  20% to approximately 23%)


1.23   Project administration, management, and audit (OC- US$1,000,000; Total
       US$1,000,000). The component will finance management costs of the
       Implementation Unit, auditing, monitoring, supervision, and intermediate and final
       evaluations, including ex-post cost-benefit analysis.

C.     Key Results Indicators

1.24   Expected Results. The following preliminary results have been identified:
       (i) beneficiaries have improved their access to urban services such as public
       spaces, drainage, sewage, sidewalks, pavement, and bike lanes through the
       implementation of sustainable infrastructure interventions; (ii) municipalities have
       utilized digital tools and relevant studies to guide sustainable urban development;
       (iii) the tourism product potential has been improved in OW and Corozal and
       contributed to diversify the country’s tourism offer; and (iv) beneficiaries, migrants
       and host communities, have improved their economic and social integration
       through actions in Components I and II (See Annex II). According to hedonics
                                                       - 17 -


         methodology 65, the contribution of the program to the sustainable urban
         development of these municipalities will be measured through the increase in the
         value of the properties located next to the interventions (16.2% is expected; see
         Annex II – Results Matrix).

1.25     Potential Beneficiaries. The program is expected to benefit around 40,000
         residents within the urban limits of OW, Corozal, and San Pedro towns, including
         the migrant population (approximately 10% of the urban population, see OEL#3).
         Direct beneficiaries from the implementation of pre-identified projects will be
         (i) inhabitants of prioritized vulnerable neighborhoods in San Pedro and OW
         (approximately 4,500 people); (ii) users of prioritized public spaces in OW
         (including shared streets) 66 and Corozal; (iii) local vendors (approximately 100
         people, primarily women, 50% migrants) and consumers in OW and Corozal; and
         (iv) entrepreneurs and workers in the tourism and commercial sectors in OW,
         Corozal and San Pedro. In the case of the vulnerable neighborhood of San Mateo,
         in San Pedro, 2,329 inhabitants will be beneficiaries of the project (51% will be
         women, 17% will be migrants, and 11% will be people with disabilities). In the case
         of the OW public market, 56 public vendors (48,2% migrants; 89.3% women) will
         directly benefit from the new working conditions. Migrant women vendors live in
         households with an average of 4.62 people.

1.26     Technical Viability. A representative sample of projects was chosen based on
         (i) municipal priorities; (ii) comprehensive approach, encompassing multisectoral,
         inclusive, and resilient interventions; (iii) targeting vulnerable areas considering
         socio-economic factors and natural risks, or prioritized areas for local economic
         development; and (iv) availability of previous studies. 67 Additional pre-investment
         studies were conducted during preparation process for these selected projects with
         Bank support and technical cooperation resources, covering various aspects such
         as     project    identification,     demand      estimation,   technical     analysis,
         architectural/engineering        designs,  natural     risk   considerations,    legal,
         administrative, and financial sustainability aspects, analysis of investment,
         operation and maintenance costs, budget schedules, and project risks. 68 For each
         selected project, at least two solution alternatives were evaluated. Designs
         considered nature-based solutions and the inclusion of people with disabilities
         wherever feasible. Projects in the sample account for almost US$9 million, and
         comply with the eligibility criteria described in ¶3.6 (additional information in

65   This method seeks to measure the benefits produced by a project based on the reflection of said benefits in
     the price of real estate located in its area of influence. To calculate this, a hedonic equation is used, where
     the price of the good is expressed based on its attributes (characteristics of the property, distance to a green
     space, environmental quality of the environment, etc.).
66   Expected users of the new sports complex include 324 students from St. Peter’s School (almost 10%, 31
     students, present disabilities); and future users of the Independence Park include 910 students from La
     Inmaculada R.C. Primary School (15 present special needs).
67   (i) a Concept Proposal for Upgrading the Public Market of OW (Catalyst Solutions CG, 2022); (ii) an
     Investment and Organizational Development Plan for OW, and a Concept Proposal for Initial Interventions of
     the New River Development Strategy (Economia Urbana, 2023); Multisectoral Diagnosis (including urban
     footprint, vulnerability to natural risks, GHG inventory, tourism sector analysis) of Ambergris Caye (IDOM,
     2023; ATN/AC-19488-BL); (iii) Corozal Bay Heritage Plaza Feasibility, Social & Environmental Assessment
     Report (VIVIDARCH, 2018; ATN/MD-15572-BL); and (iv) Corozal Town Boardwalk Pre-Feasibility Study as
     part of the study “Improving Disaster and Climate Resilience in Sustainable Tourism, Corozal District”
     (Jacobs, 2018; ATN/MD-15572-BL).
68   Pre-Investment Studies for prioritized projects of the sample in OW and Corozal (Johnson, Carianne; 2023);
     and feasibility Study for the Integral Intervention in San Mateo Neighborhood (IDOM, 2023;
     ATN/AC-19488-BL).
                                                      - 18 -


         OEL#1). Additionally, other investment priorities have been pre-identified for
         potential funding, including an integral intervention in the vulnerable neighborhood
         of Marcus Canul in OW and subsequent development phases of the integral
         intervention in San Mateo, San Pedro. A new technical cooperation is under
         preparation to support the Government in the readiness of the projects (BL-T1168).

1.27     Socioeconomic Viability. During the preparation phase, an ex-ante cost-benefit
         socioeconomic evaluation was developed on the sample projects (see OEL#2).
         Analysis was based on comparing economic costs (capital, operation, and
         maintenance costs) and benefits with and without a project, considering a horizon
         of 20 years and a social discount rate of 12%. The mechanisms to quantify
         socioeconomic benefits were: (i) hedonic prices (all projects of the sample);
         (ii) time savings (San Mateo); and (iii) net income from the incremental sale of
         tourist services (Corozal and OW projects). All benefits and costs were valued at
         market prices from October 2023 and then transformed into economic costs by
         eliminating taxes. All projects presented positive net present values (NPV) and
         internal rates of return (IRR) superior to 12% (from 28.5% to 42.8%). The sensitive
         analysis showed that the socioeconomic viability of each project resisted a
         decrease of 30% in benefits due to appreciation (quantified through hedonics
         technique) and an increase of 30% in costs. Additionally, projects are
         socioeconomically viable considering just benefits quantified with the hedonics
         technique. Finally, the analysis of the consolidated flux of the sample projects
         showed a positive NPV and a 35.6% IRR. The sensitive analysis showed
         socioeconomic viability as well, even with an increase of 71.3% in investment costs
         and 32.5% in benefits decrease.

1.28     Compliance with Public Utilities Policy (GN-2716-6). The operation complies
         with the Bank’s Public Utilities Policy (PUP; OEL#6), improving the sustainability
         and efficiency of service providers through the development of financially
         sustainable schemes that combine cost-efficiency and the most appropriate
         technological solutions to meet the population’s need to access public services.
         The Program expects to contribute to add 206 new sewage customers in San
         Pedro 69 to the profitable BWS 70, representing just 0.27% of the total customers of
         the firm. By law, BWS’ tariffs may be set at a level that ensures a 12% rate of
         return. A statutory regulator, the Public Utilities Commission (PUC), must approve
         tariffs calculated on a cost-plus basis, but also taking customer affordability into
         consideration. 71

1.29     Institutional viability. Between September and October of 2023. an institutional
         capacity assessment (ICAP) of the Central Executing Unit (CEU) of the MED
         (MFEDI) was conducted. Methodologically, the evaluation was aided by interviews
         with the staff of the CEU and information from existing operational documents. The
         ICAP identified that strengths for the implementation of this program include: (i) the
         full-time availability of experienced personnel for project administration, financial

69   New connections will increase coverage from o% to 35% in San Mateo, and from 20% to 23% in San Pedro.
70   EBITDA margin was 38% in March 2022. In FY 2022/2021 the company presented a sound EBITDA (USD 9
     million) and net profit (USD 2.9 million). Financial projections indicates that BWS will generate enough cash
     flows to finance investment levels of USD 10 million/year, keeping its gearing at adequate levels (LT
     liabilities/Equity)
71   The existing water and sewer tariffs include: i) a minimum monthly charge for all customers, regardless of
     classification; ii) a minimum of 1.000 gallons at no additional cost included within that monthly fixed charge;
     and iii) eight usage charges based on metered water use above the minimum allowance. The minimum bill
     for consumption less than 1,000 US gallon is BZD8.72, approximately USD4.35/1,000 gallon.
                                            - 19 -


      management, procurement, environmental, social, occupational health and safety,
      and human resources; (ii) national integrated financial management system
      (Smart Stream) with satisfactory alignment with IDB financial management
      expectations; (iii) extensive experience among CEU staff in managing different
      sources of financing (principally IDB); and (iv) there is legislation and regulations
      in government for oversight of financial, human resources, and environmental,
      social and occupational health and safety matters. The ICAP also identified
      challenges for implementing this program, related to: (i) the growing project
      portfolio under CEU’s responsibility (ii) the lack of technical capabilities to
      implement infrastructure projects (CEU was conceived as a unit to provide fiduciary
      services); and (iii) lack of experience in implementing multi-works Programs.
      Consequently, ICAP recommended: (i) hiring extra resources for fiduciary,
      environmental, and social aspects; and (ii) strengthening CEU’s technical
      capabilities acquiring this service from other areas of the national government. In
      addition to ICAP recommendations, further measures were proposed to address
      these challenges: (i) to establish Technical Working Groups (TWG, please see
      3.1.); and (ii) to process a new technical cooperation to support readiness of
      projects.

                   II.     FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.    Financing instruments

2.1   Program Structuring. This operation is structured as a Multiple Works Program
      as it will finance groups of similar projects with the following characteristics: (i) they
      are physically similar but mutually independent; (ii) their feasibility does not depend
      on the execution of any particular number of projects; and (iii) their individual size
      does not merit direct Bank handling. A representative sample of specific projects
      prioritized by the municipalities was presented in ¶1.22. The remaining projects,
      which will be small, similar and mutually independent works not requiring Bank’s
      direct management, still need to be prioritized with the Government and local
      authorities and will comply with the eligibility criteria described in ¶3.6.

2.2   Program Cost. The program’s total cost is USD$12,500,000 (USD$10,000,000
      from Ordinary Capital and USD$2,500,000 from the IDB Grant Facility GRF). As
      mentioned in the description of Component I, per request of the Government of
      Belize, the technical cooperation “Support to the Sustainable and Inclusive Urban
      Development Program” (BL-T1168) is under design/processing with a budget of
      up to US$0.5 million. This additional funding will support the institutional
      strengthening component by financing pre-investment studies.
                                                     - 20 -


                        Table 4. Summary of estimated program costs (in US$ millions)

                       Component                              IDB    %          GRF       %         Total       %
      Component I. Institutional
      strengthening for sustainable                           0.55    4.4       0.15      1.2         0.7        5.6
      development

      Component II. Sustainable urban
                                                              8.45   67.6       2.35     18.8        10.8       86.4
      investments
      a. Interventions in prioritized urban
                                                              4.54   36.3       1.26     10.1         5.8       46.4
         areas*

      b. Interventions in vulnerable areas*                   3.91   31.3       1.09      8.7              5        40
      Project administration,
                                                                1        8        0            0           1     8.0
      management, and audit
      Total                                                    10    80.0        2.5     20.0        12.5      100.0
      * Costs by activity are indicative


2.3   Disbursements Schedule. The loan will be disbursed over 60 months. The
      execution period was determined based on the PEP and the institutional capacity
      of the EA (details in REL#1). Taking into consideration challenges in terms of
      implementation, and standard timelines for procurement processes and works
      implementations, the deadline established for the physical start of the works is
      4.5 years.

                               Table 5. Disbursement schedule (US$ million)

           Source             Year 1       Year 2       Year 3       Year 4       Year 5           Total        %
       BL-L1046 (OC)          1.280.53        4.26            3.52       1.15           0.52          10        80%
       BL-J0007 (GRF)            0.098        1.13            0.92       0.27          0.082         2.5        20%
       Total                       0.63       5.39            4.43       1.42           0.60        12.5        -
       %                            5.0       43.1            35,5       11.4            4.9       100%        100%



B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks

2.4   Following the Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework (MPAS), the
      Program has been classified as category “B” since negative environmental and
      social impacts are expected to be moderate in the short-term duration, which can
      be managed through specific management plans. According to the type of
      interventions, the negative environmental and social impacts are moderate during
      the period of execution of the works, and there are appropriate mitigation
      measures for the sector to manage the impacts and risks. The program’s social
      and environmental risk classification is substantial, mainly considering the
      potential risks of the works to be carried out on public roads and the presence of
      key biodiversity areas (KBA) and National Protected zones into the indirect area
      of project, and the limited environmental and social institutional capacity of the
      municipalities that will have a role in the environmental and social supervision of
      the works. The hazards present in the project area are hurricanes and tropical
                                                    - 21 -


          storms, flood damage, and extreme temperatures. According to the ESG
          Screening App, the natural hazards for this operation are moderate flooding,
          tsunamis, hurricanes, and rising sea levels. Based on the available information,
          the overall criticality and vulnerability of the infrastructure component of the project
          is classified as Moderate, following the criteria shown in the criticality chart for
          urban interventions and neighborhood improvement projects. According to the
          analysis of criticality and vulnerability to natural disasters, all projects are classified
          as having low vulnerability except for San Mateo, which was estimated to have a
          moderate level of vulnerability.

2.5       The ESPS conducted an Environmental and Social Assessment for the Sample
          Projects. During the construction phase, localized and temporary negative impacts
          are expected, such as (i) induction of erosive processes; (ii) alteration of soil
          characteristics; (iii) increase in particulate matter and noise levels; (iv) increase in
          road accidents; (v) solid waste; (vi) water contamination by hydrocarbons and
          other hazardous waste; (vii) discomfort due to the cut off of services and access;
          and (viii) exposure to disabling or fatal accidents due to unsafe acts or conditions.
          During the operation phase, negative impacts can be expected, such as (i) an
          increase in solid waste; (ii) water contamination by hydrocarbons and other
          hazardous waste; and (iii) exposure to disabling or fatal accidents due to unsafe
          acts or conditions. An Environmental and Social Management Plan was
          conducted, including the mitigation measures and management procedures to
          minimize the assessed impacts and risks. For future projects, the Environmental
          and Social Management Framework (ESMF) establishes the environmental and
          social eligibility and exclusion criteria and the guidelines for the
          socio-environmental management of the projects to be financed under the
          program.

2.6       The consultations were successfully carried out by the Municipalities and the CEU
          in February 2024 in compliance with the Stakeholders Engagement Plan. 72 The
          ESA, ESPM updated version and the consultation report were disclosed on April
          8, 2024.

C.        Fiduciary risk

2.7       Based on the institutional capacity analysis of the CEU, and the risk assessment
          of the fiduciary arrangements, the fiduciary capacity and systems are considered
          adequate. Nonetheless, considering that the CEU is responsible for implementing
          other projects, there is a risk of work overload if the existing staff assumes
          responsibility for doing the additional fiduciary tasks that this project brings, which
          could lead to a delay in implementation, particularly in the first year. This risk will
          be mitigated by strengthening the CEU with additional procurement and finance
          staff before the implementation. Additionally, there is a risk related to the local
          market’s capacity to implement the infrastructure works. If the local market cannot
          implement, on time, the infrastructure works envisioned under this and other public
          sector programs, then this could lead to non-responsiveness of the local market to
          the procurement processes or the inability of the selected contractors to deliver on

72    The events recorded a good attendance of stakeholders, and despite some concerns about the construction
      phase as pest control, waste management and preserving rain tress, no additional impacts or risks were
      identified as part of the feedback received. Participants supported the implementation of the projects,
      emphasizing the importance of creating green public spaces to boost tourism and economic development.
                                                        - 22 -


          time and quality the outputs expected, which could lead to overall project delays.
          To mitigate this risk, a market analysis is being conducted in collaboration with the
          Government to assess the capacity and availability of construction companies in
          the country. Additionally, a survey will be conducted among local construction
          companies to gauge their interest and availability to participate in procurement
          processes funded by the Government, helping to identify potential contractors and
          anticipate any capacity constraints. Finally, training sessions and local fairs are
          being organized in various regions to promote awareness of the infrastructure
          projects funded by the Bank and to provide capacity-building opportunities for
          potential suppliers, enabling them to participate effectively in procurement
          processes.

D.        Other risks and key issues

2.8       Execution risks are categorized as medium-high level, and their mitigation
          measures have been primarily identified in table 6.

                                       Table 6. Risks and mitigation measures
                Taxonomy                    Risk                 Level                   Measures
            1. Execution           If there are delays in     Medium      Since acquisition of private land is not
               Environment /       acquiring land 73,         - High      considered in the scope of the
               Legal               works could be                         Program, designs must include at
                                   delayed, or the scope                  least one technical alternative without
                                   of the projects                        requiring land acquisition. When the
                                   redefined, affecting                   procurement process for works starts,
                                   the project’s execution                the project scope must be narrowed to
                                   timeline.                              the alternative with public clearance
                                                                          for use from the relevant authority.
                                                                          Municipalities or CEU could acquire
                                                                          land consultant services to speed up
                                                                          processes.

            2. Execution           If shared street           Medium      Prepare and implement
               Environment /       projects are poorly        - High      communication and information plans/
               Social              communicated to the                    campaigns (additional to public
                                   community, resistance                  consultations) to appropriately
                                   could generate                         disseminate the scope of the works,
                                   distrust and animosity                 benefits, and schedule.
                                   among residents and
                                   shop owners.




73    Delays to obtain a printed land certificate tittle issued by the Ministry of Lands could take from two months to
      a year, since the price for the land is agreed.
                                               - 23 -


                               Table 6. Risks and mitigation measures
          Taxonomy                  Risk                Level                 Measures
       3. Executing         CEU has no               Medium     Strengthen CEU technical capacity
          Agency /          experience with the      - High     with (i) project manager and project
          Organizational-   implementation of                   engineer; (ii) TWG creation with the
          Human             infrastructure multi-               participation of municipalities and
          Resources-        works programs. If                  MRTCDLLG; (iii) MOUs between TWG
          internal          CEU is not well                     participants; (iv) coordination with
          processes         strengthened for                    other national ministries and utilities
                            implementation, or                  for design and implementation of
                            key personnel is not                works.
                            available, delays in
                            decision-making and                 Develop joint training sessions to
                            execution of output-                agree the operational manual before
                            related actions could               the Kickoff workshop of the operation.
                            occur.
                                                                Strengthen CEU’s additional
                                                                resources related to procurement,
                                                                financial management, and
                                                                environmental and social safeguards.
                                                                Competitive salaries and benefits
                                                                packages will be offered to attract and
                                                                retain personnel.

                                                                Strengthen the readiness of projects
                                                                by developing pre-investment studies
                                                                using non-reimbursable funds from
                                                                BL-T1168 and the support of the
                                                                Bank’s technical team.

       4. Executing         If TWGs can’t            Medium     To reach informal agreements of
          Agency /          coordinate activities    - High     collaboration between high authorities
          Organizational    with utilities and                  of the MED-MRTCDLLG-
                            ministries from the                 Municipalities, and other national
                            national government,                ministries-utilities
                            delays may occur.

       5. Execution         Because natural          Medium     Carry on resilient design and
          Environment /     disasters (flooding,     - High     construction techniques that account
          natural           hurricanes, and rising              for potential environmental risks.
          environment       sea levels) may occur
                            in the program sites,               Ensure that output cost estimates
                            the infrastructure                  reflect work delays and physical
                            would be exposed,                   impact on structures caused by natural
                            needing updating and                disasters.
                            revision to the scope
                                                                Collaborate with environmental
                            of work, resulting in
                                                                agencies and experts to understand
                            delays and cost
                                                                and mitigate the impact of rising sea
                            increases.
                                                                levels, flooding, and hurricanes.



                   III.     IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements

3.1   Execution Arrangements. The MFEDI will function as the Executing Agency and
      be responsible for the program. The CEU, a unit in the MED, which in turn is part
      of the MFEDI, will be the implementation unit. The CEU is responsible for five other
      IDB-financed loans in execution: 5353/OC-BL, 5647/OC-BL, 5582/OC-BL,
                                                      - 24 -


          5583/OC-BL and 5769/OC-BL. 74 As the implementation unit, the CEU will serve
          as the primary point of contact for stakeholders and will participate in the
          coordination with all the relevant line ministries, municipalities, and additional
          stakeholders as utilities. Guided by the results of the ICAP, the following staff will
          be hired or appointed for the administration of the project: (i) a program manager;
          (ii) a procurement officer; (iii) a finance officer; (iv) an environmental specialist;
          (v) a social Specialist; and (vi) a project engineer. The MFEDI will establish a
          Project Steering Committee (PSC) to provide strategic oversight to the project. The
          PSC will be comprised of high-level representatives of at least the following
          ministries: the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Economic Development and the
          Ministry of Local Government.

3.2       For each municipality, a Technical Working Group (TWG) will be created with
          members of the MED, the MRTCDLLG 75 and the corresponding municipality. This
          TWG, chaired by the MED and the MRTCDLLG, will be responsible for the
          technical guidance of the program in each town. Each of the groups will be made
          up of the following participants: (i) a representative from the municipality; (ii) a
          representative from the Ministry of Local Government of the MRTCDLLG (co-
          chair); and (iii) a project manager and a project engineer from the CEU (co-chair).
          TWG will be formalized through the signature of Memorandums of Understanding
          (MOU) between the MED, the MRTCDLLG, and each of the municipalities. TWG’s
          responsibilities and operational procedures will be described in these MOUs,
          following information in the Operations Manual (OEL#4). TWGs will decide the
          studies and projects to fund, validating final TORs, and intermediate and final
          outputs. Depending on the nature of the investment or studies to implement or
          develop, TWG may ask for technical advice or validation from utilities or
          preidentified ministries from the national government. 76 TWGs will provide
          technical guidance to the CEU to carry the procurement, financial, environmental,
          social, communication, and knowledge dissemination processes needed to
          implement the activities. The supervision of works will be outsourced to private
          firms. The project engineer of the TWG will oversight its work. The scheme for
          implementation is presented in the following figure.




74    Programs’ implementation started recently and progresses well, with satisfactory performance indicators (no
      significant risks of execution identified so far).
75    Through the Department of Local Government , which provides oversight, guidance, support, and capacity-
      building initiatives to various entities, including the Town Councils, while monitoring their strategic and
      operational activities on a day-to-day basis.
76    Preliminarily identified: Ministry of Infrastructure, Development & Housing; Ministry of Tourism & Diaspora
      Relations; Ministry of Sustainable Development, Climate Change & Disaster Risk Management; Ministry of
      Immigration; BTB.
                                          - 25 -


                                  Figure 2. Implementation Scheme




       Source: own elaboration.


3.3   Procurement. Procurement of goods, works, and services to be financed in full or
      in part with program resources will be carried out under the Policies for the
      Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the IDB (GN-2349-15). The
      selection and contracting of consulting services will follow the Policies for the
      Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB (GN-2350-15) or
      those in effect at the time of project execution. Annex III includes details on
      program procurement. If, during project execution, it is identified that the Executing
      Agency (EA) has developed sufficient capacity, the possibility of supervising
      procurement processes on an ex-post basis will be evaluated. The responsibility
      of the program’s sector specialist will be to revise the technical specifications and
      the terms of reference of the procurements during the preparation of selection
      processes. This technical review will be ex-ante and independent of the
      procurement review method.

3.4   Retroactive financing. It is anticipated that the project may finance retroactively
      under the loan, up to the amount of US$200,000 (1.6% of the program total), on
      contracting key personnel for the CEU (such as the project coordinator, project
      engineer, financial officer, and procurement officer) and operational expense
      related to early project activities. The foregoing provided all the requirements are
      substantially similar to those set out in the loan agreement requirements; said
      expenses must have been incurred on or after October 5, 2023 (approval date of
      the project profile), and under no circumstances shall expenditures incurred more
      than 18 months prior to the loan approval date be included.

3.5   Advanced procurement. Before the date of loan approval, the EA may start the
      procurement processes related to projects of the sample or studies to fund by
      Component I. The procurement procedures, including advertising, shall be by the
      Bank’s Core Procurement Principles for the eventual contracts to be eligible for
      Bank financing, and the Bank shall review the process used by the Borrower. The
      Borrower undertakes such advance contracting at its own risk, and any
      concurrence by the Bank with the procedures, documentation, or proposal for
                                           - 26 -


      award does not commit the Bank to grant a loan for the project in question. The
      contracts will be awarded only after the project is eligible (entry into force and all
      conditions before the first disbursement are met).

3.6   Eligibility Criteria. Together with the municipalities, the Bank and the Borrower
      will collaboratively determine: (i) the criteria the EA will use to select the projects,
      and (ii) the general specifications for each project. This will be reflected in the
      Program’s Operations Manual. The initial eligibility criteria for project selection are
      as follows: (i) is situated in vulnerable or prioritized areas; (ii) addresses the
      integration of migrants; (iii) improvement or construction of public spaces and
      municipal facilities; and (iv) improves the provision of urban services, such as
      potable water, adequate sewage disposal, drainage, public lighting, pavement,
      sidewalks, and bike lanes. Selected projects can’t be classified as category A
      under the environmental and social guidelines.

3.7   Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing:
      (i) EA has hired and/or appointed for the administration of the program at
      least the following key personnel: (a) a program manager, (b) a procurement
      officer, (c) a finance Officer, (d) an environmental and social specialist, and
      (e) a project engineer; (ii) EA has approved and put into effect the OM, under
      the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank, which must
      include, among other elements, the environmental and social requirements;
      and (iii) A PSC has been established with high level representatives from at
      least the following entities: the Ministry of Finance, the MED, and the Ministry
      of Local Government.

3.8   Special Contractual Clauses of execution. (i) The borrower, or the EA, agrees
      to obtain, before the award of the corresponding contract for each of the works of
      the project, the legal possession of the properties where the respective work will
      be built, the easements or other rights necessary for its construction and use, as
      well as the rights over the waters required for the work in question. (ii) Prior to start
      works in a specific Town, TWG must be formally created through MOUs, previously
      agreed with the Bank, signed by the municipality, the MED and the MRTCDLLG,
      and previously agreed with the Bank, detailing responsibilities for the
      implementation and sustainability of the Corresponding investments. For other
      special contractual clauses, see Annex B of the Environmental and Social Review
      Summary (ESRS).

B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results

3.9   Monitoring. The expected results, their baselines, goals, and means of verification
      are presented in the Results Matrix (Annex II). As base information for monitoring,
      the EA, through the CEU, must present the following reports to the Bank:
      (i) Semiannual Progress Report within 60 days following the end of each semester,
      including a chapter on the representative project sample and onsite supervision;
      (ii) Annual Operating Plan, with the update of the physical and financial goals for
      the rest of the execution period; and (iii) an update of the Procurement Plan.
      Likewise, the IDB, through the project team, will conduct inspection visits to
      monitor program activities and support administration missions to analyze the
      program’s progress and address specific issues identified. A periodic update of the
      Risk Mitigation Matrix and RM will supplement this. Resources for monitoring and
      evaluation are included as part of the program administration. The required
                                           - 27 -


       financial reports will be the financial execution plan and the audited financial
       statements.

3.10   Evaluation. The evaluation of the impacts and results have been defined based
       on the indicators proposed in the results matrix, which includes the indicators with
       their respective baselines and goals. For both the impact and result indicators,
       reflective evaluations (“before and after”) will be applied. A midterm evaluation will
       be carried out in Project Completion Report (PCR) format once 50% of the
       disbursement period has been met, or 50% of the loan resources have been
       disbursed (whichever occurs first). Once the operation has been executed, a final
       evaluation of the program results, including operational/process aspects, will follow
       principles and guidelines for preparing the IDB PCR. An ex-post cost-benefit
       analysis will follow the same methodology applied in the socioeconomic analysis.
       The evaluation work will be carried out with support from external consulting
       services under terms of reference agreed upon with the bank. Resources for the
       evaluations have been budgeted. The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (REL#2)
       provides details on the monitoring and evaluating program outcomes.
                                                                                                                                                                      Annex I - BL-L1046 / BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 1




                                                                          Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                    Summary       BL-L1046 / BL-J0007
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Institutional Strategy Alignment


                                                                                                 -Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action
                                                                                                 -Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups
                                                                                                 -Institutional capacity, rule of law, citizen security
 Operational Focus Areas                                                                         -Social protection and human capital development
                                                                                                 -Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure
                                                                                                 -Productive development and innovation through the private sector




 [Space-Holder: Impact framework indicators]

2. Country Development Objectives


                                                                                                                         Supporting the reactivation of key economic sectors
   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                      GN-3086          through the continued provision of services, improving their
                                                                                                                         resilience to natural hazards and climate change.



                                                                                                                         The intervention is included in the 2024 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                       GN-3207
                                                                                                                         Program.



   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                             Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                  8.2
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                               2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                             3.2
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                          2.6
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                             10.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                      1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                    3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                          2.5
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                            2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                 1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                             9.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                           4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                 5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                   Medium Low
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                         Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting, External
                                                                                                                         Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                  Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)             Yes
                                                                                                                         Procurement: Information System, Contracting Individual
                                                                                                                         Consultant.


                                                                                Non-Fiduciary


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

                                                                                                                                                - 3566/OC-BL
                                                                                                                                   - ATN/MD-15572-BL and ATN/OC-15573-BL
Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                           Yes                     - ATN/AC-19488-BL and ATN/OC-19487-BL
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project
                                                                                                                                             - ATN/OC-19137-BL
                                                                                                                                                  - BL-T1168


Evaluability Assessment Note: The overall objective of the project is to contribute to the sustainable urban development of the municipalities of northern Belize. The specific
objectives are: (i) to improve access to selected urban services; (ii) to support local economic growth; and (iii) to facilitate the social and economic integration of vulnerable
populations, such as migrants and women.

The project has a diagnosis for the three specific objectives. The Results Matrix still has some shortcomings. The indicator associated with the overall objective included in the
Results Matrix and 15 (83.3%) outcome indicators are not yet SMART. 14 (77.8%) indicators do not yet have clear means of verification. 9 (50%) indicators do not yet have
established baseline values. The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan indicates that the baseline value of the indicator related to Specific Objective 1 will be established during the
start-up workshop. It is not indicated when the baseline values of the eight indicators associated with Specific Objective 3 will be established.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out conducting a cost-benefit analysis. The estimated benefits included: (i) the real estate valuation of properties in the
respective areas of influence of each project; (ii) time savings (project in San Mateo); and (iii) net income from the incremental sale of tourism services (projects in Corozal and
Orange Walk). Discount rates of 12% and conservative assumptions were used. The net present value of the aggregate analysis is USD5,732,183, and the IRR is 35.6%. The
sensitivity analysis shows that the benefits would have to be 32.5% lower, and the costs would have to increase by 71.3% for the program not to be economically viable.

The project includes a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan in accordance with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured by an
evaluation using a before-and-after analysis (without attribution). In addition, the ex-post efficiency of the project will be evaluated with an updated cost-benefit analysis relying
on the same methodology used for the ex-ante study.
                                                                                                                                  Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                                   Page 1 of 10

                                                                          Results Matrix
               The overarching goal is to contribute to the sustainable urban development of municipalities of northern Belize. The specific objectives are:
Project
               (i) to improve access to selected urban services; (ii) to support local economic growth; and (iii) to facilitate the social and economic integration
Objective
               of vulnerable populations, such as migrant population and women.


                                                               General Development Objective

                                                                             Expected year
                                   Unit of         Baseline      Baseline
          Indicators                                                               for             Target                      Means of verification
                                 measurement        value          year
                                                                              achievement

General development objective. Contribute to the sustainable urban development of municipalities of northern Belize.
Average market value of               US$           65,000         2023           2028             75,530        Socio-economic ex-post evaluation. Data to collect
properties located in the area                                                                                   using available sources on internet and local real
of influence of interventions                                                                                    states firms/agents.
                                                                                                                         Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                          Page 2 of 10

                                                              Specific Development Objectives

                       Unit of            Baseline   Baseline                                                     End of
     Indicators                                                   Year 1    Year 2   Year 3     Year 4   Year 5                Means of verification
                       measurement         value       year                                                       Project
Specific development objective 1. Improve access to selected urban services.
1.1.Households           Number of           0         2023                            178                         206      Semi-annual progress
receiving new            households                                                                                         reports
services of sewage                                                                                                          Intermediate and final
from BWS                                                                                                                    evaluations surveys

                                                                                                                            BWS clients data

1.2. Increase in       % of increase in     TBD        2024                            10                           20      Semi-annual progress
monthly average of         visitors                                                                                         reports
people visiting                                                                                                             Intermediate and final
new/enhanced                                                                                                                evaluations reports
public spaces with                                                                                                          Data based on information
universal                                                                                                                   provided by Municipalities
accessibility design                                                                                                        (electronic counting
                                                                                                                            devices*)
1.3. Monthly             Number of         66,434     2023                           78,392                       78,392    Semi-annual progress
average of people        pedestrians                                                                                        reports
using new/enhanced        (monthly                                                                                          Intermediate and final
sidewalks with            average)                                                                                          evaluations reports
universal
accessibility design
                                                                                                                            Data based on information
                                                                                                                            provided by Municipalities
                                                                                                                            (electronic counting
                                                                                                                            devices*)
1.4. Monthly             Number of         24,771     2023          0          0     26,629       0               28,487    Semi-annual progress
average of bicycle       bicycle trips                                                                                      reports
trips using                (monthly
new/enhanced bike         average)
lanes                                                                                                                       Intermediate and final
                                                                                                                            evaluations reports


                                                                                                                            Data based on information
                                                                                                                            provided by Municipalities
                                                                                                                            (electronic counting
                                                                                                                            devices*)
                                                                                                                       Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 10

                         Unit of            Baseline   Baseline                                                End of
     Indicators                                                   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                 Means of verification
                         measurement         value       year                                                  Project
1.5. Number of times       Number of           0        2023        0        5        5        5        5        20       Semi-annual progress
that digital tools and       citations                                                                                    reports
studies are cited as                                                                                                      Intermediate and final
sources of new                                                                                                            evaluations reports
documents or                                                                                                              based on existing
products (national or                                                                                                     documents or products
municipal)
Specific development objective 2. Support local economic growth.
2.1. Percentage of       % of tourists in     4.33      2019                         4.55                       4.85      Semi-annual progress
estimated tourist          OW and                                                                                         reports
visits to destinations   Corozal / total                                                                                  Intermediate and final
Orange Walk and             tourists                                                                                      evaluations reports
Corozal, compared                                                                                                         Data based on BTB Tourism
to the total for the                                                                                                      Performance Dashboard
Country

2.2. Increase in the     Number of new         0         2023                         5                          10       Semi-annual progress
quantity of new               small                                                                                       reports
small                    businesses/sho                                                                                   Intermediate and final
businesses/shops in            ps                                                                                         evaluations reports
the area of influence                                                                                                     Data based on information
of the interventions                                                                                                      provided by Municipalities
                                                                                                                          and available in internet
                                                                                                                           Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 10

                        Unit of          Baseline   Baseline                                                          End of
     Indicators                                                 Year 1     Year 2      Year 3    Year 4    Year 5                  Means of verification
                        measurement       value       year                                                            Project
2.3. Beneficiaries of         BZD          BZD        2024                             3,150                           3,300    Semi-annual reports
public vendors’                           3,000                                                                                 Intermediate and final
facilities monthly                                                                                                              evaluations reports
average income
                                                                                                                                Data based in surveys
                                                                                                                                collected from municipalities
                                                                                                                                at least 3 times (before,
                                                                                                                                during and at the end).
                                                                                                                                Questionnaire previously
                                                                                                                                agreed with the Bank.
2.4. Migrants                BZD          BZD         2024                              3,150                          3,300    Semi-annual reports
beneficiaries of                          3,000                                                                                 Intermediate and final
public vendors’                                                                                                                 evaluations reports
facilities monthly
average income
                                                                                                                                Data based in surveys
                                                                                                                                collected from municipalities
                                                                                                                                at least 3 times (before,
                                                                                                                                during and at the end).
                                                                                                                                Questionnaire previously
                                                                                                                                agreed with the Bank.
2.5. Women                   BZD          BZD         2024                             3,150                           3,300    Semi-annual reports
beneficiaries of                          3,000                                                                                 Intermediate and final
public vendors’                                                                                                                 evaluations reports
facilities monthly
average income
                                                                                                                                Data based in surveys
                                                                                                                                collected from municipalities
                                                                                                                                at least 3 times (before,
                                                                                                                                during and at the end).
                                                                                                                                Questionnaire previously
                                                                                                                                agreed with the Bank.

Specific development objective 3. Facilitate the social and economic integration of vulnerable populations, such as migrant population and women.

3.1. Local               % increase in     N/A        2023                            5%                                19%     Semi-annual reports
beneficiaries of        average income                                                                                          Intermediate and final
training/skills                                                                                                                 evaluations reports
improvement
programs increase
average income                                                                                                                  Data based in surveys
                                                                                                                                collected from municipalities
                                                                                                               Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 10

                      Unit of          Baseline   Baseline                                                End of
    Indicators                                               Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                Means of verification
                      measurement       value       year                                                  Project
                                                                                                                    at least 3 times (before,
                                                                                                                    during and at the end).
                                                                                                                    Questionnaire previously
                                                                                                                    agreed with the Bank.
3.2. Local women       % increase in     N/A        2023                       5%                          19%      Semi-annual reports
beneficiaries of      average income                                                                                Intermediate and final
training/skills                                                                                                     evaluations reports
improvement
programs increase
average income                                                                                                      Data based in surveys
                                                                                                                    collected from municipalities
                                                                                                                    at least 3 times (before,
                                                                                                                    during and at the end).
                                                                                                                    Questionnaire previously
                                                                                                                    agreed with the Bank.
3.3. Migrant          % increase in      N/A       2023                         5%                         19%      Semi-annual reports
beneficiaries of      average income                                                                                Intermediate and final
training/skills                                                                                                     evaluations reports
improvement                                                                                                         Data based in surveys
programs increase                                                                                                   collected from municipalities
average income                                                                                                      at least 3 times (before,
                                                                                                                    during and at the end).
                                                                                                                    Questionnaire previously
                                                                                                                    agreed with the Bank.
3.4. Women migrant    % increase in      N/A       2023                         5%                         19%      Semi-annual reports
beneficiaries of      average income                                                                                Intermediate and final
training/skills                                                                                                     evaluations reports
improvement                                                                                                         Data based in surveys
programs increase                                                                                                   collected from municipalities
average income                                                                                                      at least 3 times (before,
                                                                                                                    during and at the end).
                                                                                                                    Questionnaire previously
                                                                                                                    agreed with the Bank.
3.5. New/improved       % of stands      N/A       2023                         70%                        90%      Semi-annual progress
stands been used by    been used by                                                                                 reports
vendors                  vendors                                                                                    Intermediate and final
                                                                                                                    evaluations reports
                                                                                                                    Data based on information
                                                                                                                    provided by Municipalities
                                                                                                                                      Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 10

                        Unit of             Baseline      Baseline                                                           End of
     Indicators                                                          Year 1       Year 2     Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                   Means of verification
                        measurement          value          year                                                             Project
3.6. New/improved         % of stands         N/A          2023                                   60%                         85%        Semi-annual progress
stands been used by      been used by                                                                                        women       reports
women vendors           women vendors                                                                                                    Intermediate and final
                                                                                                                                         evaluations reports
                                                                                                                                         Data based on information
                                                                                                                                         provided by Municipalities
3.7. Migrant Vendors      % of stands          N/A          2023                                  35%                          45%       Semi-annual progress
using new/improved       been used by                                                                                                    reports
stands                  migrant vendors                                                                                                  Intermediate and final
                                                                                                                                         evaluations reports
                                                                                                                                         Data based on information
                                                                                                                                         provided by Municipalities
3.8. Migrant women         % of stands         N/A          2023                                  30%                          40%       Semi-annual progress
Vendors using             been used by                                                                                                   reports
new/improved             migrant women                                                                                                   Intermediate and final
stands                      vendors                                                                                                      evaluations reports
                                                                                                                                         Data based on information
                                                                                                                                         provided by Municipalities
(*) As an eligible expense, it is suggested to acquire and install electronic counting devices




                                                                                  Outputs

                           Unit of           Baseline     Baseline      Year        Year         Year     Year     Year     End of
Indicators                                                                                                          5                       Means of verification
                         measurement          value         year         1           2            3        4                Project

Component 1. Institutional Strengthening for Sustainable Development.
1.1. Sectoral,             Number of             0          2023         0           2            1         0       0         3          Contracts awarded for
coastal management           plans                                                                                                       studies and plans
or sustainable                                                                                                                           Semi-annual progress
zoning plans with                                                                                                                        reports
climate change and                                                                                                                       Final supervision report
gender
considerations
elaborated (critical
product)
                                                                                                                Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 10


                                                                       Outputs

                           Unit of        Baseline   Baseline   Year   Year      Year   Year   Year   End of
Indicators                                                                                      5                     Means of verification
                         measurement       value       year      1      2         3      4            Project
1.2. Institutional         Number of         0        2023       0       1        2      0      0       3          Semi-annual reports
strengthening plans          plans                                                                                 including PMR, midterm and
elaborated and                                                                                                     final evaluations
partially
implemented
1.3. Public-private        Number of         0         2023      0       1        0      0      0       1          Semi-annual reports
partnership strategy       strategies                                                                              including PMR, midterm and
for the sustainable                                                                                                final evaluations
development of the
New River in Orange
Walk Town (critical
product)

1.4. National and           Number of        0         2023      0       5        0      0      0       5          Consultancy reports
local public               institutions
institutions with                                                                                                  Installation records/ platform
digital tools for                                                                                                  account /registration details
sustainable
development
installed
1.5. National and          Number of         0         2023      0      10        0      0      0       10         Consultancy reports
local public               personnel
institutions                                                                                                       Records of attendance
personnel trained
with digital tools for
sustainable                                                                                                        Certificates of accomplish-
development                                                                                                        ment
1.6 Migrant                Number of         0        2023       0      20       20      0      0       40         Training Facilitator reports
populations trained      migrant people
in ESL,
disaggregated by
gender
                                                                                                                     Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                      Page 8 of 10


                                                                            Outputs

                              Unit of          Baseline   Baseline   Year   Year      Year   Year   Year   End of
Indicators                                                                                           5                     Means of verification
                            measurement         value       year      1      2         3      4            Project
1.7 Migrant                  Number of            0        2023       0      20       20     20      0       60         Training Facilitator reports
population trained in      migrant people
digital tools, financial
education and/or
other skills,
disaggregated by
gender
1.8 Local population       Number of local        0        2023       0      20       20     20      0       60         Training Facilitator reports
trained in digital            people
tools, financial
education and/or
other skills
disaggregated by
gender
1.9 Information                                   0        2023       0       1        0      0      0       1          Contract awarded to
campaigns related to          Number of                                                                                 communication firm
migrants’ support             campaigns                                                                                 Attendance lists, results
designed and                                                                                                            reports
implemented                                                                                                             Material distributed
                                                                                                                        Users/ followers on social
                                                                                                                        media
Component 2: Sustainable urban investments.

 2.1. Public facilities    Number of              0        2023       0       1        2      0      0       3          Post-work certificates paid.
built /upgraded            public facilities
incorporating design                                                                                                    Semi-annual progress
criteria for universal                                                                                                  reports
accessibility
(critical product)
                                                                                                                        Final supervision report


2.2. Public spaces,        Acres of public        0        2023       0      1.05     2.2     0     0.5     3.75        Semi-annual progress
including green               spaces                                                                                    reports
areas, built                                                                                                            Intermediate and final
/upgraded                                                                                                               supervision report
incorporating design
criteria for universal
                                                                                                                                    Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                                     Page 9 of 10


                                                                         Outputs

                            Unit of        Baseline   Baseline   Year     Year          Year          Year       Year     End of
Indicators                                                                                                        5                       Means of verification
                          measurement       value       year      1        2             3             4                  Project
accessibility (critical
product)



2.3. Sidewalks and            Feet of         0        2023       0     3,707.54      14,272.36         0        5,248   23,441.15     Semi-annual progress
or boardwalks             sidewalks and                                                                                                reports
built/upgraded              boardwalks
incorporating design                                                                                                                   Intermediate and final
criteria for universal                                                                                                                 supervision report
accessibility (critical
product)
2.4 Segregated bike        Feet of bike       0        2023       0         0         1,115.54          0         0      1,115.54 ft   Semi-annual progress
lanes built                   lines                                                                                                    reports

                                                                                                                                       Intermediate and final
                                                                                                                                       supervision report
2.5. Cyclist and            Number of         0        2023       0         0             1             0         0          1         Semi-annual progress
pedestrian bridge            bridges                                                                                                   reports
built incorporating
design criteria for                                                                                                                    Intermediate and final
universal                                                                                                                              supervision report
accessibility
2.6 Lightweight             Number of         0        2023       0         6             8             0         0          14        Semi-annual progress
stands for vendors           stands                                                                                                    reports

                                                                                                                                       Intermediate and final
                                                                                                                                       supervision report
2.7 Sewage system         Feet of sewage      0        2023       0         0         5,281.41 ft       0         0      5,281.41 ft   Post-work certificates paid
network extension            network
                                                                                                                                       Semi-annual progress
                                                                                                                                       reports

                                                                                                                                       Final supervision report
2.8. Roads paved          Feet of roads       0        2023       0     2,362.36 ft   1,546.07 ft   2,624.8 ft     0     6,533.19 ft   Post-work certificates paid.
                             paved
                                                                                                                                    Annex II – BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                                                                     Page 10 of 10


                                                                         Outputs

                          Unit of          Baseline   Baseline   Year     Year          Year            Year     Year     End of
Indicators                                                                                                        5                        Means of verification
                        measurement         value       year      1        2             3               4                Project

                                                                                                                                        Semi-annual progress
                                                                                                                                        reports

                                                                                                                                        Final supervision report
2.9. Streets with       Feet of streets       0        2023       0     4,855.88 ft   5,216.79 ft   5,249.6 ft    0     15,322.27 ft    Semi-annual reports
drainage system         with drainage                                                                                                   including PMR, midterm and
built incorporating                                                                                                                     final evaluations
design criteria for
disaster
management and
climate change
resilience
2.10. Public lighting     Number of           0        2023       0         51           351        0             32        434         Semi-annual reports
units installed with     public lighting                                                                                                including PMR, midterm and
energy efficiency            units                                                                                                      final evaluations
technologies (i.e.
LED)
2.11. Trees planted     Number of trees      16        2023       0         50           499        0             80        629         Semi-annual reports
                           planted                                                                                                      including PMR, midterm and
                                                                                                                                        final evaluations +
                                                                                                                                        Photographs
                                                                                      Annex III - BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                         Page: 1 of 5



                                  Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements
  Country: Belize              Division: HUD            Operation No.: BL-L1046; BL-J0007                 Year: 2024

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment
Operation Name: Sustainable and Inclusive Urban Development Program
I. Fiduciary Context of Executing Agency
1. Use of country system in the operation:

    Budget              Reports                Information System            National Competitive Bidding (NCB)

    Treasury            Internal audit         Shopping                      Others

    Accounting          External Control       Individual Consultants        Others

2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

      Particularities of the fiduciary     The EA will be the MFEDI and, through its Central Executing Unit
      execution                            (CEU), will be responsible for fiduciary management of the project.
3. Fiduciary Capacity

 Fiduciary        The assessment of the executing agency's fiduciary capacity is considered adequate, based
 Capacity of      on the ICAP and risk assessment conducted. The EA has a solid track-record implementing
 the EA           and providing fiduciary oversight to externally financed projects. Furthermore, most of the
                  fiduciary risks that were identified were qualified as low except for the one noted below.
                  Noteworthy is the fact that the results of the assessment of public financial management
                  systems in Belize conducted over the period March to May 2021 using the Bank's Guide-FMS
                  (IDB’s tool to determine the level of development and use of public financial management
                  systems) indicates a low level of development the national fiduciary systems. Considering that
                  the internal control systems and documentation of procedures within Government are generally
                  weak, the fiduciary procedures and internal controls necessary to reasonably ensure proper
                  fiduciary management of the project resources are documented in the operations manual of
                  the CEU.

4. Fiduciary risks and risk response

 Risk          Risk                                                     Risk level     Risk response
 Taxonomy
 Human         Considering that the CEU is responsible for              Medium-        The risk will be mitigated by
 Resources     implementing a large and growing portfolio, there        High           hiring additional or appointing
               is a risk of work overload should the existing staff                    additional fiduciary staff
               assume the responsibility of carrying out all the                       (finance       officer     and
               fiduciary tasks for the project, which could lead to                    procurement officer) as part
               overall execution delays and in particular the first-                   of the conditions prior to first
               year goals.                                                             disbursement.
 Local         If the local market does not have the capacity to        Medium         A market analysis is being
 market        implement, in a timely manner, the infrastructure                       conducted in collaboration
 capacity      works envisioned under this and other public                            with the Government to
               sector programs, then this could lead to non-                           assess the capacity and
               responsiveness of the local market to the                               availability of construction
               procurement processes or inability of the selected                      companies in the country.
               contractors to deliver on time and quality the                          Additionally, a survey will be
               outputs expected, which could lead to overall                           conducted      among    local
               project delays.                                                         construction companies to
                                                                                       gauge their interest and
                                                                                     Annex III - BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                        Page: 2 of 5



                                                                                      availability to participate in
                                                                                      procurement          processes
                                                                                      funded by the Government,
                                                                                      helping to identify potential
                                                                                      contractors and anticipate
                                                                                      any capacity constraints.
                                                                                      Finally, training sessions and
                                                                                      local     fairs    are     being
                                                                                      organized in various regions
                                                                                      to promote awareness of the
                                                                                      infrastructure projects funded
                                                                                      by the Bank and to provide
                                                                                      capacity-building
                                                                                      opportunities for potential
                                                                                      suppliers, enabling them to
                                                                                      participate     effectively    in
                                                                                      procurement processes.

5. Policies and Guides applicable to operation: The procurement processes financed in full or in part by Bank
resources will be conducted in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed
by the IDB (GN-2349-15) and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB
(GN-2350-15), or those in effect at the time of project execution.
6. Exceptions to Policies and Rules: none
II. Aspects to be considered in the Special Conditions of the Loan Agreement

 The fiduciary-related conditions precedent to first disbursement are hiring or appointment of (i) financial
 specialist and (ii) procurement specialist.
 Exchange Rate: For purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the Parties agree that the applicable
 exchange rate shall be that indicated in paragraph (b)(ii) of said Article. Accordingly, the agreed exchange rate
 shall be the exchange rate on the effective date on/in which the Borrower, the Executing Agency, or any other
 person or legal entity in whom the power to incur expenditures has been vested makes the related payment to
 the contractor, the supplier, or beneficiary.
 Type of Audit: Throughout the loan disbursement period, the EA will submit to the Bank annual audited financial
 statements within 120 days after the close of the fiscal year, March 31st. The audit will be conducted by a
 Bank-eligible independent audit firm. The audit’s scope and related considerations will be governed by the
 Financial Management Guidelines (document OP-273-12) and the Guide for Financial Reports and
 Management of External Audit. Audit costs will be financed with project resources.
 Other financial reports: Within 60 days after the end of each semester, an audited financial execution report
 for the period will be submitted as part of the semi-annual progress report.

III. Agreements and Requirements for Procurement Execution

      Bidding         For procurement of Works, Goods and Services Different of Consulting executed in
      Documents       accordance with the Procurement Policies (document GN-2349-15), subject to ICB, the
                      Bank's Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) or those agreed between EA and the Bank
                      will be used for the particular procurement. Likewise, the selection and contracting of
                      Consulting Services will be carried out in accordance with the Policies for the Selection
                      and Contracting of Consultants (document GN-2350-15) and the Standard Request for
                      Proposals (SRP) issued by the Bank or agreed between the EA and the Bank will be used
                      for the particular selection. The revision of the technical specifications, as well as the terms
                      of reference of the procurements during the preparation of selection processes, is the
                      responsibility of the Sector Specialist of the Project. This technical review can be ex-ante
                      and is independent of the procurement review method.
      Recurrent       The recurrent expenses required to put the Project into operation approved by the Project
      Expenses        Team Leader, which are financed, will be made following the executing agency’s
                      administrative procedures. Such procedures will be reviewed and accepted by the Bank,
                                                                                     Annex III - BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                        Page: 3 of 5



                      provided that they do not violate the principles of value for money, economy, efficiency,
                      equality, transparency and integrity.
      Advanced        It is anticipated that the project may finance retroactively under the loan, up to the amount
      Contracting     of US$200,000 (1.6% of the program total), on contracting key personnel for the CEU
      Retroactive     (such as the project coordinator, project engineer, financial officer and procurement
      financing       officer) and operational expense related to early project activities. The foregoing, provided
                      all the requirements are substantially similar to those set out in the loan agreement
                      requirements; said expenses must have been incurred on or after 05-October-23 (approval
                      date of the project profile), and under no circumstances shall expenditures incurred more
                      than 18 months prior to the loan approval date be included. It has also been identified, that
                      before the date of loan approval, the EA may start the procurement processes related to
                      projects of the sample or studies to fund by Component I. The procurement procedures,
                      including advertising, shall be by the Bank’s Core Procurement Principles for the eventual
                      contracts to be eligible for Bank financing, and the Bank shall review the process used by
                      the Borrower. The Borrower undertakes such advance contracting at its own risk, and any
                      concurrence by the Bank with the procedures, documentation, or proposal for award does
                      not commit the Bank to grant a loan for the project in question. The contracts will be
                      awarded only after the project is eligible (entry into force and all conditions before the first
                      disbursement are met). Therefore, it is not anticipated that retroactive financing will be
                      required for these activities.
                      See GN-2349-15, GN-2350-15 y l(a) Policy on Cost Recognition, Retroactive Financing
                      and Early Acquisition (GN-2259-1).
      Procurement     The method of supervision for the procurement processes executed by the EA shall be ex
      supervision     ante. If during project execution, it is identified that the EA has developed sufficient
                      capacity, the possibility of supervising procurement processes on an ex post basis will be
                      evaluated.
      Records and     The CEU will be responsible for maintaining proper records and supporting documentation
      Archives        of all procurement processes financed with the Project resources along with the relevant
                      payment supporting documents in accordance with the terms of the loan contract.

Main Acquisitions

 Description of the procurement                      Selection         New             Estimated        Estimated
                                                     Method            Procedures/     Date             Amount
                                                                       Tools                            000’US$
 Expected Works
 2.1 San Mateo Neighborhood integral                 ICB                               8/1/2024         2,422
 improvement (San Pedro Town)
 2.3 Design and construction of shared streets       ICB                               2/1/2025         2,162
 in Orange Walk Town (Main St., Church St.,
 Park St., Naranjal St.)
 2.5 Marcos Canul Neighborhood integral              ICB                               11/1/2025        1,886
 improvement (Orange Walk Town Town)
 2.6 Comprehensive public space upgrading,           ICB                               11/1/2024        1,877
 tourism facilities, and seawall protection in
 Corozal Town
 2.4 Design and construction of public facilities    ICB                               2/1/2025         1,694
 in Orange Walk Town

 2.2 Design and Construction of public spaces        NCB                               10/1/2024        759
 in Orange Walk Town
                                                                             Annex III - BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                Page: 4 of 5



 Consulting Firms
 4.1.3 International or national consultancy to   QCBS                          12/1/2024      180
 prepare a PP strategy
 4.1.1 International or national consultancy to   CQS                           3/1/2025       150
 prepare sectoral plans (coastal management,
 sustainable zoning plans or similar)
 Individuals
 Technical Coordinator                            Selection of                  8/1/2024       134
                                                  Individual
                                                  consultant
 Technical Specialist - Construction Engineer     Selection of                  8/1/2024       90
                                                  Individual
                                                  consultant
 Finance Officer                                  Selection of                  8/1/2024       84
                                                  Individual
                                                  consultant
 Procurement Officer                              Selection of                  8/1/2024       84
                                                  Individual
                                                  consultant

 Environmental Specialist                         Selection of                  8/1/2024       83
                                                  Individual
                                                  consultant
 Social Officer                                   Selection of                  8/1/2024       83
                                                  Individual
                                                  consultant

To access, procurement plan here.

IV. Agreements and Requirements for Financial Management

Programming and The budget preparation process begins each year with the budget call whereby the MFEDI
Budget          distributes a circular outlining the procedures, timelines, and forms to be completed by each
                ministry, department, and agency of the government. This process is applicable to external
                financing, including IDB resources and the resources of this project. The government has
                committed to allocate for each fiscal year of the project, adequate fiscal space to guarantee
                the timely execution of the project. As such, no bottlenecks regarding fiscal space and the
                budget process are anticipated for the project.
                                                                                  Annex III - BL-L1046; BL-J0007
                                                                                                     Page: 5 of 5



Treasury and         In accordance with the norms of Government of Belize, a bank account within the Central
Disbursement         Bank of Belize will be designated for the project to receive disbursements of project
Management           resources. Payments of project expenses in local currency will be made from the
                     Consolidated Revenue Fund account which will then be reimbursed with resources from the
                     designed account at the Central Bank of Belize for those local payments. For foreign
                     currency payments, the EA will request to the Central Bank of Belize to make those
                     payments directly from the designated project bank account.
                     In accordance with the disbursing norms for loan operations and the anticipated
                     commitments and obligations of the project, it is expected that the Advance of Funds
                     methodology will be mainly used for the project. The advance of funds, when used, will be
                     based on the true liquidity needs of the project for a period not exceeding six months.
                     Subsequent advances may be disbursed once 80% of the total accumulated balance
                     pending justification has been submitted and accepted by the Bank. The other disbursement
                     methods that may be used includes the Reimbursement of payments made and Direct
                     Payments to Supplier.
Accounting,          Accounting for the project will be facilitated through SmartStream which is the Government’s
information          national financial management system, in accordance with cash basis international public
systems and          sector accounting standards (cashIPSAS). Additionally, QuickBooks accounting software will
reporting            be used to complement SmartStream for financial reporting purposes.
Internal Control   The Internal control system of Government of Belize is weak and though an Internal Audit
and Internal Audit Unit was established at the MOF in September 2020, no internal audits have been
                   conducted so far. To ensure the internal control systems applicable to the project is
                   adequate, there will be a POM outlining the required systems of internal controls to ensure
                   the effective fiduciary management of the project.
External control:    Considering that the capacity constraints of the Office of the Auditor General, the
external financial   independent external audit of the program will be contracted and financed through the
audit and project    Program. A private audit firm considered eligible by the Bank will be procured to conduct the
reports              annual and final financial statement audits of the project. The EA will select and contract the
                     services of an eligible auditor, in accordance with the Terms of Reference agreed with the
                     Bank
Project Financial    The financial supervision plan of the project will focus on: (i) activities related to the
Supervision          implementation and follow-up of arrangements and systems being implemented for the
                     fiduciary management of the project; (ii) follow-up on the implementation status of risk
                     mitigating measures; and (iii) capacity building of EA personnel in the Bank’s procedures
                     and requirements. Disbursements will be reviewed on an ex-post basis.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/24



                                 Belize. Loan ____/OC-BL to Belize.
                                  Sustainable and Inclusive Urban
                                        Development Program



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

         That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with Belize, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing aimed at cooperating
in the execution of the Sustainable and Inclusive Urban Development Program. Such financing
will be for the amount of up to US$10,000,000, from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital,
and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions
of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                              (Adopted on ____ _____________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CID/EZIDB0000366-1672162870-23366
BL-L1046
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/24



             Belize. Nonreimbursable Investment Financing ______/GR-BL to Belize
                     Sustainable and Inclusive Urban Development Program



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility, hereinafter
referred to as the “Account”, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary with
Belize, as beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable investment financing to
cooperate in the execution of the Sustainable and Inclusive Urban Development Program. Such
nonreimbursable investment financing will be for an amount of up to US$2,500,000, which form
part of the Account, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special
Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary contained in document PR-____.



                               (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CID/EZIDB0000366-1672162870-23367
BL-J0007
