                                                                                         PUBLIC




                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                           URUGUAY




        SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION PROGRAM IN URUGUAY



                                           (UR-L1188)




                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Luis Felipe Vera (CSD/HUD),
Project Team Leader; José Francisco Demichelis (IFD/CMF) and Matias Lince Marino
(CSD/HUD), Alternate Project Team Leaders; Luis Gastón Rodríguez, María Jimena
Magrassi, Conrado Mussi, and Sofia Larralde (CSC/CUR); Guillermo Antonio Eschoyez
(LEG/SGO); Allizon Milicich, Elisa Caballero, and Willy Bendix (VPC/FMP); Federico Brusa
(CSD/CCS); Alexandre Bagolle (SCL/SPH); Graciana Rucci (SCL/LMK); Andrea Monje Silva
(SCL/GDI); María Victoria Laporte de Armas and Ruth Catacoli (VPS/ESG); Maria Victoria
del Campo (SPD/SDV); Diego Herrera Falla (IFD/CMF); Silvia Pérez, Gabriel Torres, Sofía
del Castillo, and Dianela Ávila (CSD/HUD).



Under the Access to Information Policy, this document is subject to public disclosure.
                                                    CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................................1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale.............................................1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost................................................................14
       C.    Key results indicators ...................................................................................15

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................17

       A.    Financing instruments ..................................................................................17
       B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks ....................................................19
       C.    Fiduciary risks...............................................................................................20
       D.    Other risks and key issues ...........................................................................20

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN..............................................................21

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements..................................................21
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ........................................24
                                              - ii -




                                            ANNEXES
Annex I      Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix

Annex II     Results Matrix

Annex III    Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                      REQUIRED LINKS
1.          Monitoring and evaluation plan

2.          Environmental and social review summary


                                          OPTIONAL LINKS
1.          Economic evaluation

2.          Gender and diversity analysis

3.          Climate change analysis

4.          Program Operating Regulations

5.          Theory of change
            Indicative analysis of output costs and allocation of amounts to disbursement-linked
6.
            indicators
7.          Gap analysis of the environmental and social management system

8.          Analysis of execution times

9.          Lessons learned from neighborhood improvement programs in the region

10.         Analysis of innovation opportunities

11.         Bibliography

12.         Evaluation of the executing agency’s procurement system

13.         Disbursement-linked indicator matrix - associated targets and amounts

14.         Environmental and social screening filter
                                         - iii -




                                    ABBREVIATIONS
AFA             Adjacent formal areas
CCLIP           Conditional credit line for investment projects
CONAFIN-AFISA   Corporación Nacional Financiera—Administradora de Fondos de Inversión S.A.
DINISU          Dirección Nacional de Integración Social y Urbana (National Office for Social
                and Urban Integration)
DLI             Disbursement-linked indicator
FISU            Fideicomiso Integración Social y Urbana (Social and Urban Integration Trust)
ICAP            Institutional Capacity Assessment Platform
LBR             Loan based on results
LGBTQ+          Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and other
MVOT            Ministry of Housing and Land Management
SCAP            Specific coordinated action project
SUIP            Social and urban integration project
                                                                PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                         URUGUAY
                                     SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION PROGRAM IN URUGUAY
                                                        (UR-L1188)
                                                           Financial Terms and Conditions
  Borrower:                                                                                          Flexible Financing Facility(a)
  Fideicomiso Integración Social y Urbana, through Corporación
  Nacional Financiera - Administradora de Fondos de Inversión                         Amortization period:                     12.5 years
  S.A. in its capacity as fiduciary body.
  Executing agency:                                                                   Disbursement period:                     4 years
  Ministry of Housing and Land Management, through the Dirección
  Nacional de Integración Social y Urbana (National Office for
  Social and Urban Integration).                                                      Grace period:                            5.5 years(b)
  Guarantor: Eastern Republic of Uruguay.
                                                                                      Interest rate:                           SOFR-based
               Source                      Amount (US$)                   %                                                    (c)
                                                                                      Credit fee:
                                                                                      Inspection and supervision               (c)
  IDB (Ordinary Capital):                     60 million                 100
                                                                                      fee:
                                                                                      Weighted average life:                   9 years
  Total:                                      60 million                 100
                                                                                      Approval currency:                       U.S. dollars
                                                                  Project at a Glance
  Project objective/description. The general objective is to help reduce social and urban integration barriers in Uruguay’s
  semiformal areas. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen DINISU’s management capacities; (ii) improve access to
  adequate housing in informal settlements; (iii) expand access to adequate housing solutions in semiformal areas; and
  (iv) promote the socioeconomic development of households in semiformal areas.
  Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan. The borrower, through the executing
  agency, will submit evidence of: (i) the approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations under the terms
  previously agreed with the Bank, which will include, inter alia, the environmental and social requirements set out in the
  environmental and social management system and the environmental and social action plan; and (ii) having contracted the
  independent verifier of program outcomes in accordance with the terms of reference previously agreed with the Bank
  (paragraph 3.8). See other special contractual conditions in Annex B of the Environmental and Social Review Summary.
  Exceptions to Bank policies: None.
                                                                  Strategic Alignment
  Objectives:(d)                                           O1 ☒                                O2 ☐                                  O3 ☐
                                                              OF2-G ☒
  Operational Focus Areas:(e)                   OF1 ☒                          OF3 ☒          OF4 ☒           OF5 ☐          OF6 ☐            OF7 ☐
                                                              OF2-D ☒
(a)   Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization
      schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe protection conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk
      management considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)   Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail
      any extension of the original weighted average life or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)   The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the
      Bank’s lending charges in accordance with applicable policies.
(d)   O1 (Reducing Poverty and Inequality); O2 (Addressing Climate Change); and O3 (Bolstering Sustainable Regional Growth).
(e)   OF1 (Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action); OF2-G (Gender equality); OF2-D (Inclusion of diverse population groups); OF3 (Institutional
      capacity, rule of law, and citizen security); OF4 (Social protection and human capital development); OF5 (Productive development and innovation
      through the private sector); OF6 (Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure); OF7 (Regional integration).
                           I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Background. Uruguay is one of the most urbanized countries in Latin America
          and the Caribbean, with 96% of its 3.4 million inhabitants living in urban areas.
          Economic vitality and social policies helped reduce poverty from 33% of the
          population in 2006 to 10.4% in the first half of 2020. 1[1] Income poverty [2] affects
                                                                           0




          88,000 households, totaling 353,000 people. Poverty is, in turn, associated with
          the precarious housing conditions of vulnerable households2 located mainly in
          informal settlements.[3] Informal settlements and their adjacent formal areas (AFA)
          experience similar problems related to poor access to services and urban
          infrastructure, creating semiformal areas in cities. 3 There are some neighborhoods
                                                                      1.




          in Montevideo where 1.2% of households live in poverty, while the rate for others
          in semiformal areas is 27.9%.[4, 5]
1.2       Despite Uruguay’s work to control the growth of informal settlements, between
          2011 and 2019 the number rose from 589 to 637 [6] and, with this, so did the
          number of makeshift dwellings in the country’s informal settlements. These new
          informal settlements took hold in less urbanized areas farther away from
          employment opportunities, [7] heightening the barriers to social and urban
          integration and the precariousness of the housing conditions of vulnerable
          households residing in informal settlements and their AFAs.4[8] These informal
          settlements have few urban basic services, [9] high quantitative and qualitative
          housing deficits, [10] and little access to social services, [11] thus affecting social
          and urban integration in areas such as education, work, and health care. They are
          also exposed to greater climate risks and land tenure insecurity,[12] and these are
          compounded by additional determinants of vulnerability related to gender and
          diversity.[13]
1.3       Since 1999, Uruguay has been working through the Ministry of Housing and Land
          Management (MVOT) on programs to improve the quality of life of vulnerable
          households in informal settlements [14] through neighborhood improvement and
          housing programs.5 The Bank has supported the MVOT through Conditional Credit
          Line for Investment Projects UR-X1003, which is currently executing
          Neighborhood Improvement Program UR-L1146 (4651/OC-UR). Due partly to this
          support, between 1999 and 2019, the following gains have been made: (i) the gaps
          in access to urban and social services were narrowed by intervening in
          127 informal   settlements    (more     than   15,000     households);    (ii) the
          comprehensiveness of their investments was ensured; (iii) the management
          capacity of the departmental governments for program physical and social

1    See complete list of bibliographic references identified by the number in square brackets [#] in optional
     link 11.
2    “Vulnerable households” are those exposed to sudden changes in living standard due to the precarity of
     their job or income conditions and who typically reside in semiformal areas.
3    These areas are linked to land tenure security, overcrowding, poor quality housing materials, lack of
     economic development opportunities, and precarious access to urban basic services, among other things.
4    Hereinafter the term “semiformal areas” encompasses irregular settlements and adjacent formal areas,
     because both experience common issues that the program will address.
5    The Bank is currently supporting the Government of Uruguay with CCLIP UR-X1003, under which the
     following programs have been financed: 1186/OC-UR; 3097/OC-UR; and 4651/OC-UR.
                                                  -2-



         investments was strengthened, as was coordination with public bodies in the
         country; and (iv) the MVOT’s policy-making was strengthened, seeking to prevent
         new informal settlements from being created. Progress was also made in gender
         equity through joint titling or titling in women’s names. However, extensive barriers
         to social and urban integration for vulnerable households in semiformal areas
         persist, which has prompted the Government of Uruguay to seek even more
         effective and scaled-up solutions.
1.4      Consolidation of existing programs. In 2020, the Government of Uruguay
         improved how it served semiformal areas by creating a new institutional
         framework—the Dirección Nacional de Integración Social y Urbana (National
         Office for Social and Urban Integration) (DINISU)—that consolidates programs for
         improving neighborhoods and providing housing solutions.[15] DINISU’s remit is
         to consolidate and coordinate the programs that address the various aspects of
         urban informal housing within the MVOT 6 under the Avanzar (Move Forward) Plan.
                                                          3




         That Plan consolidates all programs addressing semiformal areas under the
         direction of DINISU (hereinafter “the existing program”). As part of this new model,
         to scale up improvements to the existing program, the Fideicomiso Integración
         Social y Urbana (Social and Urban Integration Trust) (FISU)7 was set up in 2022,
         with Corporación Nacional—Administradora de Fondos de Inversión S.A.
         (CONAFIN-AFISA) as the fiduciary body in pursuit of more streamlined fiduciary
         and procurement execution. The country has also strengthened the trust to scale
         up its response. Uruguay is seeking to scale up the program through the FISU,
         which considerably increases the resources that the country has been allocating
         to social and urban integration (approximately US$13.5 million annually), given
         that it receives funding through the law that created it (repurposing of rural
         development funds) as well as a percentage of revenue from the tax on the sale
         of rural property (approximately US$40 million annually).[16]
1.5      MVOT [17] and Bank evaluations of the neighborhood improvement programs in
         execution identify four areas for improvement: (i) Management. Lack of integrated
         management systems for program design, procurement, implementation, and
         evaluation; (ii) Timing. The project cycle is slow to formalize informal settlements
         and generate housing solutions, with informal settlement growth outpacing
         formalization;[18, 19] (iii) Prevention. The existing program does not preventatively
         address the spontaneous growth of informal settlements since overcrowded
         vulnerable households in the AFAs look for housing solutions by expanding
         informal settlements; and (iv) Economic development. The existing program has
         not focused on boosting household incomes to break cycles of intergenerational
         poverty. Based on this, the Government of Uruguay has sought the Bank’s support
         to strengthen the design of a new intervention model that, by addressing these four
         areas for improvement, will enhance the existing program’s efficiency and
         effectiveness. It should be noted that this program has become public policy


6   The following programs fall under DINISU’s purview: Neighborhood Improvement Program, the National
    Rehousing Plan, and the Juntos (Together) Plan.
7   FISU received funds as established under Law 19.996, including resources from the reallocation of funds
    from the National Colonization Institute and a percentage of tax collected on the transfer of rural goods,
    which total approximately US$40 million per year. Article 238 of that law also authorizes FISU, with prior
    authorization from the Executive Branch, to take out loans from multilateral lending agencies of which
    Uruguay is a member.
                                                    -3-



         transcending different government administrations, ensuring the sustainability of
         the reforms the country is pursuing.
1.6      Problem addressed. Vulnerable households in Uruguay’s semiformal areas face
         barriers to social and urban integration.[20] Neighborhood improvement strategies
         and the delivery of housing solutions [21] have been partially effective, although
         they are progressing at a slower pace than necessary to reduce the number of
         vulnerable households in semiformal areas and lack strategies to prevent the
         creation of new informal settlements. These barriers continue to materialize in
         insufficient access to essential urban services in informal settlements and in the
         precariousness of vulnerable households’ housing, which influences their
         educational and job outlook for the future, limiting their economic and human
         development [22] and the sustainability of their social and urban integration.
1.7      Four determinants are identified for this problem, the first of which is cross-cutting
         since it leads to the existing program’s lack of capacity to address the other three
         (for more details on the determinants see optional link 5).
1.8      Determinant I. Project management and project cycle. The existing program
         has an intervention model that does not deliver with the effectiveness and speed
         needed to contain and reduce the number of vulnerable households in informal
         settlements. The slow speed is related to an inefficient project cycle stemming
         from: interagency communication challenges between actors and agencies
         involved in managing informal settlements; the need to improve participatory
         processes that accelerate execution and enhance sustainability; deficient use of
         technologies for physical and financial monitoring and evaluation of projects [23]
         and multidimensional and granular statistical information systems on the country’s
         informal settlements, resulting in limited, incomplete, and outdated information;
         and limited installed capacity in terms of trained human resources, who lack the
         necessary tools. This leads to delays, to inefficiencies in project design, execution,
         and monitoring, and to difficulties in achieving outcomes. For example, under loan
         4651/OC-UR the average number of years from initial census to the completion of
         works is 7.75 years, which is high compared to the region.

                        Table 1. Total years of execution of programs in the Southern Cone
                                           (similar sized neighborhoods)8

              Country              Uruguay                   Argentina                         Chile
              Program           Neighborhood              Neighborhood             Program for the Integration
                                 Improvement           Improvement Program                of Vulnerable
                                   Program                Third Individual              Neighborhoods
                                (3097/OC-UR)          Operation (3458/OC-AR)             (5313/OC-CH)

                Years                  8                        6.65                             4


1.9      Determinant II. Urban infrastructure and services. Access to decent housing
         and urban basic services in informal settlements is deficient.[24] Some of the chief
         barriers to integration are the lack of formal urban basic infrastructure (drinking
         water, sanitation and storm drains, adequate road networks, electricity supply,

8   The specific detail of the stages of the project cycle of the existing program in Uruguay and the transferable
    efficiencies of programs in Argentina and Chile can be found in Annex 5 of optional link 5.
                                          -4-



       public space, and street lighting), waste management, pollution, and flooding.
       Approximately 67% of informal settlements lack drinking water systems; 49% lack
       street lighting networks; and 42% have partial lighting. Electricity supply is uneven,
       with a predominance of illegal connections and, in critical cases, no grids at all.[25]
       In Montevideo—where more than 50% of informal settlements are concentrated—
       78.9% of households lack access to the formal sanitation network and 38.1% have
       an illegal electricity connection.[26] In informal settlements, 50% of the population
       is under 20 and 65% under 30, whereas these indicators drop to an average of
       28% and 43%, respectively, nationwide.[27] This difference is significant in terms
       of access to and use of urban and social services and the development of future
       generations. The environment into which a person is born, the neighborhood, and
       the conditions of material and social deprivation that characterize childhood and
       adolescence leave their mark on life trajectories. Furthermore, they jeopardize the
       country’s economic development and social welfare.[28]
1.10   Determinant III. Housing solutions and lack of prevention strategies.
       Difficulties exist in accessing adequate housing solutions in semiformal areas. The
       population in semiformal areas, especially those in informal settlements, are
       mainly vulnerable households with precarious and informal jobs, which prevents
       them from purchasing on the formal market or accessing conditions to improve
       makeshift housing. In informal settlements, housing is precarious: 32.5% of
       dwellings are built with inadequate materials;[29] 9.9% lack a bathroom; 30.4%
       have a bathroom but no flush toilet; and 8.3% have a shared bathroom. Only 18.6%
       have a kitchen with a sink and tap, while 6.1% share a kitchen with another
       household.[30] Sometimes these dwellings are at mitigable climate risk with
       flood-prone and polluted areas. The lack of adequate housing solutions precludes
       the development of social, cultural, and productive functions, thus limiting human
       development.[31] Paving within these areas has a direct impact on the removal of
       water pools, dust particles, and mud and also improves household life by enabling
       people to move smoothly.[32] The existing program has limited mechanisms to
       provide opportunities to access and improve the stock of housing solutions for
       vulnerable households. The stock of available housing has risen in recent years,
       but access to adequate housing remains a problem. In Montevideo, over the last
       11 years, more than 600 buildings have been built (more than 25,000 housing
       solutions), some of which are low-income housing, [33] but this has not succeeded
       in eradicating the housing deficit for vulnerable households, since housing
       production has not targeted them.[34] An exploratory study finds that there is a
       flow of families who, unable to stay in the AFAs, resolve their housing situation in
       informal settlements, [35] thereby evidencing the need to improve access to
       adequate housing solutions both in the informal settlements and in the AFAs, to
       alleviate the deficit and reduce the displacement of vulnerable households to
       informal settlements.
1.11   Determinant IV. Human development opportunities. Semiformal areas have
       limited access to social services and opportunities for economic and human
       development. Informal settlements reproduce intergenerational cycles of poverty
       and exacerbate urban inequality, hindering vulnerable households’ access to the
       city’s attributes and their ability to generate income. Overall, 60% of settlements
       are located more than 800 meters away from a preschool and primary school, [36]
       a pattern that is repeated with health infrastructure, early childhood care, and adult
       education centers, among others. For example, 11.8% of heads of households
                                         -5-



       living in informal settlements have completed secondary school, [37] which is
       worrying because level of education is the main determinant of job quality.[38]
       Furthermore, 29.3% of the working age population is unemployed and 21%
       inactive, [39] while the national unemployment rate is 8.6%.[40] In order to foster
       social mobility, progress must be made toward greater spatial integration, and the
       conditions in which children and young people develop must be strengthened. This
       means that accessibility to urban facilities that are essential for human capital
       accumulation must be improved for residents in the most disadvantaged
       neighborhoods. Studies suggest that poverty in childhood has immediate effects
       on education, health, employment opportunities, and the ability to lift the next
       generation out of poverty.[41] The consequences of child poverty are seen in
       physical and mental health, educational performance, and economic prospects in
       adulthood.[42, 43].
1.12   Gender considerations. Women’s labor force participation in Uruguay is 18%
       lower than men’s (56% vs. 74%), and women experience higher rates of informal
       work and unemployment.[44] This is partly due to the burden of care: women
       spend 16 hours per week on caregiving, compared to 7.4 for men.[45] The lack of
       integration of informal settlements (paragraph 1.11) leads to long distances to care
       sites and services, thus increasing the caregiving burden and reducing women’s
       time to generate income. Bringing care services closer and improving prospects
       for formal jobs in informal settlements can expand women’s labor force
       participation. In addition, self-employment, low income, and informal work are
       factors that limit access to housing credit for women, especially female heads of
       household (14% of all households in informal settlements have a woman living
       alone with her children as the head of household [46]). Supporting the titling of
       housing in women’s names (or jointly with partners) contributes to their economic
       empowerment.[47]
1.13   Diversity considerations. Afrodescendants who represent 11% of the population
       are overrepresented among vulnerable households (20% live below the poverty
       line—2.5 times the national poverty rate).[48] Housing conditions and quality are
       also worse, with 67% living in dwellings considered dangerous.[49] There is scant
       information on the living conditions, access to social services, and economic
       development opportunities of Afrodescendants and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
       transgender, queer, and other (LGBTQ+) people living in semiformal areas. In
       addition, about 16.9% of the population reports having some kind of disability.[50]
       People with severe disabilities often live in vulnerable households, and their
       dwellings are often of lower quality and/or overcrowded.[51] The exclusion of
       persons with disabilities also affects the other members of the household, who
       often have lower levels of employment and education.
1.14   Climate change considerations. An estimated 8,300 households live in areas at
       high risk and 22,300 at medium risk of flooding, [52] mostly in semiformal areas.
       In addition, informal settlements with problems such as waste, waterlogging, and
       pollution were identified.[53] These issues may be exacerbated by climate change
       and the climate vulnerability conditions of the beneficiary vulnerable households.
       Based on the foregoing, eligibility and prioritization criteria are set for the
       interventions (paragraphs 1.33 and 1.34).
1.15   Bank support for improvements to the existing program. Since project profile
       approval, the executing agency has been supported through program preparation
                                                       -6-



       resources and the work of specialists from various divisions (Housing and Urban
       Development (HUD); Connectivity, Markets, and Finance (CMF); Labor Markets
       (LMK); and Social Protection and Health (SPH)) in: (i) developing improvements
       for the 20 project cycle stages, to speed up execution of interventions (optional
       link 5); (ii) diversifying delivery mechanisms and the types of housing solutions,
       strengthening community participation mechanisms, and improving management
       teams’ training and tools; (iii) developing a methodology to prepare diagnostic
       assessments and plans to enhance families’ economic development; and
       (iv) reinforcing the use of statistical tools and digital systems for physical and
       financial traceability to improve institutional and land management. These
       activities have been supported during preparation because they help the operation
       reach a higher degree of maturity. They have been prioritized because they are
       linked to efficiency gains that scale up the new intervention model across the entire
       existing program and prepare the executing agency to carry out the new activities
       for boosting the income of beneficiary families.
1.16   Theory of change. The program aims to reduce the barriers that prevent the
       integration of vulnerable households in semiformal areas into the formal city. A
       shift towards more efficient project cycles and strengthened executing agency
       capacities (Component I) has the potential to expand the coverage of basic
       services, secure land tenure, and reduce the timeframe for the design, bidding,
       and execution of urban basic service works (Component II). In addition, the
       program aims to efficiently provide adequate housing solutions and improve
       housing conditions in semiformal areas (Component III) and to make vulnerable
       households more employable (Component IV). This theory of change is based on
       a solid body of evidence that supports the importance of addressing these issues
       comprehensively and simultaneously to make a significant impact on beneficiaries’
       lives. For more detail on the causal attribution that underpins the theory of change
       see optional link 5. Table 3 below shows the vertical logic and outcome indicators.

                                                    Table 2. Vertical logic

                                                      Problem addressed

       Vulnerable households in semiformal areas in Uruguay face barriers to social and urban integration.

                                                             Causes

       1. There are                2. Access to decent         3. There are difficulties in    4. Semiformal areas have
          opportunities to            housing and urban           accessing adequate              limited access to social
          enhance the                 basic services in           housing solutions in            services and human
          efficiency and              informal settlements        semiformal areas.               development
          effectiveness of the        is deficient.                                               opportunities.
          land management
          of the agencies in
          charge of housing
          policies.

                                                        General objective

       Help reduce social and urban integration barriers in Uruguay’s semiformal areas.

                                                       Specific objectives
                                                 -7-



                                              Table 2. Vertical logic

1. Strengthen               2. Improve access to        3. Expand access to             4. Promote the
   DINISU’s                    adequate housing in         adequate housing                socioeconomic
   management                  informal                    solutions in semiformal         development of
   capacities.                 settlements.                areas.                          households in
                                                                                           semiformal areas.

                                                Expected outcomes

1.1 Efficiency in the       2.1 Increased coverage      3.1 Efficiency of the           4.1 More employable
    management of                of essential basic         processes to design,            economically active
    social and urban             services in informal       execute, and monitor            population.
    integration projects.        settlements.               works to deliver
                                                            adequate housing
                                                            solutions.




                            2.2 Increased land          3.2 Improved housing
                                 tenure security in          conditions of vulnerable
                                 informal settlements        households in
                                 with a gender and           semiformal areas.
                                 diversity
                                 perspective.

                            2.3 Shorter design,
                                bidding, and
                                implementation
                                timeframes for the
                                works.

                                          Disbursement-linked indicators

1.1 Strategic               2.1 Prioritized informal    3.2 Households included in      4.1 Neighborhood plans for
    interjurisdictional         settlements with a          the SCAPs with an               social and/or productive
    coordination                social and urban            intervention project            integration aimed at
    agreements, with            integration project         drawn up to ensure they         boosting income and
    baseline studies            (SUIP) or specific          benefit from better             prepared within
    conducted and               coordinated action          housing conditions.             18 months of the
    aimed at social and         project (SCAP)                                              census being
    urban integration,          prepared that                                               conducted.
    signed within               incorporates climate
    12 months of                change mitigation
    FISU’s creation.            and adaptation
                                measures, designed
                                and approved within
                                three years from the
                                start of the
                                operation.

1.2 Informal settlements    2.2 Households in           3.3 Households that
     targeted with works,       informal settlements        benefited from better
     using the                  covered by at least         housing conditions in
     management                 one new urban               semiformal areas with a
     system adapted             basic service within        10% reduction in the
     with the program’s         40 months of the            historical average
     support.                   call for tenders.           execution time.

                            2.3 Households in
                                informal settlements
                                that have seen
                                increased land
                                tenure security and
                                access to the formal
                                network of urban
                                                     -8-



                                                  Table 2. Vertical logic
                                     basic services within
                                     four years of the
                                     approval of the
                                     SCAP.

                                                             Indicators

       1.3 Gap between            2.4 Households in             3.1 SCAPs prepared with      4.2 People who have
           scheduled and              targeted informal             the necessary studies        become more
           actual time                settlements                   to prevent informality       employable.
           between bidding            connected to                  and/or expand access
           and end of works.          formal urban basic            to adequate housing
                                      services.                     solutions, approved in
                                                                    less than three years.

       1.4 Informal               2.5 Households in             3.4 Households in targeted   4.3 Women who have
            settlements               targeted informal             informal settlements         become more
            targeted with             settlements that              with adequate                employable.
            neighborhood              have increased                materials.
            committees set up         land tenure security
            to monitor the            for women or both
            project.                  spouses in a
                                      couple.

       1.5 Agencies with
           strengthened digital
           technology and
           managerial
           capacity.

                                                          Components

       1. Institution-            2. Delivery of urban         3. Delivery of adequate       4. Socioeconomic
          strengthening.             basic services and           housing solutions in          development of
                                     tenure security in           semiformal areas.             vulnerable households
                                     informal                                                   in semiformal areas.
                                     settlements.



1.17   Program rationale and strategy. The strategy is structured in four lines of action
       aligned with the determinants identified above.
1.18   First, it focuses on enhancing efficiency by strengthening capacities at DINISU and
       other participating entities with Component I support. This includes improving the
       existing project cycle (cutting across all components), addressing bottlenecks in
       its 20 stages to achieve results in shorter timeframes, and improving coordination
       with departmental governments through strategic coordination agreements
       (paragraph 1.8). There are also plans to increase installed capacity in
       environmental, social, fiduciary, and procurement areas and deploy a new
       management platform [54] (see Table 3 and optional link 5).
                                                  -9-



            Table 3. Current and expected timeframes for certain key stages of the project cycle (*)

                                                                          Current               Expected
                                  Process
                                                                        (in months)           (in months)

       1.     Informal settlements prioritized in the operation with
                                                                              42                   36
              approved SUIPs/SCAPs
       2.     Increased coverage of basic services for vulnerable
                                                                              45                   40
              households in informal settlements
       3.     Increased land tenure security of vulnerable
              households in informal settlements and access to                96                   60
              the formal network of essential basic services
       4.     Approval and design of plans and projects aimed at
              preventing and/or expanding access to adequate                  42                   36
              housing solutions
                                                                        6 for housing
       5.     Housing improvements for vulnerable households           improvements,
              in semiformal areas that will improve their energy       36 for sites with     10% reduction
              and water performance                                    services, 18 for
                                                                        new housing
        (*) The average estimates are based on the project completion report of the Neighborhood Improvement
        Program and the reformulated project cycle and are estimates of the timeframes that could be shortened
        through improvements in the project cycle. For more details, see [55].


1.19   Second, to address the deficit of access to adequate housing and urban basic
       services, comprehensive neighborhood improvement interventions will be
       implemented to increase both access to services and land tenure security through
       the development of basic infrastructure. This will include improvements in
       neighborhood connectivity by facilitating solid waste collection, access to medical
       services, and the mobilization of persons with disabilities.[56] Creating quality
       public spaces will also enhance subjective wellbeing, social cohesion, and physical
       activity.[57, 58]
1.20   Third, to address insufficient access to adequate housing solutions in semiformal
       areas and the creation of new informal settlements, the delivery of housing
       solutions will be scaled up by diversifying the types of solutions. Depending on the
       findings of neighborhood diagnostic assessments, financing will be provided for
       partial or complete housing improvements made by beneficiaries themselves,
       cooperatives, or companies, as appropriate, or sites with services. In cases of
       rehousing, new or used housing will be provided. In addition, the processes for the
       diagnostic assessment, design, and implementation of housing solutions will be
       optimized.[59] In order to enhance efficiency in the delivery of housing solutions,
       personnel will be trained and management tools developed to improve execution
       times, quality, and environmental, social, physical, and financial monitoring.
       Moreover, the program’s participatory methods and communication campaigns will
       be strengthened. Improvements in housing, especially in flooring, walls, roofing,
       and water protection, will increase the quality of life of vulnerable households.[60]
       Measures will be taken to increase land tenure security, thus facilitating the
       housing improvement process.
1.21   Fourth, to overcome barriers in access to social services and human development
       opportunities in semiformal areas, the program will foster socioeconomic
       development by strengthening employability and access to government social
                                                 - 10 -



         services. This entails addressing the intergenerational transmission of inequality,
         which is largely due to differences in human capital formation such as education,
         health, and cognitive and socioemotional skills.[61, 62] Housing quality and access
         to infrastructure are key to improving human capital accumulation and job
         opportunities.[63, 64] Mechanisms to improve the implementation and monitoring
         of initiatives that enhance human capital, especially for children and adolescents,
         will be included in the training and management systems developed under the
         program.[65] Neighborhood social and/or productive integration plans will also be
         developed to boost the income of vulnerable households and make them more
         employable, and monitoring boards will be set up for interagency coordination.
1.22     Bank experience.9 The Bank has experience financing operations relating to the
         adaptation and improvement of informal settlements in Uruguay through the
         Informal Settlements Integration Program 1186/OC-UR, which originated a
         Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects in 2009: Neighborhood
         Improvement (UR-X1003, US$390 million/in execution) under which two loans
         were executed (2052/OC-UR and 3097/OC-UR, both with US$70 million in
         financing), and Neighborhood Improvement Program III (4651/OC-UR approved in
         2018 for US$70 million) currently in execution. These are loans with lessons
         learned that will be used in the program. The Bank has experience in urban
         informal housing programs with an emphasis shifting from basic infrastructure to a
         perspective that complements it with social actions. Notable in Argentina are the
         Urban Integration and Social and Educational Inclusion Program in the
         Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (AR-O0005), the Neighborhood Improvement
         Program (AR-X1004), and the Social and Urban Integration Program
         (4804/OC-AR). Notable in Brazil are the Urban Resilience and Revitalization
         Program in Socially and Environmentally Vulnerable Areas—ProMorar Recife
         (5732/OC-BR), the Program for Integrated Urban Development of the Municipality
         of Campo Grande (3630/OC-BR), and the Rio de Janeiro Low-income
         Neighborhood Urban Development Program - Stage III (2482/OC-BR). Notable in
         Paraguay are the Improvement of Housing and Habitat Program (3538/OC-PR)
         and the Housing and Rehabilitation Program for Bañado Sur in Asunción
         (Tacumbú Neighborhood) (4700/OC-PR).
1.23     The Bank has implemented multiple loans based on results (LBRs) in Uruguay
         (4290/OC-UR; 4329/OC-UR; 4658/OC-UR; 4847/OC-UR; and 5565/OC-UR), the
         following recommendations from which were taken into consideration: (i) record
         relevant indicator information and verification protocols and consider the feasibility
         of their collection during the design process; and (ii) analyze administrative and
         indicator monitoring processes. The Housing and Urban Development Division has
         also used this tool with satisfactory results (5313/OC-CH and 5741/OC-AR).
1.24     The main lessons learned from the LBRs are as follows: (i) the importance of a
         rigorous cost analysis to structure and achieve outcomes (see optional link 6);
         (ii) the inclusion of improvements identified using the Institutional Capacity
         Assessment Platform (ICAP) and analysis of socioenvironmental gaps within
         eligible expenditures and outcomes, together with the establishment of clear

9   This operation takes into consideration the lessons learned reflected in the evaluations (midterm, final,
    and project completion report) consolidated in Chapter IV of the Bank’s Housing and Urban Development
    Sector Framework Document, “Lessons Learned from the IDB Group’s Experience in the Housing and
    Urban Development Sector.”
                                          - 11 -



       implementation arrangements (e.g. audit of expenses); (iii) the definition of robust
       intermediate outcomes to ensure the final outcomes are attained; (iv) the design
       of institution-strengthening outputs; and (v) an emphasis in the design phase on
       minimizing significant adjustments to matrices and indicators during the kick-off
       workshop, reflecting progress made and technical challenges identified with Bank
       support. LBRs have achieved satisfactory results in project completion reports.
1.25   Lessons learned. The lessons have been included in the design, particularly the
       lessons learned from loan 4651/OC-UR, which highlight: (i) intersectoral
       coordination and continuous improvement of the executing agency’s institutional
       capacity; (ii) land management teams with communities in informal settlements,
       fostering consensus through active participation; (iii) the formation of
       multidisciplinary teams to ensure interventions are comprehensive and
       coordinated with other areas of government; and (iv) the development of a
       strategic land management vision and stage-based project structuring to expand
       program coverage. Lessons from operations in Argentina and Uruguay include:
       (i) the inclusion of land regularization and titling as an incremental process in land
       tenure security, defined in specific milestones; and (ii) the need for personnel
       properly trained in housing improvements to scale up interventions and optimize
       spending.
1.26   Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the IDB Group’s Institutional
       Strategy: Transforming for Scale and Impact (CA-631) and aligned with the
       objective of reducing poverty and inequality by reducing poverty and promoting
       equity via lower deficits in basic infrastructure and access to social services for
       populations with unmet basic needs. The program is also aligned with the following
       operational focus areas: (i) biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action, through
       the inclusion of green building criteria in housing, climate solutions in public
       spaces, increased accessibility to public and nonmotorized transportation, LED
       lighting, and recycling infrastructure, among other activities to be coordinated with
       departmental governments. The mobility activities proposed for financing are
       directly linked to expanding access to housing; (ii) gender equality and inclusion of
       diverse population groups, by promoting: (a) land titling for women; (b) priority
       participation of women in community initiatives to make them more employable;
       (c) the inclusion of universal design criteria to improve the conditions of persons
       with disabilities and their families; and (d) the collection of socioeconomic data on
       Afrodescendants and LGBTQ+ people living in semiformal areas; (iii) institutional
       capacity, rule of law, and citizen security, through training for enhanced efficiency
       in project management and execution and for the development and use of digital
       technology tools and systems to optimize processes; and (iv) social protection and
       human capital development, since it will support the economic and human
       development of beneficiaries, especially women. In addition, the operation is
       aligned with the Employment Action Framework with a Gender Perspective
       (GN-3057; OP-2289-1) (Talent pillar, Category 1) since it includes analyses,
       interventions, and indicators to make people more employable (Component IV)
       and also mainstreams a gender perspective in those efforts.
1.27   IDB Group country strategy with Uruguay. The operation is aligned with the
       IDB Group country strategy with Uruguay 2020-2025 (GN-3056) with the priority
       areas of: (i) public resource management, since it will seek to enhance the
       efficiency and sustainability of public policies; (ii) sustainable productive
       development, since it supports improved infrastructure quality; and (iii) equity and
                                         - 12 -



       social inclusion, since it supports the most vulnerable populations residing in
       informal settlements and adjacent areas. The operation is included in the Update
       of the Annex III of the 2024 Operational Program Report. In coordination with
       IDB Lab, lessons learned on incremental housing (ATN/ME-18930-CH and
       GRC/ME-18931-CH) and on blockchain-based preliminary titling (ATN/ME-16653-
       AR) are included. In coordination with the Agencia Nacional de Investigación e
       Innovación (National Agency for Research and Innovation), in Uruguay IDB Lab is
       also developing a program for innovation in public services, including housing and
       the delivery of basic services, which also feeds into this program. IDB Invest will
       help in identifying opportunities for collaboration in sustainable urbanization works
       for informal settlements and improving the conditions to access credit for housing
       as a result of its contribution to reducing informal housing in the housing market. It
       will also collaborate with other multilateral development banks; during the
       operation’s execution phase, it will work with teams from the Development Bank
       of Latin America and the Caribbean to update the national informal settlements
       registry, seeking an output to monitor the prevention of new informal settlements
       and/or the growth of existing ones (paragraph 1.36).
1.28   Bank support to the program to lock in the outcomes previously achieved.
       The Bank has supported DINISU in developing instruments and tools to achieve
       outcomes, focusing on two components: Component I, to enhance efficiencies in
       all aspects of the program, and Component IV, focusing on strategies to boost the
       income of vulnerable households in semiformal areas. For Component I, the
       diagnostic assessment was facilitated, and a roadmap was developed to
       accelerate the project cycle, including physical and financial traceability and
       process digitalization. This included exchanges with similar programs in Chile and
       Argentina, which secured significant efficiencies. In Component IV, a standardized
       and innovative process was created to develop neighborhood-specific
       socioeconomic development plans, improving diagnostic methodological tools and
       mapping the supply of social services to address specific gaps, with pilot testing in
       seven neighborhoods. These actions were complemented by various workshops
       and meetings, expecting to recognize the outcomes previously achieved
       (paragraphs 1.15 and 3.10). This support reflects the Bank’s value added and has
       been possible due to the nature of the LBR instrument and the strength of existing
       country systems.
1.29   Paris alignment. This operation has been analyzed using the Joint Multilateral
       Development Bank Assessment Framework for Paris Alignment and the
       IDB Group Paris Alignment Implementation Approach (GN-3142-1). It was found
       to be: (i) aligned with the adaptation target; and (ii) universally aligned with the
       mitigation target of the Paris Agreement.
1.30   According to the joint methodology of the multilateral development banks for
       tracking climate finance, the IDB contribution for this operation is 48.60% and,
       together with green finance, it amounts to 55.36%. These resources contribute to
       the IDB climate finance target (30% of the annual volume of approvals) (see details
       in optional link 3).
1.31   Institutional capacity. As required by the policy governing the LBR instrument
       (GN-2869-10), the institutional, financial, procurement, and integrity capacities of
       the executing agency and CONAFIN-AFISA were assessed using the ICAP. The
       findings confirm that it can execute on time (four years). In addition, the
                                                    - 13 -



          procurement system was assessed based on the Methodology for Assessing
          Procurement Systems (simplified version) of the Organisation for Economic
          Co-operation and Development.
1.32      Beneficiaries. Approximately 15,000 households will be direct beneficiaries of the
          improvements under this program as a result of the efficiencies of the systems
          linked to the outcomes to be achieved under Component I. In addition, at least
          2,500 vulnerable households in semiformal areas will be direct beneficiaries of the
          investments linked to the outcomes of Components II and III, of which at least
          2,067 vulnerable households in informal settlements will see increased coverage
          of urban basic services, at least 1,740 vulnerable households will see increased
          land tenure security and access to urban basic services, and at least
          930 households will receive a housing solution.10 In addition, at least 2,500 families
          will be direct beneficiaries of the investments linked to the outcomes of
          Component IV and will benefit from the social and productive integration plans, of
          which at least 500 people will participate in programs to make them more
          employable, and they will have a focus on gender and diversity, particularly on
          addressing additional determinants of vulnerability for Afrodescendants and
          persons with disabilities.
1.33      Eligibility criteria. The informal settlements where projects are financed will be
          mainly composed of vulnerable households with low socioeconomic status and
          must meet the following requirements: (i) informal settlements must be included
          on the national informal settlements registry, and the AFAs must be linked to each
          of these informal settlements; (ii) have a minimum of 40 sites with 75% housing
          occupancy; (iii) be located in urban areas with more than 7,000 inhabitants; (iv) not
          occupy areas of ecological reserve, environmental preservation, archeological
          heritage, areas at risk of natural disasters, or areas with irreversible levels of soil,
          water, or air pollution or other environmental liabilities; (v) they can mostly be
          regularized on the site where they are settled and do not generate significant
          impacts due to economic displacement; (vi) the settlements’ land is not in legal
          dispute, and the subexecuting agencies can provide legal proof that the land can
          be feasibly titled to the beneficiaries; (vii) informal settlements where road access
          exists or road connections to other connecting areas can feasibly be developed;
          and (viii) informal settlements where flood-prone and/or polluted areas do not
          exceed 50% of the total area. Projects must have the support of at least 60% of
          the community.
1.34      Prioritization criteria for the informal settlements. In coordination with the
          departmental governments, the executing agency will define the actions to be
          implemented following the criteria described in the Guide for Social and Urban
          Integration Actions.[66] Priority will be given to informal settlements in areas with
          mitigable climate vulnerability and led by women, older adults, and/or run by



10   This program supports the diversification of housing solutions with the following estimated breakdown:
     (i) at least 330 dwellings in semiformal areas that do not require a complete upgrade will be improved with
     partial intervention baskets; (ii) at least 330 houses in semiformal areas will be upgraded with full
     intervention baskets; (iii) at least 125 houses in semiformal areas will be upgraded by companies and/or
     cooperatives; (iv) at least 35 sites with services will be delivered; (v) at least 55 used dwellings will be
     delivered in semiformal areas for rehousing; and (vi) at least 55 new houses will be delivered in semiformal
     areas for rehousing.
                                          - 14 -



       persons with disabilities. Details on the prioritization criteria will be set out in the
       program Operating Regulations (optional link 4).
B.     Objectives, components, and cost
1.35   The general objective is to help reduce social and urban integration barriers in
       Uruguay’s semiformal areas. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen
       DINISU’s management capacities; (ii) improve access to adequate housing in
       informal settlements; (iii) expand access to adequate housing solutions in
       semiformal areas; and (iv) promote the socioeconomic development of
       households in semiformal areas.
1.36   Component I. Institution-strengthening (IDB: US$2.4 million). This component
       includes actions aimed at strengthening the actors involved (DINISU,
       CONAFIN-AFISA, and departmental governments) during each stage of the
       project cycle [67] to build their management capacity. In order to achieve the
       outcomes, financing will be provided for the following items: (i) technical assistance
       products to strengthen the actors in the diagnostic assessment, technical,
       fiduciary, and evaluation processes; (ii) the contracting of consulting services for
       outputs linked to the outcomes; (iii) studies for the design of intervention strategies
       and monitoring tools to prevent the creation of new settlements and/or the growth
       of existing settlements; (iv) the acquisition, development, improvement,
       installation, and operation of tools, services, goods, and technology and/or
       IT support to strengthen DINISU’s institutional capacity; (v) products to publicize,
       disseminate, and raise awareness about the program; (vi) training, workshops,
       and seminars; and (vii) a system for periodic monitoring of the growth of informal
       settlements.
1.37   Component II. Delivery of urban basic services and land tenure security [68]
       in informal settlements (IDB: US$33.3 million). This component will finance the
       design and implementation of investments to improve access to adequate housing
       for households in informal settlements. The outcomes will be achieved through the
       following investments: (i) architectural and engineering detailed designs and the
       related preliminary studies; (ii) consulting products for a diagnostic assessment of
       the baseline; (iii) public utility connections; (iv) construction of drinking water,
       sanitation, storm drainage, electricity, and public lighting systems; (v) construction
       of household connections; (vi) construction of mobility systems (multimodal road
       networks); (vii) construction of safe public spaces and green areas; (viii) urban and
       community amenities; (ix) construction and delivery of goods and services for
       urban solid waste treatment and management; (x) strategic works to integrate
       informal settlements into the formal city (resettlements, street openings, extension
       of networks, etc.); (xi) early, rapid-execution works to implement projects;
       (xii) expenses required for the property regularization process; and (xiii) technical
       and social support. The program will promote joint titling or titling in women’s
       names. The delivery of public services will be structured and coordinated with the
       providers of such services to ensure their subsequent sustainability. Universal
       accessibility criteria will be promoted to benefit persons with disabilities and
       persons with reduced mobility.
1.38   Component III. Delivery of adequate housing solutions in semiformal areas
       (IDB: US$17.1 million). This component aims to improve the housing conditions
       in semiformal areas. The outcomes will be achieved by financing: (i) architectural
       and engineering detailed designs and the related preliminary studies;
                                         - 15 -



       (ii) consulting products for a diagnostic assessment of the baseline; (iii) urban
       infrastructure works to deliver sites with access to urban services; (iv) the
       consolidation, densification, and extension of existing housing to expand the stock
       of adequate housing in semiformal areas; (v) housing improvement works; (vi) the
       acquisition of adequate used housing [69] with access to urban services to relocate
       families, when necessary; (vii) the construction of housing to relocate families,
       when necessary; (viii) expenses for rehousing and transitional housing solutions
       under the interventions (rentals, contracting of transitional modules, etc.);
       (ix) technical and social assistance; and (x) consulting products for the design and
       implementation of strategies to prevent the creation of new settlements.
1.39   Component IV. Socioeconomic development of vulnerable households in
       semiformal areas (IDB: US$5.7 million). The objective is to promote the
       socioeconomic development of households in semiformal areas. In order to
       achieve these outcomes, financing will be provided for: (i) participatory studies for
       social, economic, and environmental diagnostic assessment and on gaps in
       existing social services and vulnerable groups, ensuring data are collected on
       Afrodescendants and LGBTQ+ people; (ii) products to aid and support residents
       in accessing the various social service and productive development networks in
       the country; (iii) products for the design and implementation of social, economic,
       community, and productive development plans, prioritizing women’s participation;
       (iv) campaigns to expand access to social services and support for productive
       development; (v) the hiring of human resources; (vi) travel expenses and
       logistics-related expenses for the development of interagency coordination boards;
       (vii) the design and implementation of actions linked to the circular economy;
       (viii) workshops and training to strengthen the human capital of semiformal areas;
       and (ix) the delivery of goods, construction, and/or improved infrastructure for
       training, productive, cultural, and/or community-based activities.
1.40   Administration, supervision, evaluations, and audit (IDB: US$1.5 million).
       This includes the expenses of the borrower and executing agency for program
       management, including costs relating to the execution team, consulting services
       from companies or individuals to conduct evaluations, equipment, external audits,
       independent verification of the outcomes achieved, administration activities, and
       program monitoring.
C.     Key results indicators
1.41   The impact indicator used to evaluate social and urban integration and improved
       housing conditions will be the percentage of households in informal settlements
       that report being more satisfied with the characteristics of the neighborhood. In
       turn, the outcome indicators are: (i) strategic interjurisdictional coordination
       agreements with baseline studies conducted and aimed at social and urban
       integration, signed within 12 months of FISU’s creation; (ii) informal settlements
       targeted with works, using the management system adapted with the program’s
       support; (iii) prioritized informal settlements with a SUIP or SCAP [70] prepared
       that incorporates climate change mitigation and adaptation measures, designed
       and approved within three years from the start of the operation; (iv) households in
       informal settlements covered by at least one new urban basic service within
       40 months of the call for tenders; (v) households in informal settlements that have
       seen increased land tenure security and access to the formal network of urban
       basic services within four years of the approval of the SCAP; (vi) households in
                                             - 16 -



targeted informal settlements connected to formal basic services; (vii) households
in targeted informal settlements that have increased tenure security for women or
both spouses in a couple; (viii) SCAPs prepared with the necessary studies to
prevent informal housing and/or expand access to adequate housing solutions,
approved within three years of the start of the operation; (ix) households included
in the SCAPs with an intervention project drawn up that ensured they benefit from
improved housing conditions; (x) households that benefited from an improvement
in housing conditions in semiformal areas with a 10% reduction in the historical
average execution time; (xi) households in targeted informal settlements with
adequate material conditions; (xii) neighborhood plans for social and/or productive
integration aimed at boosting income and prepared within 18 months of the
census; (xiii) people who have become more employable; and (xiv) women who
have become more employable. For more details see required link 1.

                             Table 4. Disbursement-linked indicators [71]

                                     Type of          Measure-                 Target
           Indicators                                                                             Total
                                    indicator         ment unit   Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
Component I. Institution-strengthening

1.1 Strategic interjurisdictional    Final            # of          9      0            0   0      9
    coordination agreements,                      agreements
    with baseline studies
    conducted and aimed at
    social and urban integration,
    signed within 12 months of
    FISU’s creation.

1.2 Informal settlements             Final        # of informal     4      3            0   0      7
    targeted with works, using                    settlements
    the management system
    adapted with program
    support.

Component II. Delivery of urban basic services and land tenure security

2.1 Prioritized informal        Intermediate # of informal          6      1            0   0      7
    settlements with a SUIP or               settlements
    SCAP prepared that
    incorporates climate change
    mitigation and adaptation
    measures, designed and
    approved within three years
    from the start of the
    operation.

2.2 Households in informal      Intermediate    # of               140    1,100     707     120   2,067
    settlements covered by at                households
    least one new urban basic
    service within 40 months of
    the call for tenders.
                                                      - 17 -



                                      Table 4. Disbursement-linked indicators [71]

                                             Type of           Measure-                  Target
                    Indicators                                                                              Total
                                            indicator          ment unit    Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4

         2.3 Households in informal           Final           # of           35     215       540     950   1,740
             settlements that have seen                    households
             increased land tenure
             security and access to the
             formal network of urban
             basic services within four
             years of the approval of the
             SCAP.[72]

         Component III. Delivery of adequate housing solutions in semiformal areas

         3.2 Households included in the Intermediate    # of                 552    331       209     0     1,092
             SCAPs with an intervention              households
             project drawn up to ensure
             they benefit from an
             improvement in housing
             conditions.

         3.3 Households that benefited        Final           # of           92     305       268     265   930
             from an improvement in                        households
             housing conditions in
             semiformal areas with a
             10% reduction in the
             historical average execution
             time.
         Component IV. Socioeconomic development of vulnerable households in semiformal areas

         4.1 Neighborhood plans for           Final            # of plans     2      6            4   0      12
             social and/or productive
             integration aimed at
             boosting income and
             prepared within 18 months
             of the census.



                            II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       Rationale for the LBR. This LBR operation will be financed with up to US$60 million
          from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital and will have a four-year disbursement period.11
          The operation meets the requirements set out in the Bank’s LBR policy
          (GN-2869-10) and its operational guidelines (GN-2869-11) by: (i) supporting an
          existing government program in the delivery of outcomes by financing the
          improvements and products needed to achieve them;[73] and (ii) improving
          Uruguay’s housing and urban integration programs, beyond financing specific
          investments, by concentrating the Bank’s technical support efforts on strengthening
          the executing agency’s capacity for results-based management, improving and

11   The disbursement period was established based on the detailed plan of outputs and outcomes. An
     indicative analysis of the plan and the itemized, specific cost of the necessary outputs are available in
     optional link 6.
                                              - 18 -



standardizing processes, fostering coordination among actors, and reducing
timeframes by harnessing technology.[74] The instrument facilitates execution of the
country’s scalability strategy by implementing an enhanced intervention model
across the FISU-funded existing program, totaling approximately US$160 million.
This loan will cover only 37% of this amount. Accordingly, the amount mobilized is
three times the amount of the financing provided by the Bank, since over the years
of program execution scaling up both the investment and the resources and impacts,
FISU will manage approximately US$160 million, of which this loan will represent
only 37%. In addition, the instrument will help overcome efficiency challenges by
installing capacities at the executing agency: (i) effective institutional and
coordination arrangements; and (ii) the application of mechanisms, tools, and
technical instruments focused on streamlining processes, particularly in the bidding,
procurement, execution, and monitoring phases of projects in semiformal areas, so
as to enhance the quality and efficiency of public spending.

                                  Table 5. Estimated program costs (*)
                   Components                                     IDB                     Total           %
Component I. Institution-strengthening                      US$2.4 million         US$2.4 million        4.0
Component II. Delivery of urban basic services             US$33.3 million        US$33.3 million        55.5
and land tenure security in informal
settlements
Component III. Delivery of adequate housing                US$17.1 million        US$17.1 million        28.5
solutions in semiformal areas
Component IV. Socioeconomic development of                  US$5.7 million         US$5.7 million        9.5
households in semiformal areas
Administration, supervision, evaluations, and               US$1.5 million         US$1.5 million        2.5
audit
Total                                                       US$60 million          US$60 million        100.0

(*) The costs per subcomponent or main activity are indicative (see detail in optional link 6).


Table 6. Schedule and tranches of the program’s disbursement-linked indicators (DLI) (US$)

                        Year 1 +
                       Outcomes                                                                   Cumulative at
  DLI number                                Year 2             Year 3             Year 4
                        prior to                                                                   project-end
                       eligibility
Component I
DLI 1.1                  832,500              0                   0                   0              832,500
DLI 1.2                 1,110,000          832,500                0                   0             1,942,500
Total                   1,942,500          832,500                0                   0             2,775,000
Component II
DLI 2.1                 5,772,857          962,143               0                  0              6,735,000
DLI 2.2                  912,337          7,168,360          4,607,300           782,003           13,470,000
DLI 2.3                  270,948          1,664,397          4,180,345          7,354,310          13,470,000
Total                   6,956,142         9,794,900          8,787,645          8,136,313          33,675,000
Component III
DLI 3.2                 2,650,055         1,589,073          1,003,372                0             5,242,500
DLI 3.3                 1,210,097         4,011,733          3,525,065          3,485,605          12,232,500
                                          - 19 -




                         Year 1 +
                        Outcomes                                                 Cumulative at
        DLI number                      Year 2         Year 3         Year 4
                         prior to                                                 project-end
                        eligibility
      Total              3,860,152     5,600,806     4,528,437      3,485,605     17,475,000
      Component IV
      DLI 4.1            1,012,500     3,037,500     2,025,000          0          6,075,000
      Total              1,012,500     3,037,500     2,025,000          0          6,075,000
      Disbursement
      per year
      corresponding     13,771,294    19,265,706     15,341,082     11,621,918    60,000,000
      to outcomes
      achieved



B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks
2.2   In accordance with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework and
      existing information, this is classified as a Category “B” operation, because the
      activities to be performed will generate moderate, localized, and short-term
      adverse environmental and social impacts. Depending on the type of program
      work, negative impacts have been identified during the construction stage: the
      generation of household and hazardous solid waste, the spread of pests and
      vectors due to soil movement, land clearing, etc.; impacts on the landscape and
      land use by the works; and potential temporary and/or permanent physical and/or
      economic displacement of vulnerable households for dwellings located in areas of
      environmental or physical risk or dwellings that occupying the right of way of
      program-targeted spaces. The prioritization criteria (paragraph 1.34) seek to
      mitigate risk.
2.3   The environmental and social risk is rated as “Substantial” because the program
      activities will have the potential to generate substantial direct impacts associated
      with the resettlement of socioeconomically vulnerable households in various
      informal settlements in Uruguay, the potential risk of increased worker and
      community accidents, the context of socioeconomic vulnerability in the target
      areas, and the executing agency’s limited experience implementing the IDB’s
      Environmental and Social Policy Framework.
2.4   The project’s exposure to flood and drought hazards is categorized as “Medium”
      and “High,” respectively, based on the Bank’s Disaster and Climate Change Risk
      Assessment Methodology [75] criticality cube for housing, the physical
      characteristics criteria for the program, and the interaction with the human and
      natural environment. The negative impact on essential services is moderate. The
      technical design of the housing will incorporate disaster risk and climate change
      criteria, such that no significant increases in current natural hazard conditions or
      in the vulnerability of communities or the environment are expected as a result of
      program interventions. Considering the identified threat levels, the estimated
      criticality and vulnerability of the infrastructure interventions, and the levels of risk
      exacerbation, the operation’s risk level is classified as “Moderate.”
2.5   DINISU’s environmental and social action plan was evaluated based on the
      structure, procedures, resources, and responsibilities through which the social and
                                        - 20 -



      environmental issues of the programs and plans under execution are managed.
      Gaps between the environmental and social management system and the
      applicable requirements under Environmental and Social Performance Standards
      were identified, and the environmental and social action plan will cover the actions
      required to adequately close the gaps. Environmental and social performance
      criteria will be included as part of the disbursement verification protocols: (i) the
      half-yearly reporting of environmental and social performance indicators agreed by
      the Bank and the executing agency in the semiannual progress reports; and (ii) the
      effective completion of corrective plans in the event of deviations from targets.
      Category A works, works with high environmental and social risk, or actions
      classified as high disaster and climate change risk will not be allowed.
C.    Fiduciary risks
2.6   During program preparation, a medium-high internal process risk was identified. If
      DINISU and CONAFIN-AFISA do not receive training prior to and during program
      implementation on financial fiduciary management applicable to LBRs, delays
      could arise in preparing and presenting established fiduciary arrangements as a
      result of the learning curve. This could delay disbursement management by
      extending the 12-month deadline for submitting the outcomes linked to the first
      disbursement tranche. The fiduciary team will provide training and support to
      DINISU and CONAFIN-AFISA during the execution period, including monitoring
      the amount of expenditures incurred versus the amount of disbursements made
      by the Bank. The FISU team will also develop the categorization and assignment
      of identifiers in respect of the expenditures attributable to the program’s
      disbursement-linked and non-disbursement-linked outcomes, so as to ensure the
      viability of issuing the annual and final report of the aforementioned expenditures
      incurred by CONAFIN-AFISA, in its capacity as FISU fiduciary, under the orders
      of DINISU.
D.    Other risks and key issues
2.7   The following potential risks were identified: (i) there is no average, but the
      evaluation of the Neighborhood Improvement Program indicates that, in the period
      examined (eight years), only 25% of the target was reached. Therefore, if the land
      regularization processes are excessively delayed, the expected outcomes of
      Component III may not be achieved. To mitigate this risk, efforts were made with the
      DINISU team to develop a new mechanism to increase land tenure security; (ii) if
      the departmental governments and beneficiary families do not take adequate
      ownership of the works, then the sustainability of the interventions could be
      compromised. To mitigate this risk, the presence of field teams will be increased;
      and (iii) possible risks linked to procurement management as a result of relying on
      local systems will be mitigated by placing greater emphasis on the monitoring of
      assurance reports and preparation of the related terms of reference.
2.8   Innovation and climate change. The national informal settlements registry will
      be strengthened, and DINISU will be supported to implement a management
      model based on digitalization and data centralization, which will enable efficient
      program monitoring, improve the likelihood of achieving the objectives, and reduce
      transaction and implementation costs. In addition, the systematization,
      transparency, and accessibility of data on informal settlements will be improved,
      and innovative solutions and digital tools will be evaluated to respond to the
      development gaps in each component, as identified in optional link 10.
                                          - 21 -



       Cost-effective climate change adaptation and mitigation measures will also be
       included in the program works, which will seek to comply with construction
       standards, such as the Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies standards.
2.9    Economic evaluation (optional link 1). The analysis was conducted on
       Components I, II, III, and program administration (90.3% of the total amount). The
       ex ante cost-effectiveness methodology was used for Component II. This analysis
       calculates the cost-effectiveness ratio based on the quotient between the present
       value of expected investment costs, expected incremental operating and
       maintenance costs, and the number of households benefiting from the
       interventions at the neighborhood level. The program’s economic viability is
       observed by comparing the reasonableness of this ratio with that of other
       precedents selected from Neighborhood Improvement Programs I and II in
       Uruguay and recent similar programs in Chile and Argentina (5313/OC-CH and
       5741/OC-AR), thus providing a frame of reference that justifies the use of an
       evaluation of this type, without the need to undertake a more costly project in terms
       of time and resources for a monetary valuation of benefits. As a result,
       Component II exhibits a cost-effectiveness ratio expressed at social prices of
       US$13,320 per dwelling, lower than similar programs in Uruguay that were
       executed in the past (just over US$30,000). For Component III, the cost-
       effectiveness methodology was used where comparisons are made at the unit cost
       level. The analysis finds that the costs foreseen in the instruments, on the one
       hand, for housing improvement and adaptation (compared to Argentina) and, on
       the other, for the acquisition of used and new housing (compared to Chile) turn out
       to be cost effective, while, in relation to the instrument for adequate housing
       through the delivery of materials to companies and/or cooperatives, it is 24% more
       expensive than in Chile, which falls within an acceptable margin.
2.10   Sustainability of the interventions. The program will support the sustainability
       of the interventions through: (i) the transfer of the methodology and generation of
       capacities to reduce the qualitative housing deficit; (ii) the strengthening of
       community organizations; (iii) coordination with other responsible bodies;
       (iv) citizen participation in the definition and execution of projects; (v) the
       maintenance of public spaces together with departmental governments;
       (vi) studies necessary for the delivery of public services; and (vii) the strengthening
       of the executing agency’s capacities to respond to this problem in Uruguay. These
       seven measures will be consolidated under sustainability plans for the investments
       made to provide follow-up and monitoring during and after execution.

                     III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.     Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1    The borrower will be FISU, through CONAFIN-AFISA in its capacity as fiduciary
       body. The Eastern Republic of Uruguay will be the guarantor. FISU is an
       administration trust established in accordance with Law 17,703 and Law 19,996 to
       finance and execute social and urban integration programs for informal
       settlements. The executive branch acts as trustor through the Ministry of Economy
       and Finance, which is also the end beneficiary of the trust; the Ministry of Livestock,
       Agriculture, and Fisheries; and the MVOT. The FISU governance structure
       includes a Monitoring Committee and a Procurement Committee as set out in the
       FISU management trust agreement. In addition, FISU provides for the participation
                                         - 22 -



      of DINISU, which acts as manager, and CONAFIN-AFISA, which acts as fiduciary
      of the assets.
3.2   Institutional capacity. As required by the LBR policy, DINISU was analyzed as
      the program’s executing agency, and it was confirmed that it has sufficient
      institutional capacity to execute the program, which will be strengthened during
      program execution. CONAFIN-AFISA’s fiduciary execution capacity was analyzed,
      assessing its structure, organization, and processes, and its execution capacity
      was found to be satisfactory. CONAFIN-AFISA also has satisfactory fiduciary
      experience as the executing agency of the Bank’s investment loan for the Global
      Credit Program for Safeguarding the Productive Fabric and Employment
      (5058/OC-UR, 2020 / US$80 million / 100% disbursed).
3.3   Execution arrangements. The MVOT, through DINISU, will be the executing
      agency responsible for the planning, coordination, management, and monitoring
      of program activities. DINISU will be responsible, among other tasks, for:
      (i) leading dialogue with the IDB; (ii) prioritizing program works; (iii) approving the
      Social and Urban Integration Action Profile, SUIPs and SCAPs submitted by the
      departmental governments; (iv) ensuring that the works have social teams to
      support execution; (v) monitoring compliance with environmental and social
      requirements in accordance with the loan contract and the program Operating
      Regulations; (vi) coordinating with the departmental governments and other
      entities involved in program execution, including CONAFIN-AFISA; (vii) following
      up, monitoring, and evaluating the program; and (viii) submitting program reports
      to the Bank, including progress reports, as stipulated in the loan contract and the
      program Operating Regulations for the operation.
3.4   In coordination with DINISU, CONAFIN-AFISA, in its capacity as fiduciary of FISU,
      will be responsible for: (i) requesting disbursements of loan proceeds;
      (ii) contracting and procurement; (iii) accounting and financial control and
      monitoring, as well as the preparation and submission to the Bank of financial and
      audit reports on the program; and (iv) administering loan proceeds through a
      separate account. Details of the coordination between DINISU and
      CONAFIN-AFISA will be set out in the program Operating Regulations.
3.5   Strategic interagency coordination at FISU. FISU’s structure provides for: (i) a
      three-member Monitoring Committee, representing the trustor ministries, the main
      task of which will be to approve and monitor the program’s plan of works and
      activities; (ii) a Procurement Committee, also made up of three members—two
      appointed by DINISU and one by CONAFIN-AFISA—which will approve the
      bidding documents, evaluate the competitive procedures, and award the contracts
      for technical services and works; and (iii) a manager of the trust (a role assigned
      to DINISU), which will be responsible for executing the activities pursuant to the
      stipulations of the loan contract and the program Operating Regulations.
3.6   Program Operating Regulations. The program Operating Regulations will outline
      program coordination and administration responsibilities, the conditions for
      awarding resources, social and environmental requirements, and the exclusion list,
      among other things. Any changes will be subject to the Bank’s no objection.
3.7   Requirements applicable to the independent verifier. The company or
      professional hired to independently verify the outcomes must be experienced in
      project evaluation and monitoring, the use of outcome indicators, and the
      evaluation of the reliability of information sources and methods used to produce
                                        - 23 -



      them. The terms of reference for this contract will be agreed on beforehand with
      the Bank, and the funds for this may be sourced from the technical-cooperation
      resources from the Bank operation.
3.8   The special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement will
      be that the borrower has, through the executing agency, submitted evidence
      of: (i) the approval and entry into force of the program Operating Regulations
      [76] under the terms previously agreed with the Bank, which will include,
      inter alia, the environmental and social requirements set out in the
      environmental and social management system and the environmental and
      social action plan; and (ii) having contracted the independent verifier of
      program outcomes in accordance with the terms of reference previously
      agreed with the Bank. See other special contractual conditions in Annex B
      of the Environmental and Social Review Summary. Condition (i) is necessary
      to ensure that the executing agency has a detailed regulation in place to execute
      the program that sets out the necessary guidelines and responsibilities of each of
      the actors involved in the program. Condition (ii) is necessary to verify the
      outcomes in accordance with the Bank’s policy for the sovereign guaranteed loan
      instrument based on results (GN-2869-10).
3.9   Fiduciary agreements and requirements. Annex III contains the financial
      management and procurement guidelines. Procurement made directly by FISU,
      represented by CONAFIN-AFISA and in coordination with DINISU, will be
      governed by the systems and procedures of FISU policies and the program
      Operating Regulations. CONAFIN-AFISA’s procurement system was evaluated by
      the Bank (optional link 12) and is considered compatible with internationally
      accepted principles, practices, and standards for all procurement methods and
      provides for the possibility for bidders from all countries to participate. Financial
      management will be subject to the provisions of document OP-273-12 and the
      Bank’s LBR guidelines. Disbursements of resources to a dedicated FISU bank
      account under the program will be managed pursuant to the procedures set out in
      the program Operating Regulations. The operation provides for an initial
      disbursement and disbursements to finance previously achieved outcomes. For
      program purposes, the borrower, through CONAFIN-AFISA, will submit to the
      Bank annual and final assurance reports on the expenditures incurred by FISU
      under the direction of DINISU to achieve the disbursement-linked and
      non-disbursement-linked outcomes agreed on for the program. Assurance reports
      will be issued by an eligible auditing firm, with terms of reference agreed with the
      Bank. The firm auditing the FISU will be allowed to issue assurance reports
      provided that it is an independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank.
                                                       - 24 -



                                      Table 7. Disbursement schedule (US$)
            Item            Year 1             Year 2              Year 3           Year 4            Total
     Advance (up to       US$10,096,806          US$ -              US$ -            US$ -        US$10,096,806
     20%)
     Disbursements
     for outcomes         US$7,093,924       US$19,265,706      US$15,341,082    US$11,621,918    US$53,322,630
     achieved after
     eligibility
     Outcomes
     achieved prior       US$6,677,370           US$ -              US$ -            US$ -         US$6,677,370
     to eligibility (up
     to 15%)
     Value of
     advance                  US$ -              US$ -          US$(5,048,403)   US$(5,048,403)   US$(10,096,806)
     discount
     % advance                 0%                 0%                 50%              50%             100%
     discount
     Total                US$23,868,100      US$19,265,706      US$10,292,679    US$6,573,515     US$60,000,000



3.10     Financing of previously achieved outcomes and initial disbursement. The
         Bank may finance previously achieved outcomes and the outcomes related to DLIs
         1.1, 2.1, and 3.2 (Tables 5 and 6) between the project profile approval date
         (6 September 2022) and up to the date of loan eligibility, for up to US$6,677,370
         (11.13% of the loan amount). This will be subject to an independent evaluation
         following the corresponding verification protocol in Annex II (Results Matrix).
         Expenditures related to the achievement of these outcomes must be eligible under
         the program, attributable to their achievement, and incurred for this purpose up to
         12 months prior to project profile approval. In addition, an initial disbursement of
         up to US$10,096,806 (16.83% of the loan amount) is included once the loan has
         been declared eligible to receive disbursements. The combined amount for initial
         disbursement and financing of previously achieved outcomes will not exceed 30%
         of the total loan amount, in accordance with paragraph 5.25 of the LBR guidelines
         (GN-2869-10).
3.11     The DLIs associated with the initial disbursement and financing of previously
         achieved outcomes are identified in Table 6.
B.       Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.12     Progress monitoring. The monitoring system will consist of Annex II (Results
         Matrix), progress monitoring reports, and the DLI monitoring and information
         system, complemented by the periodically updated Risk Matrix. The executing
         agency and the Bank have agreed on a protocol for each DLI in required link 1,
         which contains the related definition and verification process. The executing
         agency will submit a progress report to the Bank within 60 days of the end of each
         calendar half-year period.
3.13     Final evaluation. These will include: (i) the results of financial execution;
         (ii) compliance with output and outcome targets; (iii) the degree to which the works
         comply with social, environmental, and operation and maintenance requirements;
         (iv) the degree of compliance with contractual commitments; (v) a summary of the
         results of audits conducted during execution; (vi) verification of compliance with
         investment limits; and (vii) a summary of lessons learned.
                                           - 25 -



3.14   This final evaluation will include an ex post economic evaluation using the same
       methodology as the ex ante evaluation. Outcome indicators will be evaluated on a
       reflexive basis. The basis for information will be the means of verification set out in
       the Results Matrix and administrative data. The impact indicator will be measured
       through a satisfaction survey that will be applied to a representative sample of
       households in all the informal settlements targeted in the first half of the last year of
       loan implementation. The arrangements and methodology for the design and
       implementation of the evaluations will be subject to the Bank’s no objection.
                                                                                                                                                                                       Annex I - UR-L1188
                                                                                                                                                                                               Page 1 of 1




                                                                         Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                   Summary             UR-L1188
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Institutional Strategy Alignment

                                                                                                -Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups
                                                                                                -Institutional capacity, rule of law, citizen security
                                                                                                -Social protection and human capital development
 Operational Focus Areas
                                                                                                -Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure
                                                                                                -Productive development and innovation through the private sector




 [Space-Holder: Impact framework indicators]




2. Country Development Objectives
                                                                                                                         1. Support the most vulnerable populations; 2. Facilitate
   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                      GN-3056          urban and housing services; 3. Improve productive and
                                                                                                                         resilient infrastructure


                                                                                                                         The intervention is included in the 2024 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                      GN-3087-2
                                                                                                                         Program.



   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                            Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                  7.8
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                               2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                             1.6
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                          3.7
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                             8.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                      2.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                    3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                          0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                            2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                 1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                             9.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                           4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                 5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                  Medium Low
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                               B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems


                                                                                                                         Financial Management: Treasury.
                                                                 Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)             Yes
                                                                                                                         Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison,
                                                                                                                         Contracting Individual Consultant, National Public Bidding.




                                                                               Non-Fiduciary



The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




The general objective is to contribute to the reduction of socio-urban integration barriers in precarious areas of Uruguay. The specific objectives are: (i) strengthen the
management capabilities of the DINISU; (ii) improve access to adequate habitat in irregular settlements; (iii) improve access to adequate housing solutions in precarious areas;
and (iv) promote the socioeconomic development of households residing in precarious areas.

The project presents a complete diagnosis of the current program, shows a detailed analysis of its bottlenecks and the expectations of generating efficiencies with the proposed
solutions. The program has 8 indicators linked to disbursements, which include three intermediate result indicators.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through cost-effectiveness and cost-efficiency analysis. The analyzes conclude that when comparing what is expected with
this program with respect to previous experiences of the habitat improvement program in Uruguay, the budgeted costs are below previous experiences. Both programs, habitat
improvement and housing improvement, where evaluated against similar programs in Chile and Argentina; however, the comparability of these programs is not clear since they
have not yet been completed.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is in line with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured using a before and
after methodology. The monitoring mechanisms for the disbursement linked indicators have a defined verification protocol and sources.
                                                                                                                                                                     Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 1 of 5



                                                                           RESULTS MATRIX
                                                                (SEE DISBURSEMENT INDICATORS MATRIX)

Project objective:                      Help reduce social and urban integration barriers in Uruguay’s semiformal areas. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen DINISU’s
                                        management capacities; (ii) improve access to adequate housing in informal settlements; (iii) improve access to adequate housing
                                        solutions in semiformal areas; and (iv) promote the socioeconomic development of households in semiformal areas.



                                                                      GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

                                                                 Baseline     Baseline      Expected year
            Indicators                    Measurement unit                                                      Target        Means of verification            Comments
                                                                  value         year          achieved


General development objective: Help reduce social and urban integration barriers in Uruguay’s semiformal areas.


1. Households in informal                   % of households          0          2024             2028            60%      Ex post impact survey               Required link 1
settlements that report being more        (*see breakdown of
satisfied with the characteristics of       all measurement
the neighborhood in its multiple                 units in
dimensions.                                  required link 1)
Annex II
Page 2 of 5


                                                                       SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

                                 Measure-                                                                                            End of     DLI
        Indicators                                   Means of verification            Baseline   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4                       Comments
                                 ment unit                                                                                           project   Yes/No

Specific development objective 1: Strengthen DINISU’s management capacities

1.1. Strategic                      # of           Strategic interjurisdictional         0         9        0        0        0        9        Yes     Required link 1
interjurisdictional             agreements         coordination agreements
coordination agreements,                         entered into by the MVOT and
with baseline studies                                   the departmental
conducted and aimed at                                   administrations.
social and urban
integration, signed within 12
months of FISU’s creation.

1.2. Informal settlements       # of informal       Reports produced by this             0         4        3        0        0        7        Yes
targeted with works using       settlements         management system and
the management system                            validated by a report signed by
adapted with program                              the DINISU authority or such
support.                                        area that replaces it in the future

1.3. Gap between                  % gap*           Work specifications and              30         -        -        -       20        20       No      Required link 1
scheduled and actual time                       completion of work (provisional
between bidding and end of                         acceptance certificate)
works.

1.4. Informal settlements       % of        Report produced by the                       0         -        -        -       90        90       No      Required link 1
targeted with neighborhood   informal   Departamento de Trabajo Social
committees set up to       settlements*   y Ambiental (Department of
monitor the project.                    Social and Environmental Work)
                                           and validated in writing by
                                          DINISU’s Social and Urban
                                        Integration Action Planning and
                                               Management area

Specific development objective 2: Improve access to adequate housing in informal settlements

2.1. Prioritized informal       # of informal    SUIP or SCAP validated in               0         6        1        0        0        7        Yes     Required link 1
settlements with a SUIP or      settlements     writing by the DINISU authority
SCAP prepared that
incorporates climate
change mitigation and
adaptation measures,
                                                                                                                                                              Annex II
                                                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 5



                               Measure-                                                                                          End of     DLI
        Indicators                               Means of verification            Baseline   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4                         Comments
                               ment unit                                                                                         project   Yes/No
designed and approved
within three years from the
start of the operation.

2.2. Households in informal      # of        Technical report signed by the          0        140     1,100     707      120     2,067      Yes       Required link 1
settlements covered by at     households      person in charge of DINISU’s
least one new urban basic                    Projects and Works Division or
service within 40 months of                  such area that replaces it in the
the call for tenders.                         future, stating the increase in
                                                         coverage

2.3. Households in informal      # of         Reports from DINISU’s Social           0        35       215      540      950     1,740      Yes     Corporate Results
settlements that have seen    households      and Urban Integration Action                                                                              Framework
increased land tenure                          Planning and Management                                                                               indicator 2.4. and
security and access to the                   area(a) validated by resolution of                                                                     2.5. Required link 1
formal network of urban                            the DINISU authority
basic services within four
years of approval of the
SCAP.

2.4 Households in targeted       % of      Report from water, sanitation,            0         -        -        -      80%       80%       No        Required link 1
informal settlements with     households* and electricity utilities or copy of
connection to formal basic                 bills from the Administración
services.                                       Nacional de Usinas y
                                             Transmisiones Eléctricas
                                          (national power company) and
                                           Obras Sanitarias del Estado
                                              (national water utility) of
                                             participating households

2.5. Households in targeted    % of               Report issued by the               0         -        -        -      100%     100%       No        Required link 1
informal settlements that   households*       corresponding departmental
have increased tenure                           administration or MVOT,
security for women or both                    depending on who owns the
spouses.                                                  land

Specific development objective 3: Expand access to adequate housing solutions in semiformal areas

3.1 SCAPs prepared with       # of SCAPs      (a) validated in writing by the        0         4        0        0        0        4        No        Required link 1
the necessary studies to                      DINISU authority or such area
prevent informal housing                       that replaces it in the future
Annex II
Page 4 of 5



                              Measure-                                                                                           End of     DLI
        Indicators                              Means of verification             Baseline   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4                        Comments
                              ment unit                                                                                          project   Yes/No
and/or expand access to
adequate housing solutions,
approved in less than three
years.

3.2. Households included in      # of       (a) validated in writing by the          0        552      331      209       0      1,092      Yes      Required link 1
the SCAPs with an             households    DINISU authority or such area
intervention project drawn                   that replaces it in the future,
up to ensure they benefit                      verifying the households
from better housing                          prioritized to benefit from the
conditions.                                            intervention

3.3. Households that            # of         (a) validated in writing by the         0        92       305      268      265      930       Yes      Required link 1
benefited from better        households     DINISU authority or such area
housing conditions in                      that replaces it in the future with
semiformal areas with a                        the list of beneficiaries. In
10% reduction of the                        addition, the resolution for the
historical average execution                   purchase of second-hand
time.                                      housing, the loans for use of the
                                                  dwellings, the list of
                                           beneficiaries, and the final list of
                                            beneficiaries awarded housing
                                           improvements must be included
                                                      as an annex.

3.4. Households in targeted    % of         Ex ante and ex post housing              0         -        -        -        -       70%       No      Required link 1.
informal settlements with   households*               survey
adequate materials.                                                                                                                                  The information
                                                                                                                                                          survey is
                                                                                                                                                      conducted by
                                                                                                                                                      comparing the
                                                                                                                                                    initial and closing
                                                                                                                                                      neighborhood
                                                                                                                                                     census of each
                                                                                                                                                      neighborhood.

Specific development objective 4: Promote the socioeconomic development of households in semiformal areas

4.1. Neighborhood plans for   # of plans       Report produced by the                0         2        6        4        0        12       Yes      Required link 1
social and/or productive                      Department of Social and
integration aimed at                          Environmental Work and
                                                                                                                                                       Annex II
                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 5



                           Measure-                                                                                        End of     DLI
       Indicators                             Means of verification         Baseline   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4                        Comments
                           ment unit                                                                                       project   Yes/No
boosting income prepared                   validated by DINISU’s Social
within 18 months of the                    and Urban Integration Action
census.                                     Planning and Management
                                         area, including the neighborhood
                                            social and urban integration
                                              plans aimed at boosting
                                            incomes. The report should
                                           include the completion times.

4.2. People who have       # of people       Report produced by the            0         -        -       200      300      500       No      Corporate Results
become more employable.                     Department of Social and                                                                             Framework
                                             Environmental Work and                                                                             indicator 2.7
                                           validated by DINISU’s Social                                                                        Required link 1
                                           and Urban Integration Action
                                         Planning and Management area

4.3. Women who have        # of women        Report produced by the            0         -        -       100      275      375       No      Corporate Results
become more employable.                     Department of Social and                                                                             Framework
                                             Environmental Work and                                                                             indicator 2.16
                                           validated by DINISU’s Social                                                                        Required link 1
                                           and Urban Integration Action
                                         Planning and Management area
 See the output matrix in required link 1.
                                                                                   Annex III
                                                                                 Page 1 of 5



                        FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Country: Uruguay        Division: HUD         Operation number: UR-L1188         Year: 2024

Executing agency: Ministry of Housing and Land Management (MVOT), through the
Dirección Nacional de Integración Social y Urbana (National Office for Social and Urban
Integration)
Operation name: Social and Urban Integration Program in Uruguay

I.   Fiduciary Context of the Executing Agency

1. Use of the country system in the operation
     Budget                    Reports               Information         National
                                                     system              competitive
                                                                         bidding

      Treasury             Internal audit            Shopping            Other

     Accounting            External control          Individual
                                                     consultants

2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

       Fiduciary           The execution arrangement provides for the administration
       execution           trust FISU, through CONAFIN-AFISA as fiduciary body, to
       considerations      receive the loan proceeds in its capacity as borrower. No local
                           contribution is planned.
                           Law 19,996, under Law 17,703, created FISU to finance and
                           execute contracts under social and urban integration
                           programs for vulnerable neighborhoods, following the design
                           and execution carried out by DINISU of the MVOT. FISU’s
                           trustors are the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Ministry
                           of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries, and the MVOT.
                           DINISU acts as manager of FISU and CONAFIN-AFISA—a
                           fiduciary role that is part of the National Development
                           Corporation. FISU establishes the duties and powers of
                           DINISU, CONAFIN-AFISA, and the governance framework,
                           including a Monitoring Committee and a Procurement
                           Committee, applicable to the operation. An agreement will not
                           be necessary to execute the program following budgetary
                           rules.
Annex III
Page 2 of 5


3. Fiduciary capacity

 Fiduciary capacity     The ICAP analysis of DINISU and FISU, represented by
 of the executing       CONAFIN-AFISA, remains available and concludes that
 agency                 financial, procurement, and coordination management is
                        adequate for the operation with opportunities for strengthening
                        during program execution.

4. Fiduciary risks and risk response

    Risk                                   Level of
                        Risk                                       Risk response
 taxonomy                                    risk
 Internal     If DINISU and FISU do        Medium-       The Bank’s fiduciary team will
 processes    not receive training prior    high         provide ongoing training on LBR
              to and during program                      in the first year of execution and
              implementation on                          support over the project’s lifetime,
              fiduciary management                       including monitoring the amount
              applicable to LBRs,                        of expenditures incurred versus
              delays could arise in                      the amount of disbursements
              preparing and                              made by the Bank. The FISU
              submitting established                     team will also develop the
              fiduciary arrangements                     categorization and assignment of
              as a result of the                         identifiers in respect of the
              learning curve.                            expenditures attributable to
                                                         program outcomes for issuance
                                                         of the annual report on
                                                         expenditures attributable to the
                                                         program’s disbursement-linked
                                                         and non-disbursement-linked
                                                         outcomes incurred by FISU,
                                                         through its fiduciary CONAFIN-
                                                         AFISA, under the direction of
                                                         DINISU as the program’s
                                                         executing agency.

5. Policies and guidelines applicable to the operation
Due to the positive results from the evaluation of DINISU’s procurement system as an
executing agency under FISU, it is recommended that this system be used to execute this
operation as an LBR under document GN-2869-1. Such an exception from use of the
Bank’s procurement policy does not apply to hiring the company, agency, or individual
expert to independently verify the attainment of the outcomes, if that hiring is done by the
executing agency. Document OP-273-12 (financial management guidelines) and Bank
guidelines applicable to LBR.

6. Exceptions to policies and guidelines
Pursuant to paragraphs 5.33 and 5.34 of document GN-2869-1, the Board of Executive
Directors approved an exception to application of the Bank’s procurement policies and to
matters relating to the origin of the goods and the nationality of the companies and
                                                                                    Annex III
                                                                                  Page 3 of 5


individuals related to an IDB member country. According to LBR guidelines, Board
approval need not be sought for each operation.

II. Considerations for the Special Provisions of the Loan Contract

 Exchange rate. For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties
 agree that the exchange rate to be used will be the rate stipulated in Article 4.10(b)(ii).
 For such purpose, the agreed exchange rate will be the rate in effect on the date on
 which the borrower, executing agency, or any other person or corporation with
 delegated authority to incur expenditures is delegated makes the respective payments
 to the contractor, vendor, or beneficiary.
 Type of audit. The external financial audit reports and other reports that, at the date of
 signature of the loan contract, have been identified as necessary to supervise program
 financial management are annual and final assurance reports on the reporting of
 expenditures incurred by FISU, represented by its fiduciary CONAFIN-AFISA under the
 direction of DINISU to achieve the disbursement-linked and non-disbursement-linked
 outcomes agreed on for the program. The borrower will submit assurance reports, with
 terms of reference agreed on with the Bank, within 120 days following the program’s
 fiscal year-end if audited by an independent, Bank-eligible audit firm or within 180 days
 following the program’s fiscal year-end if audited by the Tribunal de Cuentas (Office of
 the Auditor General). The last of these assurance reports will be submitted within
 120 days following the date of the final disbursement or any extensions thereto if audited
 by an independent, Bank-eligible audit firm or within 180 days following the date of final
 disbursement or any extensions thereto if audited by the Office of the Auditor General.
 The assurance reports may be issued by the firm that audits FISU provided that it is an
 independent, Bank-eligible audit firm.

III. Agreements and Requirements for Procurement Execution

      Bidding         The bidding documents to be used will be those DINISU already
      documents       uses for the procurement of works, goods, and services, which
                      incorporate appropriate, sufficient content. It will be recommended
                      that these documents provide for measures regarding the
                      appropriate use of funds and application of the principles of
                      economy and efficiency.
      Use of          As approved by the Board of Executive Directors for the exception
      country         to the application of the IDB’s procurement policy (paragraph 5.34
      systems         of document GN-2869-1) for the execution of LBRs, the fiduciary
                      procurement systems used by the executing agency were
                      evaluated to ensure that the loan proceeds are used to achieve the
                      relevant outcomes for the intended purposes, guided by the
                      principles of transparency, economy, effectiveness, and efficiency.
                      Based on the evaluation, these systems are considered reliable
                      and consistent with the principles of good practice and are
                      therefore recommended for use in program procurement.
      Financing of    The Bank may finance previously achieved outcomes and the
      previously      outcomes related to DLIs 1.1, 2.1, and 3.2 (Tables 5 and 6)
Annex III
Page 4 of 5



      achieved        between the project profile approval date and up to the date of loan
      outcomes        eligibility, for up to US$6,677,370 (11.13% of the loan amount).
                      These outcomes will be subject to an independent evaluation
                      following the corresponding verification protocol (see Results
                      Matrix).
      Special         If the executing agency is tasked with hiring the independent entity
      procurement     to verify the outcomes achieved, that entity could be a private
      provisions      company or a public entity with the capacity and mandate to
      applicable to   perform such evaluations; the selection procedures will be those
      the operation   set out in document GN-2350-15.
      Procurement     If the executing agency is charged with hiring the independent
      supervision     entity to verify the outcomes achieved, the Bank will supervise the
                      selection process on an ex ante basis. All other procurement and
                      contracting will be in accordance with the executing agency’s
                      procurement and contracting system and therefore will not be
                      supervised.
      Records and     Under FISU, DINISU and CONAFIN-AFISA will be responsible for
      files           maintaining the original files on procurement and financial
                      management within their purview under project execution.


IV. Financial Management Agreements and Requirements

    Programming       Under the law creating FISU, the trustors transfer annually to FISU the
    and budget        resources required to meet the program’s works and activities plan
                      drawn up by DINISU and approved by FISU’s Monitoring Committee
                      (representatives from the Ministry of Economy and Finance, MVOT, and
                      Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries). Based on the
                      program’s approved works and activities plan, the FISU Procurement
                      Committee—made up of two DINISU representatives and one
                      CONAFIN-AFISA        representative—initiates     the   corresponding
                      processes.
    Treasury and      For treasury, the national single treasury account will be used, for which
    disbursement      the National Treasury will set up a special account at the Central Bank
    management        of Uruguay in the name of FISU, represented by CONAFIN-AFISA, to
                      receive Bank resources. No provision is made for resources to be
                      transferred to accounts at other entities. U.S. dollars will be used to
                      manage the operation, and the exchange rate to be used is identified in
                      Section II. Disbursement requests will be processed via the Bank’s
                      current platform. Initial disbursement is foreseen with a discount in the
                      third and fourth year of the execution period, as is the financing of
                      previously achieved outcomes.
                      The estimated flow of funds totaling US$60 million over the life of the
                      program is as follows:
                                                                                Annex III
                                                                              Page 5 of 5




                       Year 1            Year 2           Year 3            Year 4
                  US$23.9 million   US$19.2 million   US$10.3 million    US$6.6 million



Accounting,      An ERP system applied to FISU, represented by CONAFIN-AFISA, will
information      be used. That system, called GIA and developed by DATALOGIC,
systems, and     integrates in a single system all the bidding, procurement, accounting,
reporting        and finance processes, enabling reports to be issued in U.S. dollars.
                 International Financial Reporting Standards will be used. As a
                 complement to the policies and guidelines applicable to the operation,
                 the program Operating Regulations will be used with the documented
                 definition of workflows and internal controls.
Internal control CONAFIN-AFISA has implemented corporate governance practices
and internal     that ensure compliance with Article 184.1 et seq. of Title VII, Chapter I
auditing         of the Central Bank of Uruguay’s Consolidated Securities Market
                 Regulations, such as: (a) ethical and professional competence of
                 directors, managers, and senior staff; (b) a balanced structure, with
                 clearly defined roles and responsibilities; (c) reliable control systems
                 (CONAFIN-AFISA is certified under quality standard ISO 9001:2015,
                 which is renewed every three years, with all company processes
                 reviewed every year); (d) financial statements; (e) an Audit and
                 Supervisory Committee; (f) a code of ethics; (g) external auditors; (h) a
                 risk rating agency; (i) reporting or suspicion of fraud and irregular
                 activities; (j) a commission to combat money laundering, the financing
                 of terrorism, and the financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass
                 destruction; (k) risk management.
External         This is expected to be carried out by an independent audit firm.
control and      However, the Office of the Auditor General may also carry out the
financial        external audit. The type of report, cutoff dates, and deadline for
reporting        submission are identified in Section II. The extra time for the Office of
                 the Auditor General arises from its internal process for approval of the
                 reports issued before submitting them to the Bank and the executing
                 agency.
                 CONAFIN-AFISA has external auditors responsible for preparing and
                 issuing audit reports and for performing a limited review of the
                 company’s financial statements as required by the Central Bank of
                 Uruguay’s Superintendency of Financial Services for financial
                 fiduciaries.
Financial        This may be adjusted to the execution of the program and audited
supervision of   financial reports. Planned activities include monitoring of program
the operation    progress, review of disbursement requests, and visits (in-person or
                 virtual) to DINISU and CONAFIN-AFISA.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/24



    Uruguay. Loan ____/OC-UR to the Fideicomiso Integración Social y Urbana, through the
     Corporación Nacional Financiera – Administradora de Fondos de Inversión S.A., in its
             capacity as trustee. Social and Urban Integration Program in Uruguay


        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

         That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary
with the Fideicomiso Integración Social y Urbana, through the Corporación Nacional Financiera –
Administradora de Fondos de Inversión S.A., in its capacity trustee, as borrower, and with the
Oriental Republic of Uruguay, as guarantor, for the purpose of granting the former a financing to
cooperate in the execution of the Social and Urban Integration Program in Uruguay. Such financing
will be for an amount of up to US$60.000.000 from the Ordinary Capital resources of the Bank, and
will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the
Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                                (Adopted on ___ __________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZIDB0000366-1028536987-13015
UR-L1188
