                  SPECIFIC PROCUREMENT NOTICE (Works)

                                   Request for Bids (RFB)



Date of Publication: 22 October 2025
Publication Reference Number: IDB-5877OCBL-P00022-SPN


Institution: Inter-American Development Bank
Executing Agency: Ministry Of Finance, Economic Development, And Investment

Country: Belize
Project: Sustainable And Inclusive Urban Development Program
Operation or Grant Number: BL-L1046
Loan Contract Number: 5877/OC-BL
Title of the Request for Bids: Design-Build For Corozal Town St. Paul's Boardwalk
Construction
Procurement Process Number: BL-L1046-P00022
Sector: Urban Development And Housing

1. This Invitation for Bids is issued following the publication of the General Procurement Notice
   (GPN) for this project, which was published on the Inter-American Development Bank’s
   website under publication number 001 on 11 July 2025.

2. Belize has received financing from the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) to partially
   finance the cost of the Sustainable And Inclusive Urban Development Program and intends
   to apply part of the proceeds to payments under the Contract detailed in this Request for
   Bids.

3. The Ministry Of Finance, Economic Development, And Investment
        invites eligible bidders to submit sealed bids for Design and Construction of St. Paul’s
   Boardwalk, Corozal Town. The estimated construction period is 13




4. The Request for Bids (RFB) will be conducted through the National Competitive Bidding
   process as specified in the Inter-American Development Bank’s Procurement Policies for
   the Procurement of Goods and Works (applicable edition according to the Loan Contract)
   and is open to all bidders from eligible countries, as defined in the Bidding Documents.

5. Bidders must meet the following qualification criteria:
Scope of Work:Design and construction of a reinforced concrete boardwalk (approx. 0.4 acres)
including:Seawall, staircase, rip rap shore protectionLandscaping (mangrove and native tree
planting)Electrical installations (lighting, conduits, panels)Water supply for irrigationBenches,
signage, accessibility features (ADA compliant)Preparation of detailed designs, ESHS plans,
permits, as-built drawings, and operation manuals.Design Standards:Must comply with
international codes (ACI, ASTM, NEC, ADA, IBC, ASCE).Designs must be stamped by
licensed Professional Engineers and Architects registered in Belize.Key Personnel (Must have
10+ years of experience and specific project experience):Design Phase: Project Manager, Civil
Engineer, Coastal Engineer, Architect, ESHS Specialist, Electrical Engineer.Construction Phase:
Construction Manager, Foreman, Electrical Technician.Equipment:Must have access to:
surveying equipment, concrete batching plant, vibrators, hauling trucks, excavators, backhoes,
concrete pumping equipment.Environmental & Social (ESHS) Requirements:Submit ESHS
Code of Conduct and Management Strategies & Implementation Plans (MSIP).Comply with
environmental, social, health, and safety standards throughout the project.💰 Financial
RequirementsContract Value:Estimated contract value: $880,000 USD.Bid Security:$26,400
BZD

6. Interested bidders may obtain a complete set of Bidding Documents in english by submitting
   a written request to the address provided at the end of this notice. The Bidding Document
   will be delivered via Bidders may always submit their bids by mail or by hand.
   The number of copies of the Bid to be submitted shall be One (1) original and two (2) copies
   Bidder shall seal the original and all copies of the Bid in two inner envelopes, duly marking
   them as “ORIGINAL” and “COPIES”, respectively, and shall seal the two inner envelopes
   into an outer envelope
   The inner and outer envelopes shall be addressed to:
   Karon Hamilton
   Sir Edney Cain Building, 2nd Floor, Belmopan, Cayo District, Belize .

   https://procurement.gov.bz/mof-request-for-bids-design-and-construction-of-tourist-park-
   and-independence-park-orange-walk-town-belize-works-0026-mof-2025/
7. Bids must be delivered to the address specified below no later than 04 November 2025 at
   10:00 AM. Electronic submissions will no be permitted. Late bids will be rejected.

8. Bids will be opened physically in the presence of bidders' representatives who wish to
   attend in person or online, at the address indicated below on 04 November 2025 at 10:30
   AM.

9. All bids must be accompanied by a Bid Security for the amount of 1% of the bid price.

10. The address for bid submission and opening ,Sir Edney Cain Building , 2nd Floor,
    Belmopan, Cayo District. . Address for obtaining additional information or requesting the
    procurement documents: Ministry of Finance, Belmopan . Attn: Karon Hamilton, Email:
    khamilton@ceu.mof.gov.bz, Phone: +501 822-4106.


Address: Belmopan, Belize
Executing Agency: MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Attn: Karon Hamilton
Email: khamilton@ceu.mof.gov.bz
Website: https://procurement.gov.bz/mof-request-for-bids-design-and-construction-of-tourist-
park-and-independence-park-orange-walk-town-belize-works-0026-mof-2025/
