                                            REQUEST FOR BIDS (RFB)
                                                  (WORKS)

    DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE CROSSING IN
                          SAN PEDRO TOWN, BELIZE

Institution:            Ministry of Finance
Country:                Belize
Project:                Sustainable and Inclusive Urban Development Program
Process ID:             BL-L1046 – P00002
Duration:               Eleven (11) Months
Site Location:          San Pedro Town, Belize
Deadline:               November 4th, 2025; 10:00 a.m. (Local Belize Time)

   1.   This RFB follows the General Procurement Notice for this Project, which was published on the websites of the Inter-
        American Development Bank and the Ministry of Finance.

   2.   The Government of Belize has received a loan from the Inter-American Development Bank to finance the
        Sustainable and Inclusive Urban Development Program, of which a key component of the Program focuses on
        constructing multifunctional public spaces that include parks, boardwalk infrastructure, shoreline protection, and
        ecological restoration elements to support community use and environmental stability.

   3.   The Ministry of Finance, through its Central Executing Unit and intends to allocation a portion of the Program’s
        proceeds to procure the services from a qualified Company to undertake the Contract for the “Design and
        Construction of Bicycle and Pedestrian Bridge Crossing in San Pedro Town, Belize”.

   4.   The objective is to design, fabricate and construct a precast-prestressed concrete pedestrian and bicycle bridge in
        San Pedro Town, Belize, hereafter referred to as the Project. The Project shall provide safe passage for pedestrians,
        cyclist, and wheelchair users while supporting vehicular traffic loads for emergency or maintenance vehicles. The
        design-build approach requires a fully functional bridge, including structural, electrical, and accessibility features,
        compliant with all specified codes and standards.

   5.   Qualification requirements include, among others: (a) total monetary value of construction works performed over
        a period of five (5) years, (b) experience as a prime contractor in design of works and in the construction of at least
        two (2) works of a similar nature and complexity equivalent to the construction works over a period of ten (10)
        years, (c) essential key technical personnel and equipment for the design and construction phase as indicated in the
        bidding document, (d) Financial Statements of 2020 to 2024, (e) liquid assets and/or credit facilities net of other
        contractual commitments of the successful Bidder of a minimum of BZD $200,000.00 (f) other requirement
        provided in the respective Bid Document.

   6.   The Ministry of Finance now invites sealed bids from eligible and qualified bidders for the design and construction
        for these works. The delivery/construction period is eleven (11) months. Interested eligible bidders may obtain
        further information from the Central Executing Unit, Ministry of Finance via email: procurement@ceu.mof.gov.bz.

   7.   The RFB will be conducted through the National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procedures specified in the Inter-
        American Development Bank’s Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American
        Development Bank GN-2349-15 as well as the procurement policies and best practices of the Government of Belize.
        The selection process is open to all eligible bidders as defined by the referenced policies.

   8.   The Government of Belize reserves the right to cancel this invitation, in whole or in part, without assigning any
        reason. It is under no obligation to shortlist any bidder and will not be liable for any costs incurred by bidders in
        the preparation and submission of their Bids.

   9.   A complete set of the bidding document in English may be obtained by interested bidder via online at
        https://procurement.gov.bz/opportunities/ or by scanning the QR Code below.

   10. Bids must be delivered to the address below at or before November 4th, 2025, at 10:00 a.m. Electronic shall not be
       permitted. Late bids will not be accepted and will be returned unopened to the Bidder. Bids will be opened
       November 4th, 2025 at 10:15 a.m. in the presence of the bidders’ representatives who choose to attend in person or
       on-line at the address below.

   11. The address referred to above is:

ATTN: Ruby Pascascio
Senior Procurement Specialist
Central Executing Unit
Ministry of Finance
2nd Floor, Sir Edney Cain Building
Belmopan, Belize
Email: procurement@ceu.mof.gov.bz

Ref: Design and Construction for Bicycle and Pedestrian Bridge Crossing in San Pedro Town, Belize (BL-
L1046) - Your name
