                                                                                         PUBLIC
                                                                      SIMULTANEOUS DISTRIBUTION

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                        EL SALVADOR



                    FINANCING PROGRAM FOR SUSTAINABLE,
                       INCLUSIVE, LOW-INCOME HOUSING
                                 (ES-L1165)


FOURTH INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE
       FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) TO FACILITATE
            ACCESS TO BUSINESS AND HOUSING LOANS
                         (ES-O0009)



                                        LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Leticia Riquelme,
Project Team Leader (IFD/CMF); Nathan Nadramija, Alternate Project Team Leader
(IFD/CMF); María Paloma Silva, Alternate Project Team Leader (CSD/HUD); Diego Herrera,
Karina Azar, Sandra Avalos, Daniel Fonseca, Jaime Sarmiento, Aurea Fuentes,
and Cecilia Bernedo (IFD/CMF); Karla María Meléndez (CSD/CCS); Nidia Hidalgo
(SCL/GDI); Esteban de Dobrzynski (LEG/SGO); Carlos Carpizo Riva Palacio (VPC/FMP),
Sofia del Castillo, Jorge Guerrero, and Juan José Cervantes (CSD/HUD); Juan Parodi and
Juan Fonseca (INO/SMC); and Jan Eskildsen (INO/FLI).



This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding
and replacing the original version.
                                                     CONTENTS



PROGRAM SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................................1

       A.     Background, problem to be addressed, and rationale....................................1
       B.     Objectives, components, and cost................................................................13
       C.     Key results indicators ...................................................................................14

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................15

       A.     Financing instruments ..................................................................................15
       B.     Environmental and social risks .....................................................................16
       C.     Fiduciary risks...............................................................................................16
       D.     Other key issues and risks ...........................................................................16

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN..............................................................17

       A.     Summary of implementation arrangements..................................................17
       B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ........................................19

IV.    ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ..............................................................................................19
                                                    - ii -


                                                 ANNEXES

Annex I          Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix
Annex II         Results Matrix
Annex III        Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                    LINKS

REQUIRED
1.    Monitoring and evaluation plan
2.    Environmental and social review summary
OPTIONAL
1.    Program economic analysis
2.    Programmatic approach of the CCLIP
3.    Market share of the Low-income Housing Fund
4.    Relevant portfolio balances, 2021-2023
5.    Housing deficit in El Salvador
6.    Sector supply and demand analysis
7.    Climate change and sustainability annex
8.    Green home features of the new housing units
9.    Low-income Housing Fund credit program requirements and conditions
10.   CCLIP liaison agency
11.   Natural disaster risk analysis for new and existing homes
12.   Program Operating Regulations
13.   Bibliography
14.   Vertical logic - causal chain of development challenges and IDB intervention
15.   Coordination between housing agencies in El Salvador
16.   The Bank’s experience in the housing sector
                                       - iii -


                                 ABBREVIATIONS


BANDESAL   Banco de Desarrollo de la República de El Salvador (Development Bank of the
           Republic of El Salvador)
CABEI      Central American Bank for Economic Integration
CCLIP      Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects
EDGE       Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies (certification)
EHPM       Encuesta de Hogares de Propósitos Múltiples (Multipurpose Household Survey)
ESMS       Environmental and social management system
FONAVIPO   Fondo Nacional para la Vivienda Popular (National Popular Housing Fund)
FSV        Fondo Social para la Vivienda (Low-income Housing Fund)
GDP        Gross domestic product
IFC        International Finance Corporation
IMF        International Monetary Fund
MDB        Multilateral development banks
MIVI       Ministry of Housing
MSMEs      Micro-, small, and medium-sized enterprises
SCI        Department of Trade and Investment
SMMV       Salarios mínimos mensuales vigentes (current monthly minimum wage)
SOFR       Secured Overnight Financing Rate
                                       PROGRAM SUMMARY
                                          EL SALVADOR
                FINANCING PROGRAM FOR SUSTAINABLE, INCLUSIVE, LOW-INCOME HOUSING
                                           (ES-L1165)
                  FOURTH INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE
       FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) TO FACILITATE ACCESS TO BUSINESS AND HOUSING LOANS
                                           (ES-O0009)

                                                Financial Terms and Conditions
  Borrower and executing agency                                                  Flexible Financing Facility(b)
  Low-income Housing Fund (FSV)                                 Amortization period:                    25 years
  Guarantor:                                                    Disbursement period:                    5 years
  Republic of El Salvador                                       Grace period:                           5.5 years(c)
                                  Amount                        Interest rate:                          SOFR-based
            Source                             Percentage
                                    (US$)                       Credit fee:                             (d)

  IDB (Ordinary Capital):  (a)   50,000,000        100          Inspection and supervision fee:         (d)

  Total:                         50,000,000        100          Weighted average life:                  15.25 years
                                                                Approval currency:                      U.S. dollar
                                                      Program at a Glance
  Program objective/description: The program’s general objective is to help narrow the housing deficit by providing mortgage
  loans for the purchase of low-income housing. Its specific development objectives are to: (i) expand access to mortgage credit
  for home purchases by underserved population groups; and (ii) foster the adoption of sustainable housing.
  Special contractual clauses precedent to first disbursement of the loan: The first disbursement of the loan proceeds will
  be subject to the borrower’s approval of the program Operating Regulations and their entry into effect, to the Bank’s
  satisfaction, in accordance with the terms previously approved by the Bank (paragraph 3.6).
  For socioenvironmental contractual clauses, see Annex B of the environmental and social review summary.
  Exceptions to Bank policies: The Republic of El Salvador will be the guarantor of the borrower’s financial obligations under
  the loan, including fees and interest payments and local counterpart funding. A partial waiver is requested of the Policy on
  Guarantees Required from the Borrower (Operational Policy OP-303), with respect to execution obligations under
  the program. This exception is justified on the basis of Article 11 of the Basic Law on Public Financial Administration
  (Decree 516/1995), which stipulates that obligations relating to loan execution fall outside the legal mandate of the authorities
  of the Republic of El Salvador (paragraph 3.7).
                                                      Strategic Alignment
  Objectives:(e)                                  O1 ☒                           O2 ☒                             O3 ☐
  Operational Focus Areas:(e)            OF1 ☐        OF2-G ☒       OF3 ☒        OF4 ☐        OF5 ☐        OF6 ☒        OF7 ☐
                                                      OF2-D ☒
(a)   Pursuant to Document AB-2990, the disbursement of Bank loan proceeds will be subject to the following maximum limits:
      (i) up to 15% during the first 12 months; (ii) up to 30% during the first 24 months; and (iii) up to 50% during the first
      36 months, all of which will be counted from the approval date of the loan by the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors
      (paragraph 2.2).
(b)   Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes
      to the amortization schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe protection conversions. The
      Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(c)   Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided
      that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as
      documented in the loan contract.
(d)   The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as
      part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the applicable policies.
(e)   O1 (Reduce poverty and inequality); O2 (Address climate change); and O3 (Bolster sustainable regional growth).
(f)   OF1 (Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action); OF2-G (Gender equality); OF2-D (Inclusion of diverse population
      groups); OF3 (Institutional capacity, rule of law, and citizen security); OF4 (Social protection and human capital
      development); OF5 (Productive development and innovation through the private sector); OF6 (Sustainable, resilient, and
      inclusive infrastructure); and OF7 (Regional integration).
                             I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem to be addressed, and rationale
1.1       Background of the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP)
          (optional link 2). This program is the fourth and final individual operation under
          the CCLIP to Facilitate Access to Business and Housing Loans (ES-O0009). The
          CCLIP’s objective is to promote productive activities and social welfare in
          El Salvador by providing access to credit in the business and housing sectors.
          It will be implemented according to Multisector Modality II, pursuant to the
          criteria specified in the Proposed Amendments to the CCLIP (GN-2246-13). The
          liaison agency will be El Salvador’s Department of Trade and Investment (optional
          link 10). This US$400 million credit line was approved in July 2020, together with
          its first operation, First Program of Access to Lending for the Recovery of Micro,
          Small, and Medium-sized Enterprises (MSMEs) (5083/OC-ES for US$200 million).
          The latter was successfully implemented by the Banco de Desarrollo de
          El Salvador (BANDESAL), supporting business recovery during and after the
          COVID-19 crisis. The second operation, the Low-income Housing Finance
          Program (5352/OC-ES), was approved in September 2021 for US$50 million and
          is being executed by the Low-income Housing Fund (FSV). Disbursement of the
          final US$25 million is expected this year, subject to effective fulfillment of the
          financing criteria (specifically, targets for lending to women and disaster risk
          mitigation analyses) (optional link 11). The third operation was the Access to Credit
          Program for Micro, Small, and Medium-sized Enterprises (5733/OC-ES), which
          was approved in January 2023 for US$100 million. The latter is being executed by
          BANDESAL to a satisfactory standard, with 30% of the loan proceeds disbursed
          to date and a final disbursement date in 2027.
1.2       Macroeconomic context. El Salvador is an upper-middle income country with
          modest rates of growth. The economy is dominated by the tertiary sector, which
          accounts for 60.2% of value added, and is largely dependent on international
          remittances (which account for approximately 25% of GDP).1 Economic growth
          averaged 2.4% between 2010 and 2022.2 In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic
          severely impacted the Salvadoran economy, leading to a 7.9% contraction in GDP.
          However, economic activity quickly recovered in 2021, with GDP growth of 11.9%.
          Despite the recent improvement in economic growth (3.5% in 2023),3 the country
          remains below the regional average of the Central American countries, the
          Dominican Republic, and Panama, which was 4.2% that same year.4 For 2024, the
          International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects growth of 3%,5 while local authorities
          estimate a range of between 3.0% and 3.5%. In addition, inflation in 2024 is
          expected to close the year at 2%, according to the IMF.
1.3       Housing issues in Latin America and the Caribbean. It is estimated that 45%
          of households in Latin America and the Caribbean lack access to decent housing


1    Optional link 13 (1).
2    Ibid.
3    Ibid.
4    Optional link 13 (2).
5    Ibid.
                                                 -2-



         (IDB, 2022). This deficit stems from a combination of factors, and closing it will
         require investment of around 7.8% of GDP each year, in addition to implementing
         a set of policies to address the deficit, including subsidies for low-income
         population groups, self-build programs, low-income mortgage loans, rental
         accommodation, effective regulation of land use, and titling programs (IDB, 2012).
1.4      Housing sector in El Salvador. The housing sector is of strategic significance
         due to its high social impact and potentially large contribution to economic
         recovery. Access to decent housing supports the attainment of 14 of the
         17 Sustainable Development Goals. It is also estimated that the sector can
         contribute as much as 16% of GDP in emerging economies and create up to
         six jobs (directly and indirectly) for each housing unit built (Mexican National
         Housing Council (CONAVI), 2021). The Ministry of Housing (MIVI) is the main
         government organization responsible for formulating and executing housing
         policies and programs in El Salvador, designing national housing plans, managing
         financial resources for low-income housing programs, and establishing
         construction standards. Its goal is to reduce the housing deficit to a minimum, and
         to this end it coordinates with the Property Legalization Institute, which is
         responsible for regularizing land ownership and issuing property titles to squatter
         families. To complement its functions, the MIVI coordinates the FSV
         (paragraph 1.21) and the National Popular Housing Fund (FONAVIPO), which are
         public entities providing financing and contributions for the low-income housing
         segment. FONAVIPO provides contributions and loans to low-income families for
         home improvements, while the FSV focuses on mortgages. Meanwhile,
         BANDESAL and Banco Hipotecario are attached to the Ministry of Finance and
         provide construction loans for housing development projects and mortgages for
         micro- and small enterprises, respectively.
1.5      Housing deficit. According to the 2023 Multipurpose Household Survey (EHPM),
         El Salvador has a population of just over 6 million,6 with the number of households
         totaling 2,019,583. Analysis of the housing stock shows that 28% of households
         exhibit overcrowding (i.e., homes with more than three people per bedroom), while
         50.7% suffer from qualitative deficits (i.e., physical and structural inadequacies),
         primarily with respect to basic services, water supply, and flooring. The lack of
         adequate housing—ideally both climate-resilient and of a sustainable nature to
         mitigate emissions—forces many families to live in small, shared spaces; this not
         only undermines the quality of life, health, and well-being of their members, but
         also exposes them to shocks and reduces their income-earning potential. The
         quantitative deficit7 in urban areas stands at 333,468 housing units. Within this,
         57% is concentrated among people earning less than the current monthly minimum
         wage (SMMV), who will require subsidy-based housing solutions in order to buy a
         house. A further 41% earn between 2 and 4 SMMVs. These individuals can secure
         financing for homes costing less than US$40,000, but require appropriate interest
         rates and flexible payment periods to avoid pressure on their payment capacity.8



6   Of these, 75% live in urban areas.
7   Overcrowded homes, rooms in houses or tenements, or makeshift dwellings.
8   Optional link 5.
                                                  -3-



         Based on these figures, it is estimated that approximately US$4 billion will be
         required to serve this segment, equivalent to around 12% of national GDP.
1.6      With respect to demand, the reasons for the housing deficit are similar to those
         elsewhere in Latin America and the Caribbean:9 (i) rapid urban population growth
         and high population densities, which have also led to increased house prices.
         Three quarters of the population live in urban areas, while the country also has the
         highest population density in Central America;10 (ii) limited purchasing power, with
         70% of individuals having incomes of less than 1 SMMV (79% in the case of
         women). Average monthly household income is US$700, a level that makes it
         difficult to secure quality housing; (iii) informality and fluctuating incomes, with 65%
         of the population working in the informal sector, thus limiting access to formal
         credit; (iv) a lack of programs serving the population earning less than 1 SMMV;
         and (v) low access to mortgage credit (5.4% of GDP). Supply-side issues are as
         follows: (i) nonexistent supply of sustainable low-income housing; (ii) minimal
         supply of adequate low-income housing (only 18% of housing has been made
         available to families with incomes below US$1,500);11 and (iii) an absence of
         enabling factors such as spatial or urban planning and site development for
         low-income housing (IDB, 2022).
1.7      These problems have led to the proliferation of informal settlements with
         precarious living conditions and a lack of adequate basic services. This has a
         negative impact on the health and well-being of residents. The scarcity of suitable
         and accessible housing also acts as a constraint on economic and social
         development, as families’ capacity to improve their economic and educational
         situation is limited by their lack of access to safe, stable housing. Alongside high
         construction costs for low-income housing, the lack of urban planning and the
         housing development market’s focus on medium-high income segments have also
         lead to a minimal supply of low-income housing and inefficiency in the use of land
         and resources, thus aggravating inequality and socioeconomic segregation. These
         difficulties combine to hinder progress toward sustainable and equitable
         development, affecting both the general welfare of the population and economic
         growth in the country.
1.8      Weak financial sector contribution to minimizing the housing deficit.
         According to data from the World Bank’s most recent Global Findex report,12 total
         access to mortgage credit in El Salvador is 5.4%, below the average of 7% for the
         region as a whole. Moreover, in analyzing the lowest income segments, only 2.4%
         of the poorest 40% of the population receives mortgage loans, which is relatively
         low compared with the medium- and low-income country group (3.6%).
1.9      According to data from the Financial System Superintendency, only 30% of
         mortgage loans have been issued to low- and medium-income individuals, even
         though they account for more than 90% of the population.13 A report by the


9    Multipurpose Household Survey (EHPM) 2023.
10   Optional link 13 (25).
11   Optional link 13 (23).
12   Optional link 13 (5).
13   Optional link 13 (6).
                                                      -4-



          Central Bank (Banco Central de Reserva, 2023) shows that financial institutions
          target their mortgage products to high-income segments due to their lower
          perceived risk and higher payment capacity.14 Lower-income groups generally lack
          credit histories and collateral, and this limits their access to mortgage loans. The
          situation is intensified in the case of subsegments such as women, individuals
          employed in the informal sector (who earn 25% less on average), recipients of
          remittances, and people with disabilities, thus increasing inequality in housing
          access. Commercial banks are also reluctant to provide long-term credit due to
          limited access to capital markets (private debt is equivalent to 3% of GDP), high
          transaction costs due to balance sheet mismatches (current account deposits
          stand at 57% of GDP (World Bank, 2024)), and issues surrounding the efficiency
          of property rights and legal certainty (IMF, 2014).
1.10      The FSV is a key actor in El Salvador’s mortgage sector, particularly at the
          medium- and low-income levels. In 2023, it issued more than 8,000 loans totaling
          US$183 million, making it the main intermediary for low-income mortgages. Most
          FSV loans are focused on individuals earning up to 2.5 SMMVs, and women
          account for approximately 52% of its total loan portfolio for segments earning up
          to 4 SMMVs. The FSV accounts for 63% of the total number of mortgage loans
          issued by the financial sector. In terms of portfolio value, however, it accounts for
          only 33% (US$1.421 billion), as the average FSV loan is US$22,034 (versus
          US$74,826 in the case of commercial banks), reflecting the FSV’s focus on
          households earning up to 4 SMMVs.15 With regard to the type of housing, portfolio
          balances also show that 67% of loans are for existing homes, with new units
          accounting for the rest. Purchases worth up to US$20,000 account for 42% of
          loans, while 57% are for homes priced between US$20,000 and US$40,000.
          Portfolio balances at the end of 2023 showed that 75% of loans were to households
          with incomes of up to 2.5 SMMVs, while 25% were to households earning between
          2.5 and 4 SMMVs (paragraph 1.21).
1.11      Impact of climate change on the housing sector. In El Salvador, areas
          classified as risk zones cover 88.7% of the national territory, accounting for 95.4%
          of the population. This makes the country one of the most vulnerable in the world
          according to the National Risk and Vulnerability Status Report.16 Climate scenarios
          indicate that temperatures may rise by up to 1.5°C by 2041. Rainfall is expected
          to increase in intensity, leading to more frequent flooding and landslides that will
          have a particularly large impact on the population with poor-quality housing, as
          well as on densely populated urban settlements. Other population groups will be
          affected by water stress, making access to resilient, well-located housing a
          pressing need.
1.12      The housing sector also contributes to climate change through the production of
          greenhouse gases. According to the country’s Biennial Update Report on Climate
          Change 2018, the sector generates approximately 2.7% of greenhouse gas
          emissions; however, this figure has risen fivefold over the last 40 years, with 30%


14   Optional link 13 (7).
15   Optional links 3 and 4.
16   Precipitation, tropical storms, hurricanes, and droughts that lead to recurrent flooding, landslides, water
     pollution, water stress, and damage to housing, infrastructure, and food production, among other things.
                                                   -5-



          of the increase resulting from electricity usage. The location of housing also affects
          transportation habits and the demand for infrastructure, with a direct impact on
          greenhouse gas emissions.17 The report “Creating Markets for Climate Business”
          shows how targeted, strategic financing has led to a significant increase in the
          adoption of sustainable technologies and practices in different sectors. In
          El Salvador, however, there is still no targeted source of credit for sustainable
          low-income housing on either the supply or demand sides, underlining the need
          for institutional strengthening in the housing ecosystem in order to raise awareness
          and promote sustainable practices.
1.13      As part of the Paris Agreement, El Salvador submitted its updated Nationally
          Determined Contribution in 2021. Its mitigation targets include annual reductions
          in the country’s greenhouse gas emissions, while adaptation targets include
          developing adaptable and resilient cities. The National Climate Change Plan
          (2022-2026) also includes a component to integrate sustainability into spatial
          planning.
1.14      Gender and the mortgage market. Women face a series of gaps that limit their
          employability, wages, and access to collateral as compared with men.18 According
          to World Bank data,19 only 29% of women in El Salvador have a bank account,
          versus 45% of men. In addition, 60.87% of households report having a male head
          of household, whereas 39.13% have women heads of household. One of the main
          reasons for low levels of credit access among women is access to collateral
          (women are less likely to have assets registered in their name), as well as high
          financing costs, which are reflected in more limited access to financing. Ensuring
          that women have access to credit and property ownership is linked to the following
          outcomes: (i) more productive environments (Morrison et al.); (ii) greater savings
          capacity and a lower likelihood of economic shocks (Seguino et al.); (iii) improved
          security and stability;20 (iv) positive externalities in women’s negotiation capacities
          (IDB, 2021); and (v) a greater likelihood that women will set up businesses
          (World Bank, 2008). At the same time, increased lending to women is linked to
          higher growth among financial intermediaries and an improvement in their risk
          profiles, as women have a better repayment performance (International Finance
          Corporation (IFC), 2014).
1.15      The Central Bank created a roadmap to guide the implementation by financial
          institutions of policies to foster financial inclusion for women. In the case of the
          FSV, an analysis of the Fund’s portfolio found that around 52% of its loans were
          to women.21 It designed the “Casa Mujer” program to support women homebuyers,
          including those traditionally excluded due to cultural biases (e.g., single, widowed,
          or divorced women). To expand the mainstreaming of gender in the rest of the
          FSV’s programs, the IDB approved a technical assistance operation to review the



17   Optional link 13 (4).
18   Optional link 13 (8).
19   Optional link 13 (9).
20   Optional link 13 (10).
21   Final report of the consultancy financed under client support operation ATN/OC-18918-RG, approved in
     2021 for US$350,000.
                                                       -6-



          inclusion of gender in its products,22 improving the potential for more women to
          receive financing.
1.16      Situation for persons with disabilities. According to the United Nations
          Population Fund,23 the overall prevalence of disability in El Salvador is 20.4%, with
          severe disability affecting 7.6% of the population. Disability affects women (22.2%)
          to a greater extent than men (18.2%), and according to the 2015 National Survey
          of Persons with Disability, mobility difficulties within the home are more prevalent
          among women (26.9%) than among men (21.7%). Although there are no figures
          for the number of people with disabilities who access financial services, the FSV
          has borrower-declared data from which information can be obtained.24 During the
          2021-2023 period, the average annual number of loans issued by the FSV to
          people with disabilities was 15, divided proportionately between men and women.
          To further strengthen its treatment of issues relating to persons with disabilities, in
          December 2022 the FSV signed an interagency agreement with the National
          Council for the Inclusion of Persons with Disability (CONAIPD).25 The FSV’s
          activities include providing homes with accessibility features, making the FSV
          compliant with regulations governing universal accessibility design for people
          with disabilities.26
1.17      Situation for the diaspora and recipients of remittances.27 Use of the financial
          system by the recipients of remittances is either limited or nonexistent, as these
          transactions do not involve any financial products or services other than remittance
          distribution services. Remittances totaling US$8,329,100,000 were received in
          El Salvador in 2023,28 equivalent to 24.49% of GDP. Families that receive
          remittances primarily use them for consumption. It is estimated that 32.6% of
          remittances received by Salvadoran families have been used to pay for real estate
          in the country, either for the emigrant themselves or their families; a mortgage
          product for this segment would therefore help to improve financial stability.29
1.18      Market failures. Based on the foregoing discussion, two main causes of the
          problems in access to low-income (particularly sustainable) housing can be
          identified. The first is of a structural nature and relates to the limited supply of
          low-income housing (paragraph 1.6).30 There is a high concentration of housing
          developers in the sector that are focused mainly on housing for high-income
          families.31 There are few incentives for these developers to build low-income


22   Ibid.
23   Optional link 13 (11).
24   Ibid, footnote 19.
25   Optional link 13 (12).
26   Optional link 13 (13).
27   Optional link 13 (14).
28   Optional link 13 (15).
29   Optional link 13 (16).
30   This issue will not be addressed in the operation, but an indirect impact is expected as increased demand
     will boost the supply of sustainable, low-income housing. The possibility of addressing this problem through
     the MIVI and BANDESAL is being discussed as part of the dialogue with the country, while IDB Invest is
     examining financing for housing developers that focus on low-income segments.
31   Optional link 13 (23).
                                                      -7-



          housing, due, inter alia, to constant increases in land values (which lead to low
          margins) and limited access to financing for such projects.32 Sustainable,
          low-income housing is also scarce due to a lack of national construction standards
          for the subsector, while costs are approximately 7% higher,33 an expense that is
          difficult for this social segment to absorb directly. These weaknesses mean that
          emissions in the country’s housing sector may continue to increase
          (paragraph 1.11). Lastly, supply is limited by deficiencies in enabling factors such
          as spatial/urban planning and the process of preparing specific sites for
          construction. The second cause is access to long-term mortgage financing. Given
          the relationship between housing prices and household income, home buyers
          generally rely on long-term mortgage financing, which is affected by weaknesses
          on both the supply and demand sides (optional link 6). With respect to demand,
          there are information asymmetries in relation to the population earning between
          1 and 4 SMMVs (paragraph 1.5), and these hinder the effective assessment of the
          risk profiles of potential clients. This, in turn, limits access to credit, particularly for
          women (paragraph 1.14) and vulnerable groups such as informal sector workers
          (paragraph 1.6), recipients of remittances (paragraph 1.17), and people with
          disabilities (paragraph 1.16). Although these segments have relatively stable
          incomes that would enable them to allocate between 30% and 35% of their monthly
          incomes to mortgage payments, they usually lack solid credit histories and
          significant assets that can be used as collateral. As regards the supply of finance,
          financial institutions face barriers to providing long-term credit because deposits
          from the public are their main source of funding.34 The lack of capital market depth35
          generates high transaction costs and greater market risk due to mismatches in
          financial institutions’ balance sheets. These limitations curtail the supply of
          long-term financing, as well as the availability of proper credit scoring tools and a
          more diverse range of financial products (paragraph 1.9). The last issue is support
          for families with earnings below 1 SMMV, which is of greater complexity due to its
          multidimensional nature. In this area, policies could focus on financial products for
          self-build construction and improvement projects, as well upfront subsidies for
          purchases of decent housing and site preparation (including utilities and titling),
          among other things.36
1.19      Program rationale and intervention strategy. Interventions involving public
          development banks are justified where they address market failures or achieve
          high social returns that support a country’s public policy priorities. Dedicated credit
          lines with public development banks have also been found to promote public
          policies that foster sustainable economic growth (Oxford 2018).This program
          addresses a series of barriers to financing for low-income housing in El Salvador,
          including mortgage financing for sustainable housing units. By expanding the




32   Ibid.
33   Optional link 13 (4).
34   Deposits with commercial banks stand at 75% of GDP (IMF, 2022).
35   Optional link 13 (24)
36   Although this issue is not included in the program, dialogue is ongoing with the MIVI concerning the design
     of relevant policies.
                                                      -8-



          supply of financing for low-income housing (up to US$40,000),37 the proposed
          intervention will enable households earning up to 4 SMMVs to buy homes, with
          emphasis on women and vulnerable populations and a pilot program to finance
          sustainable home purchases. It will also boost the supply of new housing and
          encourage real estate developers to adopt sustainable housing standards. Access
          to housing enables low- and middle-income households to save, build their assets,
          and withstand crises. Owning their own home mitigates the vulnerability of
          households who are either living in poverty or are at risk of falling back into
          poverty.38 Homeownership opens up opportunities such as access to credit on
          better terms due to the availability of collateral. This is particularly the case for
          women, who face greater financial constraints, and for those employed in the
          informal sector.39 Access to housing also favors household stability, which can help
          to improve opportunities for finding and maintaining employment. These factors
          are also crucial for the economic empowerment of women and vulnerable
          populations. Lastly, construction is one of the four sectors that generate most
          employment in El Salvador, accounting for 6.8% of employment. Together with the
          real estate sector, it generates 12.5% of GDP. At the same time, the availability of
          resilient housing avoids losses due to climate events (Economic Commission for
          Latin America and the Caribbean, 2012), while sustainable homes can generate
          water and energy savings of 20%, in addition to attracting market prices that are
          up to 7% higher.40 This intervention will help to drive demand for low-income
          housing by expanding access to mortgage loans. Indirectly, it seeks to add
          momentum to the market for low-income housing developers by supporting
          effective demand in this segment, particularly for sustainable low-income housing
          that will help to mitigate climate change.
1.20      This program is proposed as a response to these factors, and it will provide
          subloans through the FSV to eligible beneficiaries for the purchase of low-income
          and sustainable low-income housing. It will focus on financing purchases of new
          and existing homes by women and vulnerable population groups,41 with the aim of
          eliminating the housing deficit and promoting purchases of homes that meet
          FSV resilience requirements for natural disaster risks and climate threats
          (optional link 11). It will also finance a pilot program to promote financing for buyers
          of sustainable, low-income housing (optional link 8). The loans will be made
          available at competitive interest rates that will enable the final beneficiaries to
          purchase homes on financial terms that reflect their risk profiles and earnings
          (optional link 9).
1.21      Low-income Housing Fund. The FSV is an autonomous institution that was
          created to address the housing deficit, and it is the country’s largest provider of
          low-income mortgages. As of December 2023, it had total assets of
          US$1.058 billion, with annual growth of 4.4% driven by expansion of the net loan


37   Definition of low-income housing as per FSV regulations. To pay a mortgage of this amount while keeping
     payments under 30% of monthly income, an income of up to 4 SMMVs is required.
38   Optional link 13 (19).
39   Optional link 13 (20).
40   Optional link 13 (22).
41   This proposal will focus on people with disabilities, migrants, and those employed in the informal sector.
                                                -9-



          portfolio. Total liabilities have remained relatively stable and stand at
          US$410 million, with financial creditors and bond issues accounting for the largest
          shares. The FSV’s largest source of financing is its capital, which grew 8.6% in the
          last year, partly as a result of increased reserves. The entity is liquid, with available
          resources covering up to four months of liabilities in accordance with internal
          policies, and it is also profitable (returns on assets and equity of around 7% and
          4%, respectively) and solvent, with capital in excess of risk-weighted assets. Credit
          risk management by the FSV has helped to reduce the rate of arrears, which fell
          from 4.21% in 2019 to 2.37% in 2023. Past-due portfolio coverage stands at a
          multiple of 5.1, and refinancings, restructurings, and past-due loans are all fully
          covered. Even during the stages prior to loan approval, the FSV’s internal
          regulations require housing units to meet minimum criteria in terms of location,
          improvements, and construction methods. Loans are only approved where the
          homes concerned do not exhibit or represent any risk of qualitative deficiencies
          (Mortgage Guarantee Instructions) and are not located in risk zones.42 The current
          US$50 million operation (5352/OC-ES, 2021, which is already 50% disbursed, and
          is expected to be fully disbursed by the end of this year) has financed
          1,529 housing units, with 41.5% of loans going to women. Although the incomes
          of these women were 16% lower on average than male borrowers (US$653), they
          received slightly higher loan amounts (US$16,620.39 versus US$16,159.95) with
          better terms attached, under specific programs such as “Casa Mujer.” The latter is
          notable for its effective financial inclusion and excellent repayment performance,
          which represents a challenge to traditional credit risk models.
1.22      Estimated demand analysis. The demand for FSV credit was analyzed using
          past portfolio figures and projections for the next five years, pointing to demand for
          30,000 low-income housing loans over the next five years (2025-2029), equivalent
          to approximately US$700 million. This overall credit amount includes purchases of
          existing homes (61%) and new ones (36%) (optional link 6), and it compares to a
          total existing FSV lending rate of US$175 million per year. Financing under this
          operation will cover 7% of total demand over the next five years (optional link 6).
1.23      The Bank’s experience in the sector, country, and region (optional link 16).
          The IDB has actively spearheaded the design and implementation of sector
          operations and projects that use development banks as a conduit, both in
          El Salvador and in various other Latin American and the Caribbean countries. The
          Low-Income Housing Finance Program (5352/OC-ES) was approved in 2021 and
          finances low-income housing through the FSV, as well as a methodology for
          mitigating the physical risks associated with climate change (optional link 11). The
          data indicate that this methodology has been implemented in 100% of executed
          activities and that the program has also been effective in fostering home ownership
          for women. Specific analysis of the Casa Mujer program shows its effectiveness in
          terms of financial inclusion. The women served have incomes that are 29.46%
          lower on average, yet the program achieves superior results due to tailored
          benefits. The women receive interest rates that are 21.01% lower and loan
          repayment periods that are 5.22% longer, and they have an excellent repayment
          performance (53.33% fewer days of arrears).


42   Optional link 11.
                                                      - 10 -



1.24      Operation 2760/OC-ME (2012, US$200 million) was completed in 2016. Its aim
          was to support underserved population groups in Mexico, such as workers
          unaffiliated with social security, while also strengthening lending for home
          improvement and self-build projects. Execution of the program was satisfactory
          (project completion report 2760-OC-ME) and supported more than 37,000 housing
          actions. The “Casa Para Todos” Sector Program (CCLIP EC-O0004) was
          approved in 2019 for US$200 million, aimed at addressing the housing deficit for
          the lowest quintiles of the Ecuadorian population by providing full or partial
          subsidies. Also in 2019, the Bank provided a guarantee for a social bond issue by
          Ecuador (4699/OC-EC, 2018, US$300 million),43 enabling the country’s financial
          entities to provide mortgage loans at favorable interest rates for low-income
          housing. In November 2023, Housing Solutions for the Poor and Vulnerable
          Population (operation 5821/OC-EC) was approved for US$106.1 million, together
          with a US$1.6 million investment grant for migrant services. This operation also
          focuses on low-income population segments and addresses both quantitative and
          qualitative deficits.44
1.25      Lessons learned. In addition to the dialogue with development banks and housing
          ministries in the region, the different interventions have helped to identify the
          importance of financial innovation for facilitating access among currently
          underserved population segments. There is also a need to offer dedicated credit
          lines that promote resilient, low-carbon housing on well-located sites connected to
          public utilities. According to the report A Meta-Impact Evaluation of Social Housing
          Programs: The Chilean Case, prepared by the Office of Evaluation and Oversight,
          the impact of operations (such as this one) to promote mortgages for low-income
          housing is to narrow the housing deficit and improve the characteristics of housing.
1.26      The following lessons learned from the previous program with the FSV (5352/OC-
          ES) were extracted and applied to the present operation: (i) an analysis of the
          demand was carried out on mortgage loans by women heads of household, which
          yielded the suggestion of expanding eligibility to serve more women in this
          program; (ii) the previous program demonstrated that, with the appropriate terms
          and conditions, low-income populations can be reliable clients; consequently, the
          present operation will seek to finance other underserved population segments
          (paragraph 1.38); (iii) a methodology was developed in the previous program to
          mitigate disaster risks; in this operation, at least 20% of the financed housing units
          will be certified as sustainable, and the program will also promote the certification
          of developers (optional link 11); and (iv) most of the loans in the previous operation
          were used to finance existing housing, in part due to the scarcity of new social
          housing. Therefore, this operation will promote greater coordination between the
          FSV and developers for the development of new low-income housing.
1.27      Accordingly, lessons learned and good practices have been included in the design
          of this program such as: (i) the importance of the availability of long-term resources
          for strengthening the mortgage credit market (paragraph 1.9); (ii) the importance
          of housing sector policies that take into account lending based on studies of the


43   The guarantee is currently in place and will remain in effect until 2035. To date, however, no operation has
     been executed against the guarantee.
44   Awaiting signature.
                                            - 11 -



       housing value chain (paragraph 1.30) and promote private sector participation on
       both the supply and the demand sides (paragraph 1.28); (iii) the importance of
       public sector mortgage lending entities for supporting and mainstreaming credit
       access for both women (paragraph 1.40) and vulnerable population segments who
       lack access to credit from the traditional financial system; (iv) the anti-cyclical role
       of public financial mechanisms; and (v) the importance of dedicated credit lines for
       promoting and financing sustainable housing (paragraph 1.19).
1.28   Complementarity with other IDB Group operations in the country (optional
       link 15). Limited access to credit remains a significant barrier to growth and
       development in El Salvador. Factors such as informality, lack of collateral and
       information asymmetry hinder private financing, particularly for MSMEs and the
       social housing sector, which has led public development banks to play a key role
       in mitigating these market failures. In this context, the Bank has supported
       BANDESAL and the FSV over the last decade in the gradual development of
       innovative financial instruments such as guarantee funds, social mortgages, and
       green financing lines (paragraphs 1.23, 1.24, 1.32, and 3.2), to close financing
       gaps in the MSME and social housing segments. This operation is part of a
       package of three new interventions—ES-L1162, ES-L1163, and ES-L1165—that
       are designed and will be executed independently, but related to each other, thus
       maintaining this strategic approach by continuing to support BANDESAL and the
       FSV in developing new financing instruments. This shared approach facilitates a
       coordinated response to the needs of El Salvador’s financial sector, with public
       development banks as the central axis, maximizing the programmatic impact and,
       at the same time, making it possible to address sector specificities in each of the
       interventions, considering that the three interventions: (i) serve different sectors
       and types of beneficiaries, with different maturity periods in terms of the demand
       and conditions to meet it; and (ii) have different execution mechanisms
       (paragraphs 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4) as well as different strategic partners
       (paragraph 3.1).
1.29   The Bank’s value added and additionality. This operation, which is part of a
       CCLIP (optional link 2), reflects the long-term relationship between the IDB and
       the FSV, building on previous work and encouraging innovation on the part of the
       FSV. It will enable the institution to develop programs to address new housing
       needs, such as the design of financial products for purchases of sustainable
       housing. It will also encourage the FSV to implement strategies that prioritize
       services to ensure access to decent housing solutions for women and vulnerable
       populations such as recipients of remittances, persons with disabilities (pilot
       initiative), and informal workers.
1.30   In previous operations with the FSV, the IDB has demonstrated its ability to
       strengthen programs for specific sectors, such as credit for women and the
       implementation of methodologies to mitigate natural disaster risks. The IDB’s
       additionality can be seen in the ongoing dialogue and continuous support provided
       through technical cooperation operations to strengthen the FSV’s capabilities;
       these have enabled the Fund to continue to improve the efficiency of its services
       to the mortgage sector. The FSV’s capacities with regard to diversity and inclusion
       will be strengthened over this period through a technical cooperation operation that
       is currently being prepared to improve services for the segment of persons with
                                                   - 12 -



          disabilities.45 Resources are also being used under technical cooperation
          operation ATN/OC-20068-RG to finance a study of the housing value chain in
          El Salvador, and this will deepen understanding of how the housing sector works
          in order to identify activities that add value, as well as opportunities for
          public-private projects. Lastly, support is being provided under technical
          cooperation agreement ATN/OC-19731-ES for the development of a social and
          environmental certification system for housing. This will facilitate the creation of
          sustainability features and criteria that will be a key part of housing policy, together
          with a territorial and urban information system that will be used to train the FSV
          and housing developers in sustainability issues.
1.31      Coordination with other multilateral and donor agencies. The program will
          complement US$100 million of assistance that is being provided to the FSV by the
          Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI).46 The objective of
          the CABEI’s Financial Intermediation Program for Social Housing is to help
          low-income households purchase, build, and improve their homes.47 The CABEI
          loan seeks to finance home improvement loans, thus complementing the
          IDB program’s focus on addressing the quantitative deficit by expanding
          long-term credit.
1.32      Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the IDB Group Institutional
          Strategy, Transforming for Greater Impact and Scale (GN-3159-12) and is aligned
          with the following objectives: (i) reducing poverty and inequality by providing credit
          for low-income households to purchase housing; and (ii) addressing climate
          change, as according to the multilateral development banks’ joint methodology for
          estimating climate financing, 20% of the funds under the operation will be invested
          in climate change mitigation through purchases of housing that meet the equivalent
          of “Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies” (EDGE) Level 1 certification in
          energy and water efficiency and embodied carbon in materials). The program is
          also aligned with the following operational focus areas: (i) gender equality;
          (ii) inclusion of diverse population groups; (iii) institutional capacity, rule of law, and
          citizen security; and (iv) sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure.
1.33      The program is aligned with the Sector Strategy on Institutions for Growth and
          Social Welfare (GN-2587-2) due to its component in support of access to financial
          services for the majority. It is also consistent with the Integrated Strategy for
          Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation and Sustainable and Renewable
          Energy (GN-2609-1), as it finances sustainable housing that has been assessed
          in order to mitigate natural disaster risks. The program is aligned with the Urban
          Development and Housing Sector Framework Document (GN-2732-11), as it helps
          to address the challenge of structural social exclusion. It is also consistent with the
          IDB Group Country Strategy with El Salvador 2021-2024 (GN-3046-1) in relation
          to its strategic objective of increasing financing for access to housing in vulnerable
          segments. Lastly, the program is included in the Update to Annex III of the 2024
          Operational Program (GN-3207-3).



45   ATN/OC-21066-RG (client support, US$310,568).
46   US$50 million had been disbursed as of July 2024.
47   Optional link 13 (17).
                                                      - 13 -



1.34      Gender equality and inclusion of diverse groups. The program is consistent
          with the Gender and Diversity Sector Framework Document (GN-2800-13) as it
          establishes a specific target for lending to women and scales up this activity
          relative to previous programs. With respect to diversity, a pilot initiative will be
          implemented with a credit allocation for persons with disabilities, and the FSV’s
          institutional capacities will also be strengthened to guide work aimed at improving
          the inclusion of persons with disabilities in the mortgage market.48
1.35      Paris Agreement Alignment. This operation has been reviewed using the Joint
          MDB Methodological Principles for Assessment of Paris Agreement Alignment of
          New Operations and the IDB Group Paris Alignment Implementation Approach
          (PAIA) (GN-3142-1), yielding the following conclusions: (i) it is aligned with the
          Paris Agreement adaptation target, and (ii) based on specific analysis, it is aligned
          with the Paris Agreement mitigation target. Alignment is based on consideration of
          the following elements: (i) at least 20% of the loan proceeds will be used for
          mortgages to purchase homes with sustainability strategies equivalent to Level 1
          EDGE certification; and (ii) through an institutional strengthening plan, support will
          be provided to develop a social and environmental certification arrangement with
          sustainability features and criteria that will form an essential part of housing policy.
          Training in sustainability issues will also be provided for developers and FSV staff.
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.36      Objectives. The program’s general objective is to help narrow the housing deficit
          by providing mortgage loans for the purchase of low-income housing. Its specific
          development objectives are to: (i) expand access to mortgage credit for home
          purchases by underserved population groups; and (ii) foster the adoption of
          sustainable housing.
1.37      Sole component. Access to low-income mortgage credit to narrow the
          quantitative housing deficit for underserved population segments
          (US$50 million). The program is structured into a sole component for
          US$50 million. These resources will be disbursed to the FSV, which will in turn
          provide subloans to households for the purchase of low-income housing. Use of
          the loan proceeds will be subject to the following conditions: (i) a minimum of 50%
          of the resources will be allocated to loans for women (paragraph 1.40); (ii) 30% will
          be allocated to vulnerable population groups;49 and (iii) at least 20% will be used
          for housing that meet sustainability criteria, as established in the program
          Operating Regulations.50 The operation will allocate US$800,000 on a pilot basis
          to finance housing for persons with disabilities, supporting an initial exploration of




48   These institutional activities will be supported by resources from technical cooperation operation
     ATN/OC-21066-RG.
49   The following segments will be monitored in order to gather information that will help identify improvements
     in the FSV’s current programs: recipients of remittances, informal workers, and individuals with incomes
     below 2 SMMVs.
50   Housing units that yield resource savings equivalent to Level 1 of the IFC’s EDGE standard.
                                                      - 14 -



          the needs of this market.51 All of the subloans will be analyzed using the natural
          disaster risk methodology (optional link 11).
1.38      Eligible beneficiaries. Beneficiaries will be eligible for a home loan if they meet
          the following criteria: maximum income of 4 SMMVs, maximum house price of
          US$40,000, and adult applicants with demonstrated payment capacity, consistent
          with the FSV’s own processes and methodologies. The program will seek to
          finance the following underserved sectors: (i) women;52 and (ii) vulnerable
          individuals, including persons with disabilities,53 informal workers,54 and families
          who receive remittances.55 The program will provide mortgages with repayment
          periods of up to 30 years for first-time homebuyers, as stipulated in the
          program Operating Regulations.
1.39      Financing amount and limit. The program is expected to benefit a total of
          6,000 people.56 Subloans will be subject to a maximum amount of US$40,000, as
          established in the program Operating Regulations.
1.40      Gender and diversity considerations. The available data (paragraph 1.14)
          supports a lending target of 50% in the number of loans to women. This raises the
          scale of such lending compared to previous operations and will support a reduction
          in the gender gap. The IDB has assisted the FSV in introducing a comprehensive
          gender perspective into all its products (paragraph 1.15), helping to ensure that
          they are suitable for women. With respect to diversity, the Bank will for the first time
          work with the FSV on a pilot financing initiative for persons with disabilities. The
          minimum financing allocation will be US$800,000, taking into account the available
          data on past lending to this segment (paragraph 1.16). To support the FSV in
          drawing lessons from this initiative, technical assistance will be prepared to
          strengthen the FSV’s institutional capacities and guide work to improve the
          inclusion of persons with disabilities in the mortgage market.57
C.        Key results indicators
1.41      The following indicators will be used to measure the general development
          objective: (i) the quantitative housing deficit in El Salvador, and (ii) the percentage


51   In addition to the pilot financing initiative for persons with disabilities, resources will be provided under
     technical cooperation operation ATN/OC-21066-RG to help strengthen the FSV’s institutional capacities
     in order to better understand the financing environment for persons with disabilities.
52   Any woman mortgage beneficiary, regardless of marital status, consistent with the findings of the
     consultancy financed under technical cooperation operation ATN/OC-18918-RG.
53   Any physical or cognitive disability, as certified by a sworn statement, medical or legal affidavit, or other
     official document.
54   Individuals with no contributions to the pension savings system in the last six months or who belong to the
     variable income sector and have verifiable earnings.
55   Individuals who can demonstrate that they receive funds from abroad, consistent with the FSV’s “Vivienda
     Cercana” program (optional link 9).
56   Based on 2,000 beneficiary households with an average of three people per home (total number of
     homes/total population).
57   These activities will be supported by resources from technical cooperation operation ATN/OC-21066-RG.
     They will include a diagnostic assessment of the situation for persons with disabilities in El Salvador,
     identification of the gaps that they face in the financial system, and recommendations for the more effective
     implementation of programs under consideration for this group.
                                                 - 15 -



       of those developers building homes financed by FSV mortgages that are certified.
       The indicators used to measure the specific development objectives will be as
       follows: (i) the relevant portfolio of FSV mortgages for beneficiaries targeted under
       the program; (ii) the percentage of program resources used to finance housing
       for women; (iii) the relevant portfolio of FSV mortgages channeled to vulnerable
       individuals; and (iv) the relevant portfolio of FSV mortgages used to finance
       purchases of sustainable homes that yield savings equivalent to the
       EDGE standard.
1.42   Economic analysis. The economic evaluation identifies the flows of benefits and
       costs generated by the program. The benefits comprise: (i) the value to the
       families, estimated as the value of imputed rent net of mortgage payments for the
       new homes, including a residual amount at the end of the period to reflect the
       housing asset; (ii) value added from the development and sale of new housing
       units; (iii) value added from real estate brokerage for existing homes; and (iv) gains
       from higher imputed rents from both new and existing homes relative to the
       situation without the program. After deducting program costs and applying a 12%
       discount rate to flows, net social benefits are estimated at US$2.24 million in
       present value terms, with an internal rate of return of 13.3%. In addition, the
       sensitivity analysis shows that the program is robust to variations in the key
       parameters (economic analysis).

                         II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.     Financing instruments
2.1    Program financing comprises a US$50 million investment loan according to the
       global credit modality, drawn from the IDB’s Ordinary Capital resources. The loan
       disbursement period will be five years.

                              Table 1. Program costs (US$ millions)

                               Component                                    IDB Ordinary Capital
        Sole component. Access to low-income mortgage credit to
        reduce the quantitative housing deficit of underserved                         50
        populations
        Total                                                                          50

        Note: The executing agency will cover the operation’s administration, monitoring,
        evaluation, and audit costs.

                         Table 2. Disbursement projections (US$ millions)

                Source         Year 1    Year 2           Year 3   Year 4      Year 5       Total
       IDB (annual ceiling)     7.5        7.5             10.0     12.5        12.5         50
       Percentage                15        15              20       25           25         100


2.2    Restrictions on the pace of disbursement. Pursuant to document AB-2990, the
       disbursement of Bank loan proceeds will be subject to the following maximum
       limits: (i) up to 15% during the first 12 months; (ii) up to 30% during the first
       24 months; and (iii) up to 50% during the first 36 months, all of which will be
                                           - 16 -



      counted from the date of approval of the loan by the Bank’s Board of Executive
      Directors. These limits may not apply if the requirements established in the Bank’s
      policy in this regard have been fulfilled, provided that the borrower has been
      notified in writing.
B.    Environmental and social risks
2.3   In accordance with the Environmental and Social Policy Framework (GN-2965-23),
      this operation falls into the category of financial intermediation and is classified as
      having a moderate level of environmental and social risk. The program’s disaster
      and climate change risk classification is low. Based on the findings of the
      environmental and social due diligence process, it was concluded that the majority
      of subprojects to be financed under the program are subject to low
      socioenvironmental risk. The potential environmental and social impacts of the
      program will be managed using the program’s environmental and social
      management system (ESMS), which will be based on compliance with the IDB’s
      list of exclusions, local laws, and additional exclusion and eligibility criteria. The
      FSV’s environmental and social management system will also be used. These
      environmental and social requirements will constitute the ESMS for the program
      and will be included in the program Operating Regulations (paragraph 3.6 and
      required link 2).
C.    Fiduciary risks
2.4   Based on the previous operations executed with the FSV, the fund’s experience
      with other international organizations, and the results of the institutional capacity
      assessment, the fiduciary risk is considered to be low, primarily due to the FSV’s
      highly developed fiduciary systems (see Annex III) (paragraph 3.2).
D.    Other key issues and risks
2.5   Economic and financial risks. The following medium-high risks have been
      identified: (i) the competitiveness of loans under the program could be
      compromised due to the uncertainty created by economic cycles, affecting the
      financial terms of the mortgages. This risk will be mitigated through the use of the
      IDB’s Flexible Financing Facility, which allows the borrower to set interest rates
      and repayment periods; and (ii) a potentially insufficient supply of low-income
      housing in the market or an increase in low-income home values that exceeds the
      program limit. To mitigate the latter risk, there is ongoing dialogue with the MIVI,
      the FSV, and through the program specifically, concerning the possibility of issuing
      prequalification letters to incentivize financing for housing developers
      (paragraph 1.28).
2.6   Sustainability. This program represents a continuation of the IDB’s strategic
      commitment to its long-term relationship with the FSV, using both financial and
      nonfinancial support to promote sustainable urban development. The funds
      received from subloan repayments will be used to issue additional loans for the
      same type of activities, allowing the FSV to finance further housing solutions where
      applicable. In addition, the supply of sustainable low-income credit lines will be
      strengthened through the use of a green certification seal program and assistance
      aimed at better meeting the needs of persons with disabilities (paragraph 1.30).
                                           - 17 -



                    III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1   Borrower and executing agency. The FSV will be the borrower and executing
      agency for this operation. The FSV will use its administrative, financial, and
      accounting resources and systems to administer and maintain records for the
      loans issued using program resources, consistent with Bank policies and the
      financial rules applicable to the entity. Furthermore, the borrower’s financial
      obligations under this operation will be backed by the sovereign guarantee of the
      Republic of El Salvador.
3.2   Execution and administration. The Bank will disburse the resources to the FSV,
      which will fulfill program objectives by providing subloans to eligible beneficiaries,
      consistent with the provisions of the program Operating Regulations. The FSV will
      use its existing organizational, administrative, and financial structures to execute
      the program, and its finance department will be responsible for managing the
      program and coordinating with the IDB. The FSV will apply its capacity with the
      highest standards of transparency during the processes of identifying final
      beneficiaries, approving loans, auditing the program, and reporting to the Bank
      (paragraph 1.30). The FSV is well-prepared to execute the program for the
      following reasons: (i) its execution of the second operation under the CCLIP has
      been positive; (ii) the simplified institutional capacity assessment carried out in
      2024 showed that the FSV has sufficient financial and fiduciary capacity to serve
      as executing agency; (iii) it is the largest low-income mortgage lender in the
      country (almost 90% of this segment and 66% of the total mortgage portfolio in the
      country); and (iv) in terms of the areas for improvement identified in the institutional
      capacity assessment, the FSV’s project management capabilities will continue to
      be strengthened, together with the quality of its technical capacity in relation to
      sustainability (through certification of key staff members in the IDB’s sustainable
      housing program).
3.3   Strategic coordination arrangements. El Salvador’s Department of Trade and
      Investment (SCI) is the liaison agency for CCLIP ES-O0009, to which this
      operation belongs (paragraph 1.1). Accordingly, the FSV will meet with the SCI at
      least twice per year to discuss progress in program execution and ensure that the
      strategic objectives are met. Where necessary, the two entities may also jointly
      propose operational adjustments to improve program performance. The FSV will
      share with the SCI the regular reports and documents indicated in the program
      Operating Regulations so that the necessary information is provided regarding the
      status of the program. The FSV and SCI may agree to any other type of additional
      arrangement considered necessary, and these should be added in writing to the
      program Operating Regulations.
3.4   Coordination will also take place with the MIVI, as the lead agency for the country’s
      housing sector. Among other things, this will seek to examine the role of the
      program within policy for the sector, as well as in strategic decision-making that
      may guide or influence low-income housing policy in the country at the national or
      territorial levels. To this end, the FSV will meet with the MIVI at least twice per
      year. The FSV’s finance department will be responsible for interactions with the
      SCI and the MIVI.
                                             - 18 -



3.5    Program Operating Regulations. The program Operating Regulations will
       include: (i) full details of responsibility for program coordination and administration;
       (ii) general characteristics of beneficiaries; (iii) specific characteristics of subloans
       eligible for financing; (iv) characteristics of sustainable housing units; (v) issues
       relating to credit scoring; (vi) social and environmental requirements, as well as a
       list of exclusions; and (vii) corporate governance and integrity reporting
       requirements. Any modifications of the program Operating Regulations will require
       the Bank’s no objection.
3.6    Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the
       loan proceeds. The first disbursement of the loan proceeds will be subject
       to the borrower’s approval of the program Operating Regulations and their
       entry into effect, to the Bank’s satisfaction, in accordance with the terms
       previously approved by the Bank. This condition is essential as the program
       Operating Regulations will establish the guidelines, procedures, and coordination
       arrangements that will guide execution.
3.7    Exceptions to Bank policies. The Republic of El Salvador will be the guarantor
       of the borrower’s financial obligations under the loan, including fees and interest
       payments and local counterpart funding. A partial waiver is requested of the Policy
       on Guarantees Required from the Borrower (Operational Policy OP-303) with
       respect to execution obligations under the program. This exception is justified on
       the basis of Article 11 of the Basic Law on Public Financial Administration
       (Decree 516/1995), which stipulates that obligations relating to loan execution lie
       beyond the legal mandate of the authorities of the Republic of El Salvador. The
       FSV, which is both borrower and executing agency for the program, has the
       necessary organizational, regulatory, financial, technological, and human
       resources capacity to execute the operation. This exception is consistent with
       those approved for the other operations under CCLIP ES-O0009.
3.8    Disbursements and advances of funds. Loan disbursements will be deposited
       to a special FSV account that will then be used to disburse funds for the subloans
       and receive debt repayments. The Bank may disburse program resources
       according to any of the modalities provided for in the Financial Management
       Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (GN-2811-1), as described in Annex III.
       Disbursement requests will be accompanied by the information stipulated in the
       program Operating Regulations, and verification will be on an ex post basis,
       subject to a review of the subloans issued.
3.9    Funds resulting from repayments of the subloans financed with resources under
       this program may only be used to provide new subloans in accordance with the
       provisions of the loan contract and the program Operating Regulations.
3.10   Audited financial statements. The FSV will deliver audited annual financial
       statements for the program under the terms of reference agreed on with the Bank.
       Financial statements will be submitted within 120 calendar days after the close of
       the fiscal year. The final financial statements for the program will be delivered
       within 120 days after the date of the final disbursement.
3.11   The program audit function will be performed by a Bank-eligible external audit firm
       under the procedures established in the current audit guidelines. The external audit
       of the program will be financed by the FSV using its own resources. Accordingly,
                                            - 19 -



       the institution must ensure that funding for the audit services is available each year
       until such time as the program is completed.
3.12   Procurement. As a demand-driven program with a sole component for financing
       subloans, no procurement of goods, works, or consulting or nonconsulting services
       will be required as part of execution. No program execution plan or procurement
       plan is therefore included in this proposal.
B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.13   Monitoring. Program execution will be monitored via semiannual progress reports
       submitted within 60 days after the end of each six-month period. The reports will
       be based on the reporting commitments included in the results matrix (Annex II)
       and the financial progress reports indicated in the General Conditions of the loan
       contract. Semiannual progress reports will include updated information based on
       monitoring of the program, as well as the resources that will be allocated for this
       purpose, consistent with the provisions of the monitoring and evaluation plan. The
       FSV will be responsible for gathering and verifying the information.
3.14   Impact evaluation. An evaluation of program outcomes will be performed using
       an ex post cost-benefit analysis of the outflows and inflows associated with the
       intervention (monitoring and evaluation plan), with a corresponding analysis of
       growth in the relevant portfolio for the intervention. Preparation of the evaluation
       will begin six months before the anticipated completion date of the operation, and
       it will be submitted no later than 12 months thereafter (or in accordance with Bank
       policies at that time). The administrative budget for the operation includes the
       funds required to perform the program evaluation.

                                IV. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA

4.1    General eligibility criteria. This fourth program under CCLIP ES-O0009 will be
       implemented according to Multisector Modality II, and it is compliant with the
       eligibility criteria set forth in policy document GN-2246-13 and its operational
       guidelines (GN-2246-15) for the following reasons:
       a. The multisector objective of the CCLIP—to promote productive activities and
          social welfare in El Salvador by providing access to credit in the business and
          housing sectors—continues to be included in the priorities set out in the
          IDB Group Country Strategy with El Salvador 2021-2024 (GN-3046-1). The
          program contributes to the priority area of reducing social vulnerability by
          expanding access to mortgage finance for underserved population segments,
          while also addressing the crosscutting themes of climate change adaptation
          and mitigation and women’s empowerment.
       b. Previous operations under this CCLIP are achieving planned benchmarks,
          reflecting adequate progress in execution vis-à-vis their specific objectives
          (optional link 2). This operation has been designed to build on the
          achievements of these previous operations (paragraph 1.1).
       c. An institutional capacity assessment of the FSV was conducted in 2024; it
          yielded high scores in terms of program financial management and resource
          administration activities, low levels of fiduciary risk, and satisfactory attainment
          of development objectives.
                                                    - 20 -



          d. This proposal includes specific actions to improve FSV capacities, consistent
             with the recommendations of the institutional capacity assessment
             (paragraph 3.2).
          e. The SCI was designated by the Government of El Salvador as the liaison
             agency for the CCLIP (optional link 10). Under Chapter X of Decree 1 of
             2 June 2019, it is authorized to carry out coordination and monitoring activities
             for the programs financed by the CCLIP.58 The SCI will monitor the flow of
             operations in each sector and will formulate proposals for adjustments, where
             necessary, to achieve the objective of the CCLIP (paragraph 3.3).
4.2       Eligibility criteria specific to the fourth operation under the CCLIP. This
          fourth individual operation under the CCLIP to Facilitate Access to Business and
          Housing Loans (ES-O0009) will be implemented according to Multisector
          Modality II, and it is compliant with the eligibility criteria set forth in policy
          document GN-2246-13 and its operational guidelines (GN-2246-15) for the
          following reasons:
          a. An institutional capacity assessment was carried out of the FSV, which found
             that the entity has both high execution capabilities and potential areas for
             improvement (paragraph 3.2). No potential risks of a fiduciary nature were
             identified (paragraph 2.4).
          b. The first program under the CCLIP (5083/OC-ES) was executed by
             BANDESAL to support micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs),
             and its final disbursement occurred in 2023. The operation was rated as
             satisfactory for its entire duration and the project completion report is expected
             to be completed this year.
          c. The second operation (5352/OC-ES), executed by the FSV, has been rated as
             satisfactory in all evaluations, with satisfactory execution and a high probability
             of achieving its development objectives.
          d. The third operation (5733/OC-ES), executed by BANDESAL, has benefited
             829 MSMEs. As of year-end 2023, it was rated as satisfactory with a high
             probability of achieving its development objectives.
          e. As indicated above (paragraph 3.2), the FSV is sufficiently prepared to execute
             the fourth program under CCLIP ES-O0009.
          f.   The objective of this operation helps to achieve the CCLIP’s multisector
               objectives as it promotes social well-being through access to credit in the
               housing sector (paragraph 1.1). This type of support to the housing sector is
               envisioned under the CCLIP (paragraph 1.1).




58   Published in Official Gazette 101, Vol. 423.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Annex I - ES-L1165
                                                                                                                                                                                                Page 1 of 1




                                                                          Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                   Summary             ES-L1165
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Institutional Strategy Alignment



                                                                                                -Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups
                                                                                                -Institutional capacity, rule of law, citizen security
 Operational Focus Areas
                                                                                                -Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure




 [Space-Holder: Impact framework indicators]

2. Country Development Objectives



                                                                                                                         Increase financing for access to housing in vulnerable
   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                     GN-3046-1
                                                                                                                         segments




                                                                                                                         The intervention is included in the 2024 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                      GN-3207-3
                                                                                                                         Program.



   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                            Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                  8.1
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                               2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                             1.6
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                          4.0
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                             7.5
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                      1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                    3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                          0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                            2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                 1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                             8.3
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                           4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                 4.3
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                      Low
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                               FI
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems


                                                                                                                         Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting, External
                                                                                                                         Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                 Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)             Yes
                                                                                                                         Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison.



                                                                                Non-Fiduciary


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                          Yes              ATN/OC-18918-RG, ATN/OC-19731-ES, ATN/MC-16262-RG
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




The Social, Inclusive, and Sustainable Housing Financing Program (ES-L1165) is the fourth operation under the CCLIP for Access to Business and Housing Credit, and its
general development objective is to contribute to the reduction of the housing deficit by providing mortgage loans for the acquisition of social interest housing. The Program
aims to contribute to this objective through the specific development objectives of (i) increasing access to mortgage loans for the acquisition of housing serving underserved
populations; and (ii) promoting the adoption of sustainable housing. The diagnosis of the operation presents the quantitative housing deficit as a general problem, particularly
pronounced in lower-income segments. The diagnosis identifies the causes of this problem as rapid urban population growth, informality, limited purchasing power, and the lack
of mortgage schemes to serve low-income populations, as well as the scarce supply of adequate social housing. In light of this, the program offers loans for the acquisition of
social and sustainable housing for households with incomes of up to 4 minimum wages, seeking to finance other underserved sectors, such as women, informal workers,
recipients of remittances, and people in vulnerable situations, including people with disabilities.

The outcome indicators associated with the specific objective are SMART and would allow the scope of the objective to be measured. The economic analysis quantifies benefits
through the rental value imputed to new housing, the added value of the investment in new housing, and the added value of the intermediation of used housing, yielding an IRR
of 13.3%.

The monitoring and evaluation plan proposes three evaluation strategies: (i) a reflective evaluation that shows the scope of the results associated with the specific objective; (ii)
a qualitative analysis that discusses the lessons learned during the execution of the program; and (iii) an ex post cost-benefit analysis. These evaluation strategies do not allow
for empirical attribution of the results.
                                                                                                                                                                              Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 3


                                                                                 RESULTS MATRIX

                         The specific development objectives of this operation are to: (i) expand access to mortgage credit for home purchases by underserved population groups; and
PROGRAM OBJECTIVE:       (ii) foster the adoption of sustainable housing. Achievement of these objectives will support the operation’s general development objective of helping to narrow
                         the housing deficit by providing mortgage loans for the purchase of low-income housing.


                                                                         GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

                                                                             Expected
                               Unit of        Baseline        Baseline
       Indicator                                                               year            Target       Means of verification                        Comments
                              measure          value            year
                                                                             achieved
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE. Help narrow the housing deficit by providing mortgage loans for the purchase of low-income housing
Quantitative housing          Number          136,873           2023            2029          134,873       Low-Income Housing        Baseline calculated by the FSV based on the
deficit in El Salvador                                                                                      Fund (FSV), with data     2023 EHPM. Reflects the urban deficit for groups
                                                                                                            from the Multipurpose     earning 2 to 4 times the current monthly
                                                                                                            Household Surveys         minimum wage (SMMV) (136,873 housing units)
                                                                                                            (EHPMs)                   (optional link 5).
                                                                                                                                      The program is expected to help reduce the
                                                                                                                                      quantitative housing deficit in urban areas
                                                                                                                                      by 1.8%.
                                                                                                                                      The indicator will be calculated based on
                                                                                                                                      information from the available EHPMs and the
                                                                                                                                      Population and Housing Census (excluding
                                                                                                                                      returning migrants).
Percentage of those          Percentage           0             2023            2029             80         FSV report, with IDB      By stimulating demand, the program is expected
developers building                                                                                         data                      to foster sustainable housing development.
homes financed by FSV                                                                                                                 Developers that build housing financed by FSV
mortgages who are                                                                                                                     mortgages will be included once they have been
certified                                                                                                                             certified through the IDB’s training program.
                                                                                                                                      Calculated as a percentage of all developers
                                                                                                                                      building homes financed by FSV mortgages.
Annex II
Page 2 of 3


                                                                  SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                                                                               End of
                                 Unit of        Baseline       Baseline                    Means of
          Indicator                                                           program                                                Comments
                                measure          value           year                     verification
                                                                               (2029)
 SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 1. Expand access to mortgage credit for home purchases by underserved population groups
 Relevant portfolio of FSV     US$ millions      737.0           2023           787.0   FSV data        Measures the eligible FSV portfolio balance according to
 mortgages for beneficiaries                                                                            program criteria.
 targeted under the program                                                                             This will constitute the relevant portfolio for the program. The
                                                                                                        target is calculated as the baseline plus the additional portfolio
                                                                                                        injection created by the program, as of 2029.
 Percentage of program         Percentage           0            2023            50     FSV data        Pro-gender indicator.
 resources used to finance                                                                              Measures the amount of resources used to provide financing to
 housing for women                                                                                      women as a percentage of total program resources.
                                                                                                        The baseline is 0, as this is a new program and no loans have
                                                                                                        yet been issued.
                                                                                                        The target reflects the projection for the end of the program.
 Relevant portfolio of FSV     US$ millions      220.0           2023           235.0   FSV data        Measures the balance of the FSV portfolio used to finance
 mortgages provided to                                                                                  mortgages for vulnerable individuals.
 vulnerable individuals                                                                                 This segment includes: (i) persons with disabilities; (ii) people
                                                                                                        working in the informal sector; (iii) families who receive
                                                                                                        remittances; (iv) people with incomes of less than two SSMVs
                                                                                                        wages; and (v) older adults (defined as those over age 60).
                                                                                                        The target is calculated as the baseline plus the additional
                                                                                                        portfolio injection from the IDB, as of 2029.
 SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 2. Foster the adoption of sustainable housing
 Relevant portfolio of FSV     US$ millions         0            2023           10.0    FSV data        Measures the balance of the FSV portfolio used to finance
 home loans used to finance                                                                             sustainable housing projects.
 mortgages for sustainable                                                                              The baseline is 0 as the FSV has never had a program to
 housing (i.e., those yielding                                                                          finance sustainable projects.
 resource savings equivalent                                                                            Sustainable homes are those that meet the sustainability
 to Level 1 EDGE                                                                                        characteristics established in this program and during the
 certification)                                                                                         program launch workshop.
                                                                                                        In general, these characteristics will reflect energy efficiency,
                                                                                                        housing design, and efficient water use.
                                                                                                        The International Finance Corporation’s EDGE tool will be used
                                                                                                        to verify that the homes yield at least 20% savings in energy and
                                                                                                        water use and embodied energy in materials. This will be
                                                                                                        equivalent to Level 1 of the EDGE standard.
                                                                                                        The target is calculated as the baseline plus the additional
                                                                                                        portfolio injection from the IDB, as of 2029.
                                                                                                                                                              Annex II
                                                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 3


                                                                                OUTPUTS
                     Unit of    Baseline   Baseline                                                End of    Means of
    Indicator                                         Year 1   Year2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5                                           Comments
                    measure      value       year                                                 program   verification
Sole component. Access to low-income mortgage credit to narrow the quantitative housing deficit for underserved population segments (US$50 million)
Number of        Number of        0      2023       300     300     400      500     500      2,000    FSV data    Number of housing units purchased using program
mortgages          housing                                                                                         financing. This indicator represents the physical
issued by the       units                                                                                          target for the component.
program                                                                                                            The target reflects the projection for the end of the
                                                                                                                   program.
Program          US$ millions     0      2023        7.5     7.5     10     12.5    12.5        50     FSV data    Value of mortgages issued by the program. This
resources used                                                                                                     indicator represents the financial target for the
to finance                                                                                                         component.
mortgages                                                                                                          The target reflects the projection for the end of the
                                                                                                                   program.
Breakdown of program resources to be used for key target groups
Resources used   US$ millions     0      2023        3.5     3.5     5.0     6.5     6.5       25.0    FSV data    Annual allocation of funds for home lending to
to finance                                                                                                         women.
women                                                                                                              The value at the end of the project represents the
                                                                                                                   total sum over the execution period.
Resources used   US$ millions     0      2023        1.0     1.0     2.0     3.0     3.0       10.0    FSV data    Annual allocation of funds for financing sustainable
to finance                                                                                                         mortgages that meet the requirements of this
sustainable                                                                                                        program. The final requirements will be determined
homes                                                                                                              in the program launch workshop.
                                                                                                                   The value at the end of the program represents the
                                                                                                                   total sum over the execution period.
Resources used   US$ millions     0      2023       0.16    0.16    0.16    0.16    0.16       0.80    FSV data    Annual allocation of funds used to finance homes for
to finance homes                                                                                                   persons with disabilities.
for persons with                                                                                                   The value at the end of the program represents the
disabilities                                                                                                       total sum over the execution period.
                                                                                                     Annex III
                                                                                                   Page 1 of 4



Country: El Salvador                 Division: IFD/CMF         Operation No.: ES-L1165             Year: 2024


                                FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Executing agency:                  Low-Income Housing Fund (FSV)
Operation name:                    Financing Program for Sustainable, Inclusive, Low-income Housing

                              I.     FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1. Use of country systems in the operation1

     Budget                  Reports                 Information systems        National competitive
                                                                                    bidding (NCB)
     Treasury                Internal audit          Shopping                   Other
     Accounting              External control        Individual consultants


2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

         Special features of          The FSV will be the borrower and executing agency for this
          fiduciary execution          operation. The FSV will use its administrative, financial, and
                                       accounting resources and systems to administer and maintain
                                       records for the loans administered using program resources,
                                       consistent with the financial rules applicable to the entity and
                                       the Financial Guidelines for IDB-Financed Projects (OP-273-12).
                                       The FSV will use the loan proceeds to provide subloans to eligible
                                       beneficiaries, consistent with the program Operating Regulations.
                                       No procurement by the executing agency is anticipated.


3. Fiduciary capacity

    Fiduciary capacity of            The institutional capacity assessment concluded that the FSV has a
    the executing agency             high level of institutional capacity. The executing agency is currently
                                     implementing the Low-income Housing Finance Program
                                     (5352/OC-EC), with satisfactory results. Its performance in relation to
                                     financial execution and the management of fiduciary processes under
                                     the program has also been sound. In addition, the FSV has already
                                     executed the following Bank-financed operations: 1379/OC-EC
                                     (2001) and 2373/OC-EC (2010).




1       Any system or subsystem that is subsequently approved may be applicable to the operation, in accordance
        with the terms of validation by the Bank.
Annex III
Page 2 of 4


4. Policies and guidelines applicable to the operation: Document GN-2349-15, paragraph 3.13
   (Procurement in Loans to Financial Intermediaries) will apply. This stipulates that in loans of
   this type, procurement by beneficiaries will be subject to current private sector or commercial
   practices. As a demand-driven program with a sole component to finance subloans,
   implementation will not involve the procurement of any goods, works, nonconsulting services,
   or consulting services. No procurement plan is therefore included in this proposal. With regard
   to financial management, the Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects
   (OP-273-12), the Audited Financial Reports and External Audit Management Handbook, and
   the Disbursement Handbook will apply.
5. Exceptions to policies and guidelines: None.



              II.   CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

 Exchange rate: For the purposes of the activities stipulated in Article 4.10 of the General
 Conditions, the parties agree that the applicable exchange rate will be the one indicated in
 subparagraph (b)(ii) of said article. Accordingly, the agreed exchange rate will be that prevailing
 on the effective date on which the borrower, executing agency, or any other natural or legal
 person to whom the authority to incur expenses has been delegated, makes the respective
 payments to a contractor, supplier, or beneficiary.

 Type of audit: For the duration of program execution, audited financial statements will be
 submitted each year within 120 days of the end of each fiscal year. The external audit of the
 program will be performed by an outside firm acceptable to the Bank. The final audited program
 financial statements will be submitted to the Bank no later than 120 days after the date of the
 final disbursement.



                    III. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION


    Projects with financial    This loan is for global credit programs and other operations in which
     intermediaries             resources are provided to financial intermediaries that will in turn
                                issue subloans or resources via other onlending modalities;
                                accordingly, it will be stipulated that the Bank's prohibited
                                practices clauses are to be included in the agreements between the
                                executing agency, its financial intermediaries, and its subborrowers.
                                Alternatively, if under the circumstances it is not possible or
                                practical to include these clauses in the aforementioned contracts,
                                the project team may examine other means of adopting acceptable
                                controls and duly binding the relevant third parties to the Sanctions
                                Procedures. These mechanisms will be designed in coordination
                                with the Office of Institutional Integrity and will be supported by the
                                Legal Department and set forth in the program Operating
                                Regulations.
                                                                                           Annex III
                                                                                         Page 3 of 4


                       IV. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS


   Programming         The FSV budget is approved by its board of governors and subsequently
    and budget          ratified by an executive decree issued through the Ministries of Finance
                        and Housing.
                        FSV internal Code 480, Budget Procedures, regulates and establishes
                        guidelines for the formulation, approval, and management of the budget.
                        For the purposes of the budget, the Law on the Fondo Social para la
                        Vivienda takes precedence over the Basic Budget Law.

   Treasury and        This area is governed by internal FSV Code 475, Treasury Management
    disbursement        and Custody Procedures. The FSV will use the loan module of its
    management          ABANKS IT system to process and manage disbursements to the final
                        beneficiaries of the subloans issued under the program. The FSV will
                        maintain a special account for the exclusive use of loan proceeds, from
                        which disbursements to beneficiaries will be made.
                        The IDB will disburse the program resources according to the
                        reimbursements and/or advance of funds modalities, consistent with
                        document OP-273-12. All disbursement requests must include the
                        information listed in the program Operating Regulations. Where a
                        request is submitted for an advance of funds, the amount of each
                        advance will be determined based on program liquidity needs over a
                        period of up to 180 days. For each advance of funds request (with the
                        exception of the first), the executing unit must substantiate the use of at
                        least 80% of previously advanced funds that have not yet been
                        accounted for.

   Accounting,         Accounting in the FSV is governed by Code 410, Accounting
    information         Procedures and Operations, which establishes the procedures and
    systems, and        guidelines for accounting at the institution, pursuant to the Basic Law on
    reporting           Public Financial Administration, the technical manual for the integrated
                        financial management system (SAFI), and the administrative handbook
                        for institutional goods.
                        The accounting module of the ABANKS system is used for initial
                        accounting entries, which are subsequently transferred to the
                        government accounting system (SICGE).

   Internal control    The internal audit for the program is performed by the FSV’s internal
    and internal        audit unit, which reports to the institution’s Presidency and Executive
    audit               Management.
                        The FSV applies the internal audit technical standards for financial
                        system participants, as well as the internal audit standards for the
                        governmental sector (NAIG) issued by the State Audit Office (CCR)
                        based on the global standard of the Committee of Sponsoring
                        Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
Annex III
Page 4 of 4



     External control   External control for the program will be performed by an independent
      and financial      external audit firm acceptable to the Bank. The external audit firm may
      reports            be the same one that audits the entity’s financial accounts, provided it
                         is eligible for Bank-financed projects. The terms of reference will require
                         the Bank's prior no objection. In the event of a competitive process, the
                         stipulations of the IDB’s Audited Financial Reports and External Audit
                         Management Handbook will be followed.

     Financial          The program requires ex post financial supervision of disbursements,
      supervision of     the inputs for which will be drawn primarily from the audited financial
      the operation      statements. To supplement these, the Bank will make at least one
                         financial supervision visit to the executing agency each year.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/24



             El Salvador. Loan ____/OC-__ to Fondo Social para la Vivienda (FSV).
               Financing Program for Sustainable, Inclusive, Low-income Housing
                  Fourth Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit Line
                      for Investment Projects (CCLIP) to Facilitate Access
                           to Business and Housing Loans (ES-O0009)



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

         That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with Fondo Social para la Vivienda (FSV), as borrower, and with the Republic of El
Salvador, as guarantor, for the purpose of granting the former a financing aimed at cooperating
in the execution of Financing Program for Sustainable, Inclusive, Low-income Housing, which
constitutes the fourth individual operation under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment
Projects (CCLIP) ES-O0009, approved by Resolution DE-87/20 on July 29, 2020. Such financing
will be for the amount of up to US$50,000,000, from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital,
and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions
of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.




                               (Adopted on _______________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CID/EZIDB0000366-275433124-9462
ES-L1165
