                                                                                          PUBLIC
                                                                        SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE



                   DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                             SURINAME




                     STRENGTHENING SPATIAL PLANNING AND
                    ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT IN SURINAME
                                             (SU-L1067)



                                           LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Tatiana Kopelman (CSD/HUD),
Team Leader; Anaitee Mills (CSD/CCS); Santiago Bucaram Villacis (CSD/RND), Alternate Team
Leaders. Francine Vaurof, and Raul Delgado (CSD/CCS); Raijant Gangadin (CCB/CSU); Carlos
Salazar; Washington Fajardo; Silvia Perez; Dianela Avila; Sofia del Castillo; Gabriel de Barros;
Manuela Palacios; and Roberto Madera (CSD/HUD); Sara Vila Saintetienne (LEG/SGO); Cleide
Berlanda Custodio de Silva, Veerle Vivienne Combee (VPC/FMP); Luis Quintero (SPD/SDV)
Adriana Zambrano (VPS/ESG); Yves Lesenfants, and Adam Mehl (CSD/ACU); Suzanne Duryea
(SCL/GDI); and Jason Malcolm Wilks (IFD/ICS).

In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved
by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made
available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                       CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... I


I.     PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................. 2

        A.      Background, problem addressed, and justification ........................................ 2
        B.      Objective, components, and cost ................................................................ 15
        C.      Key Results Indicators ................................................................................ 19

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 20

        A.      Financing instruments ................................................................................. 20
        B.      Environmental and social safeguard risks ................................................... 22
        C.      Fiduciary risk .............................................................................................. 23
        D.      Other risks and key issues .......................................................................... 23

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 24

        A.      Summary of implementation arrangements................................................. 24
        B.      Summary of arrangements for monitoring results........................................ 26
                                               - ii -



                                          ANNEXES
Annex I     Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM)

Annex II    Results Matrix

Annex III   Fiduciary Arrangements


                             REQUIRED ELECTRONIC LINKS (REL)

REL#1       Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) / Annual Operational Plan (AOP)

REL#2       Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements

REL#3       Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS)

REL#4       Procurement Plan


                             OPTIONAL ELECTRONIC LINKS (OEL)
OEL#1       Analysis of Project Cost and Economic Viability

OEL#2       Project Operations Manual (POM)

OEL#3       Sustainability and Climate Change

OEL#4       Institutional Reengineering Proposal for NMA and MinROM

OEL#5       Strategy to support data management for Suriname

OEL#6       Prefeasibility Building Proposal

OEL#7       Vertical Logic

OEL#8       Legal Landscape Assessment

OEL#9       Innovation Analysis

OEL#10      Execution Arrangement

OEL#11      Bibliography

OEL#12      Synergies and Contributions Across the IDB Group

OEL#13      Gender and Diversity Analysis

OEL#14      Safeguard Policy Filter and Safeguard Screening Form
                                       - iii -



                                  ABBREVIATIONS

AFS     Audited Financial Statements

CBA     Cost-Benefit Analysis

CC      Climate Change

DRCCR   Disaster and Climate Change Risk Classification

EA      Executing Agency

ED      Environment Directorate

EDGE    Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies

EIS     Environmental Information System

EFA     Environmental Framework Act

EOU     External Operation Unit

ESG     Environmental and Social Governance

ESIA    Environmental and Social Impact Assessments

ESMF    Environmental and Social Management Framework

ESMR    Environmental and Social Management Report

ESMS    Environmental and Social Management System

ESS     Environmental and Social Strategy

ESRR    Environmental and Social Risk Rating

GDP     Gross Domestic Product

GDV     Green Development Vision

GHG     Greenhouse Gas

GIH     Geospatial Intelligence HUB

HFLD    High Forest cover, Low Density

ICAP    Institutional Capacity Assessment

IDB     Inter-American Development Bank

IIC     Inter-American Investment Corporation

IMF     International Monetary Fund

LUC     Land Use Change

MDB     Multilateral Development Banks

MEP     Monitoring and Evaluation Plan
                                        - iv -



                                  ABBREVIATIONS

MinROM   Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment

MOP      Multi-Annual Development Plan 2022-2026

MRV      Monitoring, Reporting and Verification

NAP      National Adaptation Plan

NDC      Nationally Determined Contributions

NIMOS    National Institute for Environment and Development

NMA      National Environment Authority

NPV      Net Present Value

NSDP     National Spatial Development Plan

OC       Ordinary Capital

OPC      Operations Policy Committee

PA       Paris Agreement

PCR      Project Closing Report

PIU      Program Implementation Unit

POD      Proposal for Operation Development

PS       Permanent Secretary

PSC      Project Steering Committee

SPA      Spatial Planning Act

SPD      Spatial Planning Directorate

SEP      Stakeholder Engagement Plan

SESA     Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment

SMIN     Suriname Environmental Information Network

TORS     Terms of Reference

UNCBD    United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity
UNFCCC   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
                                              PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                   SURINAME
                   STRENGTHENING SPATIAL PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT IN SURINAME
                                                  (SU-L1067)
                                        Financial Terms and Conditions
 Borrower                                                              Flexible Financing Facility(a)
                                                        Amortization Period:               22.5 years
 Republic of Suriname
                                                        Disbursement Period:               7 years
 Executing Agency                                       Grace Period:                      8 years (b)
                                                        Interest rate:                     SOFR Based
 Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment
                                                        Credit Fee:                        (c)

          Source             Amount (US$)        %      Inspection and supervision fee:    (c)

                                                        Weighted Average Life (WAL):       15.25 years
  IDB (Ordinary Capital):      30,000,000       100
                                                                                           Dollars of the United
                                                        Currency of Approval:
 Total:                        30,000,000       100                                        States of America
                                                       Project at a Glance
Project Objective/Description: The objective of the program is to improve Suriname's institutional capacity to
manage land use. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen Suriname’s spatial planning and environmental
frameworks, regulations, and instruments; (ii) increase the availability and use of data for spatial planning, climate
change, and environmental management; and (iii) strengthen MinROM and NMA’s operational conditions (¶1.43).

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement are: The Borrower, through the Executing Agency
(EA), shall provide evidence, to the satisfaction of the Bank of (i) the establishment of the transitional PIU within
MinROM and the selection of its program coordinator (ii) the approval and entry into effect of the Project Operations
Manual (POM) (OEL#2), in the terms previously agreed to with the Bank; and (iii) the approval by the Council of
Ministers of the Green Development Vision (GDV) Statement (¶3.5). See additional environmental and social
conditions described in Annex B of the ESRS.
Special Contractual Clauses of Execution: Prior to the bidding for the construction of the two bioclimatic
buildings included in Component 1.c, the Borrower, through the Executing Agency, shall have presented evidence
that all designs for such buildings meet the EDGE standards (¶3.7). See additional environmental and social
conditions described in Annex B of the ESRS.

Exceptions to Bank Policies: None
                                                      Strategic Alignment
 Objectives(d):                                   O1 ☐                              O2 ☒                           O3 ☐
                                                      OF2-G ☒
 Operational Focus Areas(e):            OF1 ☒                         OF3 ☒        OF4 ☐       OF5 ☐       OF6 ☒         OF7 ☐
                                                      OF2-D ☒
(a)   Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option to request modifications to the
      amortization schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe protection conversions. In considering
      such requests, the Bank will take into account operational and risk management considerations.
(b)   Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility (FFF), changes in the grace period are possible as
      long the Original Weighted Average Life (WAL) and the last payment date, as documented in the loan agreement, are not
      exceeded.
(c)   The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during
      its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies.
(d)   O1 (Reduce poverty and inequality); O2 (Address climate change); and O3 (Bolster sustainable regional growth).
(e)   OF1 (Biodiversity, natural capital and climate action); OF2-G (Gender equality); OF2-D (Inclusion of diverse population
      groups); OF3 (Institutional capacity, rule of law, and citizen security); OF4 (Social protection and human capital
      development); OF5 (Productive development and innovation through the private sector); OF6 (Sustainable, resilient, and
      inclusive infrastructure); and OF7 (Regional integration).
                                                       -2-




                    I.        PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and justification

1.1       Suriname, a small nation boasting significant natural resources and an
          upper -middle-income status, houses approximately 618,040 residents. It is part of
          the Guiana Shield, which encompasses one-third of the Amazon and is one of the
          last remnants of intact primary forest. Suriname stands as the most forested
          country in the world, with 93% of its land area covered by forest. With a
          deforestation rate of 0.2 percent, the country is considered one of the top three
          “High Forest, Low Deforestation” (HFLD) countries, 1 playing a critical part in global
          Climate Change (CC) mitigation and adaptation. It also hosts a diversity of marine,
          coastal, freshwater, savannah, and tropical forest ecosystems, playing a crucial
          role in supporting its development and enhancing the well-being of its population.

1.2       Currently, Suriname is emerging from a severe macroeconomic crisis. The country
          had not fully recovered from the 2015 commodity price shock when the COVID-19
          pandemic hit. The crisis prompted the development of a recovery plan to stabilize
          the economy, protect people with low incomes, restore debt sustainability, rebuild
          international reserves, and create a strong foundation for inclusive growth. The
          IDB has provided budgetary support for US$350 million, while the International
          Monetary Fund (IMF) disbursed US$323 million up to the fifth review of the
          extended arrangement under the Extended Funding Facility. Even though public
          debt is still high, fiscal consolidation is gaining traction, reserves keep increasing,
          exchange rates have stabilized, and consumer price inflation is decelerating.

1.3       Crucial to the nation's economic landscape are its ample natural resources. The
          extractive industry generates approximately 86% of foreign exchange earnings
          and 25% of government revenues. [2] Additionally, recent offshore exploration has
          proven the existence of abundant oil and gas resources, representing a new
          promising source of public revenue. 2 Suriname has outstanding agricultural
          potential 3 that has not exploited to its fullest. [3] Although natural areas and
          resources play a crucial role in Suriname's economic development, unbalanced
          Land Use Change (LUC) undermines its resilience against the growing challenges
          of CC, threatening livelihoods, driving resource scarcity, slowing down
          conservation, and, in turn, impacting the sustainable environmental management
          of the territory and its communities.

1.4       In Suriname, LUC is driven by multiple factors, including economic growth
          pressures [7], demographic demands, and urban sprawl. The country’s limited
          institutional capacity to regulate, monitor, and control land use through spatial


1     The term HFLD refers to countries that have a forest cover greater than 50% and an average annual
      deforestation rate lower than the global average during the 10-year reference period.
2     According to the IMF (2024), oil production in Suriname is assumed to begin by end-2028, peaking at
      79 million barrels in 2030 and 2031 before declining gradually. With a total investment of US$9 billion and
      pre-investment flows starting at end-2024, growth would begin to pick up as early as 2025.
3     In 2019, the agriculture sector represented 5.8% of Suriname’s GDP [3].
                                                         -3-



          planning (SP) and environmental management (EM) contributes to unbalanced
          LUC. 4,5

1.5       The country’s population increased significantly, from 183,681 inhabitants in 1950
          [8] to 618,040 in 2022,[9] intensifying urban and socioeconomic demands. Given
          the lack of spatial development regulations, the urban footprint spread, following
          an expansive, fragmented, and unplanned model of territorial occupation. This is
          evident in Greater Paramaribo, where the urban footprint grew from 118 km2 in
          1975 to 289 km2 in 2020 (Figure 1). This growth occurred in an unstructured way
          with low densities, a discontinuous urban fabric, and a suburban character, 6 that
          resulted in the absorption of rural and natural areas. While the urban surface
          increased by 13% of its total area, the forest lost 11.4% of coverage. [10] Currently,
          urbanization is considered one of the main LUC drivers in the country. 7 [11]

                            Figure 1: Greater Paramaribo’s Urban Growth 1975-2020




            Source: URSA based on GHSL (Global Human Settlement Layer)


4     The lack of planning policies creates an environment where there is no coercion against discontinuities in the
      urban fabric. [32]
5     LUC represents one of the main drivers of environmental change. Ineffective land management has led
      to extensive land degradation, diminished agricultural productivity, and poses a significant risk to rural
      livelihoods in numerous developing nations. [33]
6     The allotments structure in Greater Paramaribo is built up by many smaller and rather independent allotments
      shaped by detached and low-rise buildings. In the city, 62.1% of all houses is low rise with one or two building
      layers. [32]
7     Sprawl has been related to job suburbanization increased commuting journeys, car dependency, congestion
      and a failure to provide efficient public transportation. Sprawl is also intrinsically linked to habitat
      fragmentation, loss of biodiversity, an increased effect of the urban heat island effect. [32]
                                                       -4-



1.6       Additional drivers of LUC are the escalating and unsustainable practices of gold
          mining that occur mainly in the Brokopondo District [11] and the reliance of
          subsistence farmers on shifting cultivation methods. [13] This, coupled with limited
          governmental control 8, results in land degradation, forest cover and protected
          areas reduction, and heightened erosion, 9 leading to increased GHG emissions.
          Approximately 15.47% of Suriname’s is subject to land degradation [16]. Mining
          activities have resulted in 100 km² of degraded land awaiting rehabilitation [16] and
          accounted for 68.9% of all loss of forest cover from 2000-2017. [17] Additionally,
          in 2023, deforestation caused by shifting agriculture represented 93% of all
          deforestation emissions.[17] Furthermore, deforestation-induced soil erosion and
          mining-related pollution contribute to waterway sedimentation and marine
          contamination, adversely affecting critical biodiversity habitats. [15] Mining and
          forestry operations further exacerbate the issue by causing landscape
          fragmentation and simplification, resulting in reduced structural integrity of
          ecosystems, compromising their function and provision of services. At the national
          level, the repercussions include adverse health effects on well-being, decreased
          income due to soil productivity losses, and arable land depletion. [15]

1.7       Suriname's ecosystems are crucial for climate change adaptation and
          mitigation. The country is carbon -negative, thanks to its forests and mangroves
          that store 13.1 Gt CO2e. However, Suriname's ecosystems are threatened by
          urbanization and productive activities including mining and agriculture. [1] The
          growing trends in these sectors, if not managed sustainably, could severely
          undermine Suriname's carbon sink capacity, exacerbating the impacts of CC and
          threatening community’s livelihoods.
1.8       Suriname's latest climate projections [18], estimate increases in daily temperature
          from 32°C to 37°C (SSP2-4.5) or 39°C (SSP5-8.5) over the entire country for all
          periods, together with a sea level rise of 1 meter by 2100, and more intense
          precipitation events. These changes will increase hazards, posing serious
          pressure on infrastructure and urban development, further challenging the
          effective management of natural assets, and contributing to ecosystem
          degradation and loss of livelihoods. The Suriname Multiannual Development Plan
          2022-2026 (MOP) estimates that a 1-meter sea-level rise would have significant
          economic and social impacts. It would affect more than 6.4% of the country’s Gross
          Domestic Product, 7% of its population, and 5.6% of agricultural land. Suriname is
          already grappling with extensive coastal erosion and damage caused by heavy
          rainfall, flooding, high temperatures, and strong winds. [1] Studies found that
          mangrove stabilization loss at Wegnaar Zee resort in Wanica, led to flooding and
          erosion, resulting in 27 meters of land lost in one year. [19] With over 90% of its
          population and much of its infrastructure and human activity located along the low-
          lying coastal strip, many sectors are at risk of suffering losses and damages
          caused by gradual CC and extreme weather. [19] These effects would result in
          added pressure on coastal defenses, land drainage and irrigation systems,
          housing, and overall infrastructure. [20]




8     In 2009, only 115 of the tens of thousands of small-scale miners within Suriname operated legally. [14]
9     These activities release substantial amounts of mercury and sediments into both terrestrial and aquatic
      ecosystems. [15]
                                                     -5-



1.9       Suriname’s institutional response to LUC and CC. Since 2019, the Government
          of Suriname has made significant commitments to face the challenges of LUC and
          CC. Through its National Determined Contribution 2020–2030 (NDC) and the
          National Adaptation Plan 2019-2029 (NAP), it has committed globally to
          maintaining 93% of forest cover and to conducting comprehensive climate
          adaptation planning and regulation. Likewise, Suriname has ratified its
          commitment to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD)
          and to the conservation and wise use of wetlands and their resources through the
          RAMSAR convention.

1.10      However, the country recognizes the need to address the challenges that hinder
          optimal land use management from achieving these commitments. [21] This
          includes: (i) strengthening institutions to spearhead activities aligned to these
          commitments; (ii) formulating and improving legislation; (iii) introducing land use
          and spatial planning strategies with CC considerations; (iv) developing and
          improving data collection and sharing; and (v) increasing capacity for enforcement.

1.11      In response to the call for more attention to spatial planning and coordinated
          environmental policy, in 2020 the country established the Ministry of Spatial
          Planning and Environment (MinROM), which is tasked with the formulation and
          implementation of the country's environmental and spatial planning policy and
          institutional coordination. Under the MinROM, the Environment Directorate (ED)
          holds a general mandate for addressing CC adaptation and mitigation, ensuring
          that all multilateral environmental and CC agreements are integrated into national
          policies and legislation. Furthermore, the Spatial Planning Directorate (SPD),
          oversees the development of sound policy, planning, and legislation for spatial
          planning.

1.12      Simultaneously, to promote an integrative approach to economic, social, and
          environmental sustainability, in 2020, the Government of Suriname enacted the
          Environmental Framework Act (EFA) to regulate pollution, waste management,
          and environmental impact. This act established the National Environment Authority
          (NMA) 10, an autonomous body, responsible for the assessment, monitoring and
          enforcement of the environmental policy implementation. Until then, environmental
          and sustainable management had been undertaken by the National Institute for
          Environment and Development (NIMOS), including the implementation of the
          institute’s Environmental Impact Assessment guidelines. Thus, NIMOS was
          identified to transition into the NMA by expanding its current mandate from
          environmental policy implementation to environmental compliance and control,
          accompanied by the pending enactment of operational bylaws of the EFA. 11 The
          transition process began in late 2023. 12



10    The NMA holds technical and regulatory enforcement autonomy. It is represented in the state council and
      parliament by the MinROM for policy matters.
11    The EFA subsidiary regulations include noise, water and air contaminants and hazardous substance
      regulation, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) regulation, environmental enforcement,
      and environmental fund. A detailed description, status, timeline and explanation are included in OEL#8.
12    NMA transition is a four phased proposal. As of June 2024, phases 1 and 2 are under way.
                                                        -6-



1.13     Further to these efforts, the Government of Suriname is developing a Green
         Development Vision (GDV) to define green economic values, promote sustainable
         economic growth, and set guidelines for land conservation, aiming to harness
         natural assets and enhance institutional capacities for a balanced and sustainable
         future. 13

1.14     Problem. Despite its efforts, Suriname has difficulty in managing its land use in a
         sustainable manner given its insufficient capacity. Suriname lacks three of the five
         critical areas identified by best practices for effective land governance14: (i) A
         legal, institutional, and policy framework that acknowledges existing rights,
         enforces them at a low cost, and empowers users to exercise these rights
         according to their aspirations while benefiting society. (ii) Land use planning and
         taxation systems designed to prevent negative externalities and promote effective
         decentralization. (iii) The public provision of land information that is widely
         accessible, comprehensive, reliable, current, and cost-effective over the long term.
         This situation is associated with the following determinants:

1.15     Weak land use frameworks, regulation arrangements, and management
         instruments. 15 Land use and spatial planning in Suriname is characterized by the
         lack of an overarching guiding strategy, insufficient regulation, inexistent planning
         instruments and the absence of monitoring mechanisms. Currently, none of the
         country’s ten districts have a structural or zoning plan. This has resulted in
         uncontrolled land parceling, overlapping mining and forestry concessions, and
         double issuance of land domain. The current legal framework for planning lies in
         two outdated and limited acts, 16 which have focused on the Ministry of Public
         Works (MOPW) managing infrastructure for urban and residential areas [7], and
         do not account for MinROM’s mandate for environmental and land regulation and
         management. Moreover, the land management legislative instruments are
         fragmented in various documents regulating land and natural resource issuance,
         use, and protection. [7] Currently, the Government of Suriname is in the approval
         process of the Spatial Planning Act (SPA), which provides for an integrated
         participatory approach to spatial planning, incorporating CC considerations and
         socio-economic factors to regulate the country’s spatial development for the
         upcoming 50 years. However, it requires subsidiary regulations 17, instruments 18,



13   Currently the GDV is undergoing a thorough stakeholder engagement process in which the IDB has actively
     participated. A first proposal for a GDV statement will be presented by the end of 2024.
14   The others are: (i) Clearly defined state land identification and management that cost-effectively provides
     public goods; (ii) Accessible mechanisms for authoritatively resolving disputes and managing
     conflicts.[36]
15   Institutional arrangements refer to the delegation, distribution, or sharing of power related to growth
     management decision-making and implementation authority. [37]
16   The Planning Act 1973, the Urban Development Act, developed in 1972, and the Building Act 1952 provides
     stipulations for building permits in residential areas of Suriname.
17   The legal frameworks will be based on the SPA. These include structural plan regulations zoning regulation
     and codes, fee regulations for the services provided by the Ministry, subdivision regulations, among others.
18   Astructural plan indicates, the spatial planning of a district, part of a district or a region. It is aligned and
     responsive to the provisions established in the National Spatial Development Plan (NSDP). Zoning plans are
     more detailed than structural plans and provide rules regarding the zoning, development and use of the land
     included in the plan.
                                                       -7-



         procedures, and strengthened institutional bodies to effectively enact and
         implement the regulation. [7]

1.16     Suriname’s 2020 enactment of the EFA and the establishment of the NMA, has
         represented an important advancement in protecting, promoting, and managing its
         environment. However, the statutes set out under the EFA require the
         development of procedural and regulatory bylaws to facilitate its operability, and
         expand its technical capacity for monitoring. Furthermore, within MinROM, the ED
         is critical in developing environmental policy and overseeing CC -related projects.
         However, it is challenged by weak institutional coordination, limited capacity to
         undertake policy work, and ownership for strategic decision-making at national and
         local levels.

1.17     Insufficient available and reliable data to manage Land Use and LUC.
         Reliable, recent and official readily available data is generally scarce among
         Amazonian countries, particularly that related to land use, spatial planning, and
         environmental themes. 19 This scarcity hinders policy processes and the ability to
         make evidence-based decisions. In Suriname, there is a need for more knowledge
         to support environmental, spatial planning, and CC actions, however the limited
         reliable data and information sharing arrangements represent a significant
         challenge. [21][34] A 2022 survey found that 45% of citizen respondents could not
         access government data. [38] Suriname scored 57/100 in terms of environmental
         data coverage and openness. [39] Insufficient territorial, socioeconomic, and
         environmental data hinder the possibility of: (i) monitoring, licensing, and
         inspecting the environment and territory; and (ii) environmental and territorial
         planning [22] ultimately limiting the decision-making capacity.

1.18     In this sense, Suriname currently has data gaps on climate and meteorology,
         elevation, geomorphology, hydrography and hydrology, rural environmental
         registry, territorial protected areas, zoning, tourism, and roads. 20 [22] (OEL#5)
         Under the EFA, the NMA is tasked with the collection and exchange of information
         on the natural and human living environment. To meet this task, it needs
         specialized equipment, including fit for purpose systems to keep track of
         procedural 21 and environmental data 22, and training to identify, collect, generate,
         and house new data.

1.19     Furthermore, Suriname is challenged by non-existent data-sharing mechanisms 23
         and a lack of clarity regarding spatial planning, CC, and environmental information
         institutional ownership. Existing regulations do not specify responsibilities in data


19   This includes but not limited to land, sea, forest, hydrology, climate, demographic statistics, and geography.
20   Currently data is available on vegetation, fauna and flora, sanitation, environmental risks, political
     subdivisions, demography, and energy.
21   The system should allow NMA to keep track of the monitoring program or schedule, frequency; roles and
     responsibilities; compliance/non-compliance; etc.
22   The system should allow NMA to access crucial information from the EIA necessary for environmental
     monitoring and informed decision-making: baseline data (quantitative and qualitative); geographical data;
     significant environmental impacts; mitigation measures; monitoring variables and/or performance indicators;
     monitoring results.
23   Mining, wildlife, and nature conservation information is scattered in research documents, reports, and external
     parties’ websites. [22]
                                                     -8-



         ownership, sharing, and maintenance, resulting in uncoordinated data
         management and limited inter-agency collaboration. [22] The existing databases
         are managed by each institution with different technical parameters and levels of
         digitalization. Of a total of thirty organizations currently owning some form of data,
         only 30% of them share the data. [22] Likewise, data collection on carbon
         emissions encountered numerous obstacles leading to difficulty in preparing
         national GHG inventories and planning for adaptation finance and climate action
         country-wide. [12] To date, Suriname has only prepared three of the seven national
         GHG inventories. [12]

1.20     In 2016 the Suriname Environmental Information Network (SMIN) 24 was created
         to act as a network to collaboratively produce official and formal environmental
         data and information for the purpose of national policy and planning, and to
         develop, and publish consistent reporting processes (NAP, 2019). To date, the
         SMIN is not operational due to a lack of a legal mandate [22] and financial
         resources to support its objectives.

1.21     In practice, these gaps and vagueness can lead to duplicates, overlaps,
         contradictions between some data groups, unnecessary waste of human and
         financial resources, and uncertainty in data validation, ultimately damaging the
         information’s credibility and its decisions. This hinders the country's capacity to
         monitor, report, and verify national climate, spatial development and environmental
         actions.

1.22     New government agencies in land use, spatial planning, CC, and
         environmental management have limited institutional capacity, qualified
         human capital, adequate facilities, and insufficient coordination
         mechanisms. Both NMA and MinROM have insufficient technical expertise and
         inadequate operational management systems. NMA faces difficulties in hiring
         personnel due to challenges in finding qualified professionals. Currently, with
         40 vacant positions, only 50% of their total positions are filled. 25 It also lacks
         regular staff training programs, digital solutions to monitor and manage projects,
         and procedures for technical quality management of works/goods, financial
         accounting, and procurement. Likewise, with its upending expansion of
         responsibilities, 26 the NMA is set to hire an additional 40 staff members by the end
         of 2024. 27 For this, it requires robust onboarding processes, strong capacity
         building and training platforms, and planning and control systems to support the
         human resource management of the growing team.

1.23     MinROM also needs more qualified staff given the higher-than-average
         (20% vs. 10%) vacancy rate for the technical, procurement, accounting and
         finance, and project management departments. [44] MinROM staff comprises 69

24   The SMIN is comprised of NMA (previously NIMOS), MGLIS, ABS, PlanBuro, SBB. SMIN is chaired and
     housed under the NMA.
25   Data from December 2023.
26   The NMA was launched on July 22nd, the government completed dialogues with worker unions, approvals
     of modifications to the EFA, management regulations and salary scales were revised and a financial officer
     hired.
27   A first batch of new hires have been completed, and the existing NIMOS staff will have transitioned to NMA
     staff by July 22nd, with a total number of employees of 42.
                                           -9-



       persons and needs to grow the team by at least 30% in the upcoming year to fulfill
       its mandate. The MinROM is consistently undertaking hiring processes to complete
       its staffing. Currently, the position of Permanent Secretary of Spatial Planning is
       vacant, and the area holds only six staff members, which substantially challenges
       its capacity to develop implement and enforce the required policies, provide
       advisory services, and coordinate with other agencies. To mitigate these
       shortcomings, MinROM has hired temporary consultants to support key activities
       and reviewed existing public servants to incorporate to its workforce. Likewise, it
       is working with local and international educational institutions to identify
       opportunities for students to join the ministry and to establish continuing education
       and training opportunities. However, the Ministry and local academic institutions
       require financial and technical support to carry out these endeavors.

1.24   MinROM and NMA do not have their own institutional facilities. The spaces
       currently rented out by both entities prove inefficient. The physical space is
       insufficient to accommodate and expand their teams. Moreover, these spaces are
       not accessible to people with physical disabilities, creating barriers in their
       participation and use of services. The lack of eco-efficient technologies to improve
       energy and water use coupled with the rental fees, represent a recurring financial
       burden. MinROM currently pays USD$4,000 in monthly rental fees and an
       additional USD$20,000 is budgeted for repairs, payment of parking facilities, and
       utilities. NMA pays USD$9,000 in rental fees for its current office facilities. They
       also have insufficient office furniture, storage, computer hardware/software,
       monitoring equipment, vehicles, internet, telecommunications, and security
       services. Finally, both institutions lag in terms of the provision of online services
       and public access to information. Suriname scored 108/193 in the UN ranking for
       e-government. [40] This is coupled with a weakened communication strategy,
       which limits the reach and impact of both agencies’ actions.

1.25   Gender. Worldwide, women are unequally impacted by land use, spatial planning,
       and environmental decisions. However, their interests and needs are often
       excluded from community spatial planning processes and women are
       under-represented in related professions like architecture and engineering. [41] In
       Suriname, they represent 51.5% of the population, and despite the relative
       increase of women in management positions and the highest enrolment in tertiary
       education, they are still marginally involved in national decision-making. [25] For
       instance, in 2022 Suriname’s gender gap in political leadership is 23%, and in
       economic participation is 74%. Only 29.4% of ministerial level positions are held
       by women and men hold 2.4 times as many seats in the national parliament as
       women. [52] Likewise, across economic opportunities, education, health, and
       political leadership, the gender gap index is near 74%, six points above the global
       average and one point above the LAC average. [24] Through its Gender Vision
       Policy Document 2021 – 2035, the country has committed to promoting women’s
       participation and inclusion. However, lack of gender awareness is one of the major
       obstacles in the process of eliminating discriminatory practices. [43] A study
       conducted specifically for MinROM and NMA, identified that these entities have no
       provision yet for equal opportunities, equity and antidiscrimination of women staff
       [44] (See OEL#13).

1.26   Diversity. Suriname is home to several indigenous people (IP) and Maroons
       (afro-descendants), which represent around 22% of the total population. [25] They
                                           - 10 -



       are mainly concentrated in the interior of the country, where extreme droughts and
       floods have been recorded in the past. Their dependency on natural resources to
       cover their basic needs, make them particularly vulnerable to CC and disaster
       events. These communities also lag “behind in infrastructure, and basic services
       such as drinking water and sanitation”. [25] Considering this reality is essential for
       the country’s economy and people. However, IP and afro-descendants are often
       excluded from participating in planning processes that have a significant impact of
       them [41].

1.27   People with disabilities (PwD) represent 15.9% of the country’s population.
       However, the legal framework in Suriname has not established spatial planning
       frameworks adapted to the needs of these groups,or building codes requiring
       accessibility features. While data for Suriname is not available, regional reports
       have noted their limited participation in decision making processes [42] and the
       low level of accessibility of public facilities in LAC for PwD. [42] Moreover, PwD in
       the country are less likely to be employed than people without disabilities (39.9%
       versus 53.2%). In 2012, only 9 of the 17 ministries had PwD working in
       Government offices, and only 2 were involved in the spatial planning sector. PwD
       interviewed considered that some of the reasons are security concerns of the hiring
       entity, and unwillingness of colleagues to assist them in the workplace. [45]
       Globally, PwD also face discriminatory barriers when accessing public information
       and services, for instance, they face numerous challenges when accessing digital
       platforms as these are often not designed with accessibility in mind.

1.28   Program Strategy. As the first lending operation which aims at strengthening
       Suriname’s institutional capacity to manage land use, the program represents a
       pivotal step in mainstreaming CC readiness and environmental management into
       the country’s spatial planning and socioeconomic development. Furthermore, the
       investments made through this operation prove timely and critical in supporting
       Suriname’s environmental ambitious and the achievement of its 2030 international
       commitment. The program will address the problem’s determinants in three key
       areas: spatial planning, environmental management, and CC response. This
       involves developing robust frameworks, regulations, and instruments to achieve
       sustainable land use practices and low-carbon development. The project will focus
       on designing and implementing a comprehensive Spatial Planning Strategy
       centered on environmental priorities and climate resilience. Both spatial and land-
       use planning are integral facets in crafting sustainable, well-coordinated, and
       inclusive strategies and plans, fostering the development of more resilient and
       livable communities. [27]

1.29   The project will address existing data gaps by providing an integrated
       Environmental Information System (EIS), including a Geospatial Intelligence HUB
       (GIH) and Monitoring Reporting and Verification (MRV) system for enhanced
       climate decision-making. An EIS will facilitate the utilization and distribution of
       environmental data to assess climate and environmental impacts, monitor GHG
       emissions and other pollutants, gauge the economic effects of environmental
       changes, and formulate policies to enhance the environmental performance of
       businesses, sectors, and administrative units. Given the escalating negative
       effects of CC, a robust monitoring system is imperative to shape Suriname's ability
       to achieve their development objectives. [28] Developing an MRV system is crucial
       for discerning emission patterns, pinpointing areas for GHG reduction endeavors,
                                                 - 11 -



         monitoring support for mitigation efforts, gauging the efficacy of planned actions,
         self-assessing the impact of received assistance, and tracking progress in
         emission reduction. [29]

1.30     To ensure institutional readiness, the project will establish capacity building
         programs and operational strengthening measures for MinROM and NMA. Finally,
         to improve overall environmental governance, the project will develop zoning, land
         use, and environmental permitting digital platforms aligned with international
         standards and meet the needs of both public officials and Surinamese citizens.
         This will empower Suriname to regulate the impact of human activities on natural
         resources, safeguard public welfare, and promote sustainable prosperity. [30] The
         vertical logic of this program is included in OEL#7.

1.31     Bank experience in the sector, the country, and lessons learned. The Bank
         has a long history of promoting sustainable land use through sound spatial
         planning, environmental management, and CC mainstreaming, which are
         anchored in strong national and subnational institutional capacities. The operation
         lends from experiences like the “National Land Use Policy” program
         (ATN/OC-15982-PN) that accompanied the formulation of Panama’s National
         Land Use Policy and Plan, as well as the design of institutional training programs
         for their implementation. Likewise, the program "Support to the Implementation of
         Land-Use       Planning”     in    Dominican     Republic     (ATN/AC-19697-DR;
         ATN/OC-19696-DR) supported the development of instruments for municipal land
         use planning with CC considerations. Moreover, from “Mexico’s Urban and Land
         Information System” (ATN/JF-16577-ME) that assisted the country in the
         development of the national urban and land information system. This program also
         incorporates experiences from the “Support for the Conservation and Management
         of Cultural and Natural Heritage” (4450/OC-PN) and “Agricultural Competitiveness
         Program” (4097/OC) on the use of external management agencies to create
         capacity, safeguard technical quality and ensure successful program
         implementation

1.32     In Suriname, the Bank has provided support to promote sustainable and resilient
         spatial planning and environmental management, in line with the country strategies
         (¶1.39). Through the technical cooperation “Environmental Management”
         (ATN/SF-5941-SU), the establishment of the initial environmental policy was
         supported, setting the groundwork for NIMOS, recently created at the time. With
         the growing vulnerability to CC, the Bank provided Suriname with the technical
         cooperation “Mainstreaming CC in Sustainable Decision-Making Tools”
         (ATN/OC-17395-SU) that supported the inclusion of CC in Surinam’s National
         Development Plan and the strengthening of NIMOS. These technical cooperations
         provided the initial efforts in establishing Suriname's current landscape for spatial
         planning, environmental management and CC adaptation and mitigation serving
         as the groundwork for the implementation of this operation. The Bank has fostered
         a participatory approach for the development of a Spatial Planning Vision for
         Suriname and the drafting of Suriname’s SPA. Additionally, through funding from
         the Amazonian Unit, this Program benefits from the Bank's experience with 28

28   The Amazon Coordination Unit is developing Amazonia360, a digital platform which integrates and
     harmonizes data on the Amazon region from various sources using geographic information systems in a
     user-friendly approach.
                                                       - 12 -



       Platform, by providing technical assistance for the design of the GIH. Likewise, it
       has provided assessments on the country’s ability to manage its land use and the
       required actions to strengthen its spatial planning and environmental
       management, to be funded by the operation.

1.33   Lessons learned from these experiences were identified and incorporated in the
       Program as follows:


                                               Table 1. Lessons Learned

                            Lessons Learned                                     Reflected in Project Design

        1.   CC considerations into land use and spatial              The program will finance disaster risk and CC
             planning. The importance of incorporating CC             assessments as part of the development of
             considerations, using CC risk assessments into           land use and spatial planning instruments.
             planning instruments and decision-making tools

        2.   Reliable data and integrated information                 The program will support the GIH creation
             systems. The availability of reliable and accurate       which provides the institutional architecture and
             data and the integration of land information systems     technologies for data collection, organization
             safeguarded by comprehensive institutional and           and sharing. The program includes creating
             normative frameworks, is critical for effective land     geographic information systems to support
             use management                                           decision-making and promote transparency.

        3.   Institutionalizing Data Sharing. Streamlining data
             collection, sharing, analysis, and reporting can be
             significantly enhanced by institutionalizing data
             sharing through existing informal and formal
             interinstitutional structures

        4.   Context-Appropriate MRV Systems. MRV systems             The Program will finance the creation of an
             best inform decision-making processes. To ensure         MRV system to monitor environmental
             their long-lasting use, they should be appropriate to    management and promote context-appropriate
             the local context, responsive to internal constraints,   decisions. This will be further supported by
             tailored to the country’s needs, and anchored in a       building the necessary technological
             solid knowledge base for further environmental and       infrastructure for efficient and agile interactions.
             climate monitoring.

        5.   Donor coordination. Establishing government led          The program will support the setup of a Donor
             coordination mechanisms is important to articulate       Coordination Unit within MinROM. This unit will
             complementary efforts from various organizations         articulate all initiatives and funds that support
             and donors, preventing overlap and ensuring              the implementation of the land use, spatial
             cohesive action.                                         planning and environmental management
                                                                      policies, strategies, plans and projects.

        6.   Training for installing institutional capacities.        The program strongly emphasizes capacity
             Need to strengthen newly created public agencies         building and operational strengthening based
             for efficient operation by designing and implementing    on a thorough understanding of current
             change management strategies, accompanied by             processes and operational management to
             training opportunities and capacity-building tools.      identify areas of opportunity and improvement.
                                                                      The loan is anchored in developing technical
                                                                      capacities by creating training materials for
                                                                      long-lasting knowledge transfer.

        7.   Support the project implementation process with          The program execution mechanism will
             technical expertise and program management               incorporate contracting an External Operation
             experience                                               Unit (EOU) to support MinROM in program
                                                                      implementation and creating technical and
                                                                      project management capacity in both entities.
                                                    - 13 -



1.34     Technical aspects. The TC “Spatial Planning Assessment and Development
         Support for Suriname” (ATN/AC-19447-SU) provided the relevant technical
         analyses to prepare the environmental and infrastructure requirements for the new
         buildings for MinROM and NMA (OEL#6), a change management strategy
         (OEL#4), a geospatial data management and governance strategy (OEL#5), a
         rapid diagnosis of the legal spatial planning and environmental landscape (OEL#8)
         and the development of a comprehensive technical readiness assessment to
         identify potential implementation scenarios, and define a roadmap 29 to meet the
         outcomes of the program.

1.35     Climate Change Financing. The project is consistent with the Bank’s CC Sector
         Framework Document (GN-2835-8). It is estimated that the project has 38.19%
         climate finance mitigation and adaptation according to the MDB Joint Climate
         Finance methodology, through spatial planning related to climate change and
         environmental management, support in CC regulatory systems and data
         collection, and the construction of bioclimatic buildings that will meet green
         certification standards. According to the IDB Group's Green Finance Methodology
         (GN-3101), the operation also contributes to the environmental sustainability
         objectives of “Strengthening environmental governance systems” and “Pollution
         prevention and control”, therefore the operation has a total of 73.98% green and
         climate finance.

1.36     Paris Alignment. This operation has been analyzed using the Joint MDB
         Assessment Framework for Paris Alignment and the IDB Group PAIA
         (GN-3142-1); it has been determined: (i) aligned to the adaptation goal of the Paris
         Agreement PA); and (ii) aligned to the mitigation goal of the PA based on a specific
         assessment. Alignment was based on the consideration of the following elements:
         as per the POM, the acquisition of data center equipment will consider energy
         efficiency criteria equivalent to Energy Star. The operation is deemed coherent
         with the NDC and no risks of carbon lock-in or stranded assets have been
         identified.

1.37     The country’s strategy in the sector. The program will contribute to helping
         Suriname to achieve some of the MOP goals:

         a.     Promoting a livable environment, nature, and safety.

         b.     Mainstreaming the country’s environmental vision into land use and spatial
                planning and environmental management frameworks, regulation and
                instruments leveraging evidence-based decisions supported by databases
                with spatial and environmental information.

         c.     Contributing to an efficient and effective government, by strengthening
                MinROM and NMA. [31]




29   Scenarios included ideal, optimized and limited progress. The roadmap was developed under the optimized
     progress scenario which has a pragmatic and gradual approach considering current laws and regulations with
     contextual limitations and budget constraints.
                                                     - 14 -



1.38     Moreover, this operation will support the country in its progress towards achieving
         the NDC under three priority emitting sectors (i.e., forests, agriculture, and
         transport) through increased MRV capacities. A new spatial planning framework,
         including a NSPD and subnational structural plans, will support the country in
         maintaining forest coverage at an optimal level from an economic point of view. It
         will also contribute to progress the management of emissions in transport and
         urban infrastructure by providing the necessary regulation to limit urban sprawl.

1.39     Bank strategy in the country. The operation contributes to the Country Strategy
         with Suriname 2021˗2025 (GN-3065) objective improve digital government by the
         implementation of digital platforms for permit processing and increased access to
         geospatial information. Likewise, it contributes to the goals of enhancing CC
         resilience and institutional capacity by increasing capacities and enforcing
         frameworks for the country’s sustainability and resilience. It seeks to foster
         scalability and synergies throughout the IDB Group. It will strengthen the country’s
         territorial development and growth frameworks that guide both public and private
         sector investments towards a sustainable, resilient, and equitable vision,
         consistent with international commitments. Particularly, the program will contribute
         to current and future operations of the IDB Group, by promoting sustainable use,
         ecosystem conservation in the bioeconomy, infrastructure resilience and inclusive
         socio-economic development through the integration of local communities and
         traditional knowledge, and ensuring the effective implementation and success of
         projects that contribute directly to report and measure GHG emissions reduced by
         mitigation and adaptation activities, namely through the projects “Financing
         Program for Productive and Sustainable Development in Suriname“ (5860/OC-SU;
         5861/GN-SU) and “Bio-economy Empowerment in Suriname Indigenous
         Communities through Access to Water, Energy and Telecommunications
         (Bio-SWEET)“ (SU-L1076). Likewise it will support scalable and synergistic IDB
         Invest and IDB Lab projects with private companies 30 by guiding future
         contributions towards a unified green growth vision (OEL#12). It will also provide
         critical additionality to the implementation of the REDD+ Strategy and the National
         Biodiversity Strategy to sustainable manage forests ecosystems, and biodiversity
         in collaboration with other donors, such as World Bank, UN-REDD Program,
         UNDP, Conservation International, WWF, and the Guyana Shield Facility. The new
         spatial planning legislation should provide for an improved coordination,
         consultation and participation mechanism with non-state actors. The operation
         contributes significantly to Suriname's REDD+ strategy, specifically to its strategic
         lines of maintaining HFLD status, and contribute to land use planning, by
         supporting accelerated and regulated spatial planning, monitor conservation
         efforts, inform decision-making and strengthen regulatory and supervisory
         institutions. Finally, the REDD+ implementation falls under the responsibility of the
         NMA, which will bridge the forestry's MRV system to the national system, ensuring
         Suriname's forestry monitoring capacity is constantly improved and in line with the
         overall GHG, land use, land-use change and forestry, and climate mitigation and
         adaptation reporting requirements under the UNFCCC.




30   In 2023, IDB Invest partnered with Aannemings-Maatschappij Baitali (“Baitali”), to increase connectivity and
     integration in the northwest of Suriname. [35]
                                             - 15 -



1.40   Strategic alignment. The Program is consistent with the IDB Group Institutional
       Strategy “Transforming for Scale and Impact” (CA-631). It is aligned with: address
       CC by providing Suriname with the necessary capacities to mitigate GHG
       emissions, adapt to CC impacts, adopt spatial planning strategies geared toward
       sustainable patterns of territorial development, and minimize the adverse effects
       of LUC. It is also aligned with the operational focus areas of: (i) biodiversity, natural
       capital, and climate action; (ii) Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population
       groups (iii) institutional capacity and the rule of law; and (vi) sustainable, resilient,
       and inclusive infrastructure.
1.41   Moreover, the Program is consistent with the Sector Framework Document of
       Climate Change (GN-2835-8) in contributing to action line 1: adapt and build
       climate resilience, by strengthening local capacities in understanding the
       implications of CC and considering these in decision-making about territorial
       development, as well as the Sector Framework Document of Housing and Urban
       Development (GN-2732-11) in the line of action 2: Reducing Pollution and
       Increasing Climate Mitigation and Resiliency Levels and 4: Promoting Good Urban
       Governance. By increasing the Government of Suriname’s capacity to draft and
       implement environmental and spatial policy, the operation is aligned with the
       “Amazonia Forever” program through its transversal area of developing
       institutional capacities and promoting the rule of law.

1.42   It aligns with the ONE Caribbean strategic framework by contributing to "Increased
       climate-responsive social inclusion" by supporting projects promoting social
       inclusion and equality with a climate adaptation perspective, such as developing
       spatial planning frameworks considering environmental and CC factors. It also
       aligns with the expected result of "Improved infrastructure resilience in the region"
       as it aims to develop a platform and a digital permitting system for zoning and
       spatial development, which will strengthen the digital infrastructure for spatial
       planning and increase the availability of data for climate-resilient decision making.
       It aligns closely with the IDB Group Natural Capital and Biodiversity Mainstreaming
       Action Plan 2024-2025 (NCBMAP), serving as a strategic implementation vehicle
       for the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) in Suriname.
       Through the strengthening of institutional frameworks, data management systems
       and enhancing the operational and technical capacity of key institutions like
       MinROM and NMA, increasing the quality of biodiversity-related interventions and
       improving resource mobilization it contributes to Components 2 (operations and
       accountability), 3 (Knowledge products and capacity building) and 4 (Resources
       mobilization and nature financing).

B.     Objective, components, and cost

1.43   The program's objective is to improve Suriname's institutional capacity to manage
       land use. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen Suriname’s spatial planning
       and environmental frameworks, regulations, and instruments; (ii) increase the
       availability and use of data for spatial planning, climate change, and environmental
       management; and (iii) strengthen MinROM and NMA’s operational conditions.
       These objectives will be achieved through the components described below.
                                                         - 16 -



1.44      Component 1. Strengthening MinROM’s Capacity for Spatial Planning,
          Climate Change and Environmental Management (US$16,950,000). This
          component seeks to enhance MinROM’s spatial planning, CC, environmental
          management, and operational capacities. 31 To this end, it will support the Ministry
          in outlining the priorities to achieve and monitor the country’s environmental vision.
          The component will support the design and enforcement of spatial planning
          frameworks that will guide land use and territorial development, with environmental
          and CC considerations, at the national and sub-national levels. It will also support
          training activities and the physical space MinROM requires to comply with its
          functions. The activities financed under this component are grouped into three
          categories:

          a.     Instruments for CC and Environmental Management. It includes: (i) the
                 creation of a GDV framework and implementation action plan, integrating
                 aspects of CC, biodiversity, and environmental protection; (ii) support for the
                 definition of the GDV framework’s political, economic, and social aspects
                 through modeling of the government-defined valued for sustainable and low
                 carbon development; and (iii) the development of an inclusive, participatory
                 stakeholder engagement strategy.

          b.     Land Use and Spatial Planning Frameworks and Instruments. It
                 includes: (i) the design of Suriname’s Spatial Planning Strategy in line with
                 the national environmental priorities; 32 (ii) the drafting of Structural
                 Development Plans and Zoning Plans 33 that will guide the implementation of
                 the spatial planning strategy at the subnational level; (iii) the design and
                 implementation of the Zoning and Land Use Platform 34 to promote
                 transparency on applicable regulations and proposals and increase
                 availability of data for decision-making, public awareness, and enforcement;
                 and (iv) the design and implementation of a Zoning and Spatial Development
                 Permits and Licensing System, which are accessible for the visually
                 impaired. 35 The platform and licensing system will foster PwD access to data
                 and tools to participate in planning processes with informed decisions. 36




31   Territorial development includes land mass as well as adjacent waters and airspace.
32   This includes, among others: the creation of the NSDP, the drafting of amendments to ensure that the
     institutional arrangements are set in place for the required laws and bylaws, as well as the development of
     public awareness campaigns on spatial planning, the regulations to come into play and its enforcement.
     These frameworks and instruments will seek female, IP, afro-descendants and PwD representation, through
     stakeholder participation and inclusive guidelines.
33   According to Government priorities and the regulations included in the SPA, the operation will finance the
     development of ten zoning plans.
34   The loan will support the creation of the Zoning and Land Use Platform, as a public platform to research
     zoning and land use regulations, development proposals and city planning initiatives.
35   This includes the procedural and institutional set up as well as a digital solution for efficient operation.
36   The platform and licensing system will be developed following a user-center design that considers the specific
     needs of women and PwD. They will include impairment adaptation and disaggregated data on gender and
     diversity of people requiring permits. Their development will also include awareness, outreach, and
     communication campaigns to educate the public on their functionalities and benefits.
                                                      - 17 -



         c.     Institutional and Operational Strengthening. It includes: (i) the
                strengthening of MinROM through the design of a change management plan
                and development of critical managerial systems like document, facility,
                material resource, and personnel management systems; (ii) the design and
                implementation of a strategic operation plan which leverages digitalization
                and promotes progress monitoring and impact evaluation systems for the
                set-up of a Donor Coordination Unit 37 with the purpose of leveraging and
                articulating donors’ contributions for Suriname’s sustainable development;
                (iii) the development of a training plan for MinROM staff. It encompasses the
                design and implementation of training materials and programs on spatial
                planning and environmental management, project and organizational
                management, and soft skills. Regarding gender and diversity, training will be
                developed in non-discriminatory practices in the workplace and towards
                public services to promote women and PwD inclusion; (iv) the creation and
                implementation of partnerships with academic institutions for the
                development of advanced education curricula associated to spatial planning,
                environmental management, and CC; and (v) the design and construction of
                two bioclimatic buildings to house MinROM and NMA, 38 complying with
                EDGE standards, including gender sensitive elements in the design, as well
                as incorporating design and wayfinding elements for ensuring access of
                PwD.

1.45     Component 2 Strengthening NMA’s Capacity for Environmental
         Management and Climate Transparency (US$10,050,000). This component will
         contribute to strengthening environmental frameworks, regulations, and
         instruments, increasing the availability of CC and environmental data, and building
         NMA’s operational capacities. This will be achieved through the following activities
         grouped into four categories:

         a.     Environmental Information System. It will finance: (i) the implementation
                of GIH which will serve as a systematized, centralized, and up-to-date
                repository for all spatial data that is needed in the country. It shall encompass
                robust functionalities, including advanced reporting capabilities, mapping,
                and viewing tools for comprehensive spatial analysis, and the ability to
                efficiently extract and download relevant data, this includes: (a) the creation
                of institutional arrangements to provide legal soundness to the GIH, (b) the
                setup of the GIH governance system, including the creation of the steering
                committee, the strengthening of the relevant departments within SMIN to
                support the GIH, (c) the drafting and establishment of data sharing
                arrangements, including definition of data standards and protocols, (d) the
                purchasing of energy-efficient hardware and software, (e) the development
                and implementation of a data collection plan, including identification of new
                data sources 39 and digitalization of existing physical assets, (f) purchasing of
                data sets, and (g) development of sector specific applications within the GIH

37   All systems developed for the set-up of the Donor Coordination Unit will be linked to the Ministry of Finance
     and Planning.
38   The buildings will be developed on a lot owned by MINROM and designated for this use.
39   Including remote sensing and earth observation, and a geospatial data management system to collect and
     monitor data on land, water, biodiversity, urban footprint, and vulnerability, as well as sampling and
     measurement equipment, and specialized lab appliances and supplies.
                                                        - 18 -



                 (OEL#5); and (ii) the design and implementation of the EIS which will provide
                 public geospatial and statistical data to users on environmental indicators,
                 and will encourage women to access information for decision making. 40

         b.      The Environmental Enforcement System will finance the optimization of
                 the ESIA and environmental permitting process currently carried out
                 manually by NMA through a digital permit and licensing system by
                 establishing standards, protocols, and procedures for authorizing,
                 monitoring, and enforcing ESIA, environmental permits, and policing. It
                 includes the drafting of the environmental standards, 41 the establishment of
                 permitting procedures, the development and implementation of monitoring
                 protocols including the purchasing of energy-efficient equipment, 42 designing
                 and implementing an awareness, outreach, and communication plan and the
                 deployment of the environmental enforcement strategy. 43

         c.      Implementation Mechanisms for Climate Transparency. It will finance:
                 the development and implementation of a national MRV system from priority
                 economic sectors; 44 to ensure accurate measurement of GHG emissions
                 with accompanying cross sectoral 45 technical training including the
                 establishment of a National Carbon Emission Monitoring Unit.

         d.      NMA Institutional Capacity. It will finance (i) supporting NMA’s
                 organizational structure and processes reengineering, including the
                 development and implementation of a change management plan, which
                 accompanies the final phases of the NMA transition; (ii) the design and
                 setting up of critical managerial systems like the financial, document and
                 personnel management systems; (iii) the design and implementation of a
                 training plan with NMA public officials, including the development of training
                 materials and the implementation of training programs on CC and
                 environmental management, project management, financial, human
                 resources and organizational management and soft skills. Regarding gender
                 and diversity, training will be developed in non-discriminatory practices in the
                 workplace and towards public services to promote women and PwD
                 inclusion; and (iv) the creation of partnerships with academic institutions for


40   This EIS will be developed following a user-center design that considers the specific needs of women and
     diverse groups. Its development will also include awareness, outreach, and communication campaigns to
     educate the public on their functionalities and benefits.
41   Includes air, water, and soil pollution minimum standards.
42   It refers to purchasing monitoring equipment such as passive air quality monitoring and portable air quality
     stations, satellite communication systems, and vehicles to carry out monitoring activities. The equipment will
     adhere to energy efficiency criteria, where possible, including but not limited to Energy Star certified products
     and/or other energy-efficiency specifications.
43   As a part of the EFA, the program will strengthen the NMAs capacities to enforce environmental policy through
     (i) drafting the necessary regulations for the set-up of an environmental enforcers program; (ii) the design of
     the enforcement strategy; (iii) hiring and training of the environmental enforcers; and (iv) purchasing of
     reporting equipment, including vehicles and satellite communication for remote locations.
44   A 2019 technology needs assessment determined priority sectors and identified and prioritized pertinent
     technologies with a 15-months estimated implementation time.
45   The loan will support GHG emission reporting capacity building in the agriculture, forestry, energy, and
     transportation industries across private, public, and non-governmental sectors.
                                                     - 19 -



                the development of advanced education                          curricula    associated       to
                environmental management and CC.

1.46     Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Audits (US$3,000,000). It
         will finance: (i) the hiring of a transitional Program Implementation Unit (PIU)
         (¶3.1); (ii) the hiring of the EOU (¶3.2); (iii) program monitoring and evaluation
         activities, including a mid-term and a final evaluation; (iv) external annual financial
         auditing; and (v) implementation of ESG instruments including stakeholder
         engagement activities.

C.       Key Results Indicators

1.47     Expected Results and potential beneficiaries. The project’s long-term impact is
         to contribute to avoiding GHG emissions by reducing the expected deforestation
         rate. However, the objective is to improve Suriname's institutional capacity to
         manage land use, particularly in relation to forest cover protection. This will be
         obtained through the program’s main results which substantially increase the
         probability of success by providing the necessary infrastructure, data, and
         institutional capacity for effective forest management and protection. The adoption
         of spatial planning strategies by MinROM, including the National Spatial Planning
         Strategy, subnational zoning plans and the Zoning and Land Use public platform
         provides the necessary framework to guide sustainable development while
         preserving critical forest areas. The increase in climate, environment and land-use
         data availability and use 46 enables real-time monitoring and data-driven
         decision-making regarding LUC and potential threats to forest cover. This
         capability is crucial for avoiding CO2 emissions and preserving CO2 reservoirs.
         The improvement in environmental regulation compliance and the agencies’
         operational capacities ensures the presence of skilled personnel and robust
         systems for implementing and enforcing land use regulations and forest protection
         measures. This is essential for the long-term sustainability of forest management
         efforts. The program expects to directly benefit the 140 employees of MinROM and
         NMA, who will acquire the necessary instruments to fulfill their functions. Moreover,
         Suriname’s 618, 040 citizens will indirectly benefit from a more sustainable use of
         natural resources through the regulation of pollutants and hazardous activities, and
         increased awareness of land use, environmental issues, and climate action.

1.48     Socio-Economic Feasibility. An economic cost-benefit analysis (CBA) (OEL#1)
         was carried out for the program. The CBA forecasts the deforestation conditions
         in the absence and existence of the project, and its associated change in CO2
         emissions. Emissions are valued using the social cost of carbon. The difference
         between the value of the emissions in the two states is considered as the benefits
         of the project. Thus, the quantified benefits come from reducing deforestation,
         leading to carbon sequestration and environmental preservation. The estimated
         Internal Rate of Return from the main exercise is 74%, with a Net Present Value
         (NPV) of US$405,700,944 and a benefit-cost ratio of 6.78. This exercise assumes
         a price US$85 per carbon/ton and a 10% reduced deforestation rate relative to the


46   This includes structured datasets that detail the kinds of activities occurring locations, with associated
     geospatial references. It should include metadata that describes the land use nomenclatures and hierarchies
     used, and information on protected areas and forested areas. and a well-maintained archive of previous
     existing land uses.
                                                    - 20 -



          situation without project. Sensitivity analyses were carried out for key variables
          that could affect the profitability of the project, including the percentage of
          deforestation reduction, carbon prices, timing of benefits, and O&M costs. The
          project exhibits a positive net return across most scenarios, with positive NPVs if
          the carbon price exceeds US$57.6 per ton, demonstrating the results’ robustness.
1.49      Institutional Feasibility. The institutional viability of the program is considered
          high, given that the proposed activities will support the Government of Suriname
          in meeting its international commitments, 47 the national goals established in the
          MOP, and MinROM and NMA mandates. In addition, the activities will include
          technical, operational, and organizational training to promote effective and
          sustainable implementation of the program. Furthermore, an Institutional Capacity
          Assessment (ICAP) was carried out to identify needs and opportunities to
          strengthen capacities for this program's execution. The assessment identified
          general strengths related to technical quality management, health, safety,
          environment, and social safeguards. However, it highlighted the need to
          strengthen specific knowledge and program implementation capabilities under IDB
          policies, particularly in project planning, financial and procurement management,
          reporting, project governance, and risk management. The recommendations from
          ICAP are incorporated into the program’s execution scheme (¶3.1) (OEL#10).

                         II.       FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments

2.1       Program Structuring. The Bank will support the Government of Suriname’s
          institutional capacity to manage land use, spatial planning, environmental and
          climate issues through a Specific Investment Loan (SIL), due to the need for a
          cohesive sectoral approach to land and environmental management, achieved
          through the activities of this operation. The timeframe was established considering
          the international commitments supported by the loan are set for 2030, allowing for
          the monitoring of these commitments.

2.2       Program Cost. The amount of this loan is US$30,000,000, which will be 100%
          financed with Ordinary Capital (OC) resources from the Bank. There is no local
          contribution or co-financing.




47    The NDC commitments were done under the previous government. Despite a change in political parties, the
      current Government of Suriname is working towards meeting these commitments.
                                                                - 21 -



                                           Table 2. Summary of Program Costs (in US$)

            Components                                                                 IDB                  Total                  %

            Component I. Strengthening MinROM’s capacity for Spatial                      16,950,000          16,950,000           56.5
            Planning, Climate Change, and Environmental Management

            1.1      Instruments for CC and Environmental Management                           750,000              750,000         2.5

            1.2      Land Use and Spatial Planning Frameworks and                            8,650,000         8,650,000           29.0
                     Instruments

            1.3      Institutional and Operational Strengthening                             7,550,000         7,550,000           25.0

            Component 2. Strengthening NMA’s capacity for                                 10,050,000          10,050,000           33.5
            environmental management and climate transparency

            2.1      Environmental Information System                                        4,555,000         4,555,000           15.0

            2.2      Environmental Enforcement System                                        2,575,000         2,575,000            8.6

            2.3      Implementation Mechanisms for Climate Transparency                      1,670,000         1,670,000            5.5

            2.4      NMA Institutional Capacity                                              1,250,000         1,250,000            4.2

            Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Audits                           3,000,000         3,000,000           10.0

            Total                                                                         30,000,000          30,000,000            100



2.3       Disbursement schedule. The disbursement period will be seven years 48 in
          accordance with the Pluriannual Execution Plan (REL#1).


                                              Table 3. Disbursement Schedule (US$)

                Category      Year 1        Year 2        Year 3         Year 4     Year 5       Year 6        Year 7           Total

            Component I                0     35,000      2,180,000   3,475,000     6,540,000    4,520,000      200,000        16,950,000

                                                                                                                              10,050,000
            Component II               0             0    175,000    2,465,000     2,060,000    3,195,000     2,155,000

            Other costs                0     61,517       643,663        550,709    573,638      566,859       603,613         3,000,000

            Total                      0     96,517      2,998,663   6,490,709     9,173,638    8,281,859     2,958,613       30,000,000

            %                      0%        0.32%           10%            22%        31%          28%              10%          100%




48    The 7-year execution period is critical for the program's success and long-term impact calibrated to
      Suriname's unique context. It allows for comprehensive regulatory framework development and genuine
      capacity building, processes that cannot be rushed without compromising quality and sustainability. It provides
      necessary flexibility to navigate political and economic volatilities while enabling a phased incremental
      approach that aligns with Suriname's 2030 climate commitments.
                                            - 22 -



B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks

2.4   According to the Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy Framework (ESPF), this
      operation is classified as Category “B” since its activities are likely to cause mostly
      local and short-term negative environmental and social impacts and for which
      effective mitigation measures are readily available. The main environmental and
      social impacts are associated with the construction of two ministerial buildings and
      are expected to occur mostly during the construction phase. These are:
      (i) induction of erosive processes; (ii) alteration of soil characteristics; (iii) increase
      in particulate matter and noise levels; (iv) solid waste; (v) discomfort due to the cut
      of services and access; and (vi) nuisances to the community and impeded access
      to residences and businesses. Physical works will be carried out in a peri-urban
      developed location and are not expected to have adverse impacts on Indigenous
      Peoples, vulnerable groups, critical/natural habitats, ecosystem services or
      cultural sites within the project area. The Project will not require land acquisition.
      However, it will cause the physical displacement of one family (4 adults). No
      economic displacement has been identified.

2.5   The Environmental and Social Risk Rating (ESRR) has been classified as
      "Substantial" mainly due to risks related to occupational health and safety (mainly
      linked to asbestos), water contamination by hydrocarbons and other hazardous
      waste, risks of traffic accidents and those related to the physical displacement of
      one family. Also, because of the limited capacity of MinROM, as it has no
      experience with the Bank’s ESPF.

2.6   The Disaster and Climate Change Risk Classification (DCCRC) is “High”. The area
      of influence of the Program is exposed to moderate fluvial flooding, high drought,
      and sea level rise, with influence by CC hazards. The criticality and vulnerability of
      the proposed infrastructure are considered High (building construction), With the
      construction of the buildings, no increase in the current conditions of natural
      hazards in the environment or vulnerability of the surrounding communities or the
      environment is expected. The Program will develop a Disaster Risk Assessment
      and a Disaster Risk Management and Emergency Response Plan (DRMP),
      considering present and future CC risks.
2.7   An Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) has been done for this
      operation. For the policy subcomponent, a Strategic Environmental and Social
      Assessment (SESA) has been prepared to evaluate the potential risks and impacts
      of implementing the proposed changes, including a Strategic Environmental and
      Social Management Plan (SESMP) with guidelines to mitigate these risks and
      impacts at the time of policymaking (execution). An ESA/ESMP for the works on a
      building has been prepared. Both, the SESMP and the ESMP, include their
      corresponding Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). Regarding the policy
      component, there will be a firm hired for the development of the regulatory
      framework, and the SESA/SESMP will be included in bidding documents to ensure
      its requirements/plans are considered by this firm. The consultations were
      successfully carried out by the MinROM on July 3rd and 4th 2024 in compliance
      with the SEP. The main comments to the ESIA/ESMP related to construction
      materials and traffic problems, and comments to the SESA/SESMP related to the
      obsolete pesticide law and the Indigenous Peoples and tribal communities rights.
                                                         - 23 -



          The final versions of the ESA/ESMP, including its corresponding SEP and the
          Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), the SESA/SESMP with its associated SEP, the
          ESMS, and the Consultation Reports, were disclosed on the Bank's website on
          August 26, 2024.

C.        Fiduciary risk

2.8       The main fiduciary risks identified with the ICAP include: (i) MinROM’s lack of
          experience with IDB policies and its limited capacity to implement a project of this
          size, complexity and scope can create implementation delays. To mitigate this risk,
          the program will contract an EOU to provide technical, administrative, financial and
          procurement support and guidance to the project (paragraph 3.1); and (ii) Given
          the multidisciplinary and highly specialized nature of the program, the program
          requires the participation of various departments within the MinROM and NMA,
          other public sector entities 49 and interested parties. Potential conflict among
          departments and limited coordinating capacities can disrupt program
          implementation and hinder achieving the program’s objective. To mitigate this risk,
          the program will rely on: (i) for coordination and internal conflict management
          within MinROM and NMA, the program will establish a Project Steering Committee
          (PSC) (¶3.3); and (ii) the EOU will support the program in the necessary logistical
          and administrative activities to ensure a seamless coordination among additional
          agents. Additionally, to mitigate integrity risks the program will finance activities to
          support the Executing Agency’s adoption of best practices to manage conflict of
          interests, perform due diligence and to manage assets

D.        Other risks and key issues

2.9       Other risks identified as high are: (i) the 2025 presidential elections can lead to
          reprioritization affecting the program's successful implementation; and (ii) deeply
          ingrained existing organizational culture 50 within MinROM and NMA, posing
          challenges to the new approaches promoted by the program, resulting in low
          participation, partial or ineffective implementation of activities. To mitigate these
          risks, the program will: (i) conduct awareness campaigns emphasizing alignment
          with Suriname's 2030 climate goals; (ii) rely on the EOU and establish a robust
          PSC to ensure continuity and high-level support across political transitions; and
          (iii) implement a flexible, phased approach within the seven-year timeline, allowing
          for adjustments while maintaining core objectives. Additionally, the program will
          identify change champions, customize trainings, and leverage the GDV framework
          to create a long-term, apolitical foundation for the program's objectives.




49    Other public entities include: National Planning Office, Ministry of Land Policy and Forestry, Ministry of Natural
      Resources, Ministry of Health, MOPW, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Husbandry, Ministry of Regional
      Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
50    Organizational culture is a set of shared company beliefs, values, and expectations that define the workplace
      environment and employee experience.
                                                                     - 24 -



2.10   Sustainability: To ensure technical sustainability, the loan will finance the creation
       of training materials, which will provide opportunities for capacity building beyond
       implementation. The building design adhering to EDGE standards enables for low-
       cost maintenance. The loan’s financial sustainability considers the government’s
       commitment to allocate budget lines for additional personnel required and for the
       maintenance of the loan’s investments. NMA is envisioned to be financially self-
       sufficient, through the collection of processing fees, permits, and sanctions. The
       government is currently developing green financing opportunities to support the
       activities and mandates required for these entities.

                       III.            IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.     Summary of implementation arrangements

3.1    Execution Arrangements (OEL#10). The Borrower of the Program is the
       Republic of Suriname through the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP). As
       the sector head, the MinROM will be the governmental entity responsible for
       implementing and executing the project. The EA will establish a transitional PIU,
       which will be conformed of short-term consultants to ensure the contracting of the
       EOU. The task description, role, and responsibilities of the transitional PIU are
       included in the POM.

3.2    The program will include the hiring of a firm to provide technical assistance to serve
       as an EOU. This EOU will support the EA in the program planning, management
       and monitoring, preparation and supervision of technical documents, among
       others as defined (OEL#10).The EOU will follow the structure in Figure 2.

3.3    Finally, to provide strategic and policy guidance to aid the decision-making process
       and coordination between the MinROM and NMA, and direct and guide the
       technical aspects of the program, a PSC will be set up (OEL#10). The task
       description, role, and responsibilities of the PSC will be included in the POM.

                                           Figure 2. Program Execution Mechanism




                                          EA                                Minister
                                                                                                      Project Steering
                                                                             ROM
                                                                                                      Committee
                                                                                                      (PSC)
                                                                                                      ROM + NMA
                                                                          PS of General
                                                                          Management
                                                                          and Financial
                                                                             Affairs




                                       External Operation Unit              Project
                                                                            Manager




                                                                  Program           Social       Digital                         Spatial
          M and E         Financial        Procurement                                                          Environmental
                                                                 Coordination      Safeguard     System                         Planning
          Specialist      Specialist        Specialist                                                            Specialist
                                                                   Liaison         Specialist   Specialist                      Specialist




        Source: IDB
                                                      - 25 -



3.4       Maintenance of works. The borrower and the EA will ensure that the works and
          equipment financed under the program shall be adequately maintained to
          generally accepted technical standards with the support of the MOPW responsible
          for government property maintenance and upkeep.

3.5       Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement are: The
          Borrower, through the Executing Agency (EA), shall provide evidence, to the
          satisfaction of the Bank of (i) the establishment of the transitional PIU within
          MinROM and the selection of its program coordinator (ii) the approval and
          entry into effect of the Project Operations Manual (OEL#2), in the terms
          previously agreed to with the Bank; and (iii) the approval by the Council of
          Ministers of the Green Development Vision (GDV) Statement. See additional
          environmental and social conditions described in Annex B of the ESRS.

3.6       The first condition aims to ensure the timely and swift procurement process of the
          EOU, as critical milestone for program execution; condition two is included to
          support the internal organization of the EA thus safeguarding the program’s
          successful implementation and condition three is required given the relevance of
          this document in meeting sector goals.

3.7       Special Contractual Clauses of Execution: Prior to the bidding for the
          construction of the two bioclimatic buildings included in Component 1.c, the
          Borrower, through the Executing Agency, shall have presented evidence that all
          designs for such buildings meet the EDGE standards.

3.8       Financial agreements and requirements. The program will follow the provision
          included in the Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed projects
          (OP-273-12).

3.9       Procurement. The EA will procure goods, works, services, and consulting
          services as established in the Policies for the procurement of goods and works
          financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-15), the Policies for
          the selection and contracting of the consultants funded by the Inter-American
          Development Bank (GN-2350-15), and other internal Bank procedures. All the
          program acquisitions will follow the determinations of the Procurement Plan,
          including appropriate methods, supervision, and monitoring modality.

3.10      Disbursement period and modality. The disbursement period will be seven
          years. Disbursements will be made according to the program liquidity needs in the
          form of advances, based on a cash flow of the duly acquired commitments for the
          following six months and after having justified at least 80% of what was previously
          advanced.

3.11      Audited financial statements. The EA with the support of the EOU, will be
          responsible for submitting the following documents to the Bank: (i) Annual Audited
          Financial Statements (AFS) of the Program and internal controls report to be
          submitted within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year; 51 and (ii) final AFS,
          to be submitted within 120 days after the final disbursement date of the Program.
          The audits will be performed by an independent external audit firm acceptable to

51    The fiscal year will be from January 1 to December 31.
                                            - 26 -



       the Bank, complying with the Bank’s guidelines (OP-273-12). The firm will be hired
       by the EA using program administration resources.

B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results

3.12   Monitoring. Program monitoring consists of verification of the agreed policy
       measures of the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (MEP) (REL#2). The EA and the
       Bank will meet regularly to monitor the operation’s results and anticipate and
       resolve technical difficulties related to the operation’s execution. The EA will submit
       to the Bank all information required for measuring fulfillment of program targets
       and will provide timely information on progress toward those targets.

3.13   Evaluation. The evaluation strategy will consist of: (i) an evaluation that allows
       verifying the achievement of the proposed objectives; (ii) an ex-post economic
       analysis; and (iii) at closing, an analysis in accordance with the IDB guidelines of
       the Project Completion Report (PCR). Part (I) will be based on: (i) a “before and
       after” analysis of the outcome and impact indicators included in the Results Matrix;
       (ii) an effectiveness evaluation that will review the intervention’s theory of change;
       and (iii) a qualitative evaluation that provides complementary information on how
       the achieved results can be attributed to the program. The evaluation’s main
       questions will address whether the actions implemented helped achieve the
       program objectives. The ex-post evaluation, the economic analysis, and the PCR
       will be conducted at the end of execution.
                                                                                                                                                                                Annex I - SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 1




                                                                         Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                   Summary             SU-L1067
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Institutional Strategy Alignment



                                                                                                -Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action
                                                                                                -Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups
 Operational Focus Areas                                                                        -Institutional capacity, rule of law, citizen security
                                                                                                -Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure




 [Space-Holder: Impact framework indicators]


2. Country Development Objectives



   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                      GN-3065          1.2 Improve digital government




                                                                                                                         The intervention is included in the 2024 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                       GN-3207
                                                                                                                         Program.



   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                            Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                  7.6
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                               2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                             1.6
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                          3.5
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                            10.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                      1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                    3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                          2.5
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                            2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                 1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                             9.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                           4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                 5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                  Medium High
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                               B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems




                                                                 Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)




                                                                               Non-Fiduciary


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                          Yes              ATN/AC-19447-SU,ATN/OC-19009-SU,ATN/OC-20167-SU
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




The program's general objective is to improve Suriname's institutional capacity to manage land use. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen Suriname’s spatial planning and
environmental frameworks, regulations, and instruments; (ii) increase the availability and use of data for spatial planning, climate change, and environmental management; and
(iii) strengthen MinROM and NMA’s operational conditions.

The project presents a complete diagnosis. The indicators associated with the specific objectives included in the Result Matrix are SMART and have means of verification. Some
indicators do not have an established baseline and/or target; the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan indicates that they will be determined before starting program execution.

A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was conducted to assess the economic feasibility analysis of the proposed intervention considering a 20-year period and a 3% discount rate. The
CBA forecasts the deforestation conditions in the absence of the project, and its associated change in CO2 emissions. Estimated benefits results from reducing deforestation,
leading to carbon sequestration and environmental preservation. The estimated net present value is US$ 405,7 million and the internal rate of return is 74%, assuming a price
US$85 per carbon/ton. The exercise concludes that the project is economically feasible and includes sensitivity analyses that yield positive returns if the carbon price exceeds
US$57.6 per ton.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan in line with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured using a before and after
methodology. In addition, an updated ex-post cost-benefit analysis will be carried out, using the same methodology of the ex-ante analysis.
                                                                                                                                                 Annex II – SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 8

                                                                      Results Matrix

Project Objective    The program objective is to improve Suriname's institutional capacity to manage land use. The specific objectives for this operation are to:
                     (i) strengthen Suriname's spatial planning and environmental frameworks, regulations, and instruments; (ii) increase the availability and use of
                     data for spatial planning, climate change and environmental management; and (iii) strengthen MinROM and NMA's operational conditions. The
                     achievement of these objectives will contribute to the general objective of Improving Suriname's institutional capacity to manage land use.




                                                          General Development Objective

General development objective: Improve Suriname's institutional capacity to manage land use

                        Unit of               Baseline             Baseline       Expected year for                       Means of
    Indicators                                                                                             Target                                Comments
                      measurement              value                 year           achievement                          verification

Indicator 1. GHG        tons CO2e                 0                  2024                2044             7,965,686    Land use report    See REL#2
emissions avoided                                                                                                      based on
from reduced                                                                                                           Satellite images
deforestation                                                                                                          and GHG
                                                                                                                       emissions
                                                                                                                       calculator
                                                                                                                                         Annex II – SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                  Page 2 of 8



                                                          Specific Development Objectives

Specific development objective 1: Strengthen Suriname's spatial planning and environmental frameworks, regulations and instruments

    Indicators         Unit of         Baseline   Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   End of      Means of          Comments
                     measurement        value       year      1      2      3      4      5      6     7      Project    verification

                                                                                                 -       1
1.1. Spatial         # of systems         0        2023       -      -      -      -      -                     1       Council of       See REL#2
planning system                                                                                                         Ministers
approved by the                                                                                                         Approval order
Council of
Ministers

1.2. Percentage of      km2 of           0%        2024       -      -      -      -      -      -     100%   100%      Zoning plans     See REL#2
national territory   territory with                                                                                     signed by
with a zoning plan   zoning plan /                                                                                      MinROM
approved by          total territory                                                                                    Ministers
MinROM Minister

1.3. Annual           # of permits        0        2023       -      -      -      -      -      -      21      21      Environmental    See REL#2
environmental                                                                                                           permits
permits                                                                                                                 applications
applications
received
                                                                                                                                                      Annex II – SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                               Page 3 of 8


 Specific development objective 2: Increase the availability and use of data for spatial planning, climate change and environmental management

         Indicators      Unit of          Baseline    Baseline    Year    Year    Year    Year    Year    Year    Year    End of       Means of          Comments
                       measurement         value        year       1       2       3       4       5       6       7      Project     verification

 2.1. Annual              # of data           0         2023        -       -       -       -       -       -     TBD 1    TBD      Server           See REL#2
 environmental           downloads                                                                                                  Downloads
 information                                                                                                                        tracker
 platform data
 downloads

 2.2. Annual land       # of web visits       0         2023        -       -       -       -       -       -     TBD 2    TBD      Server IP        See REL#2
 use and zoning                                                                                                                     tracker
 information
 platform visits


 2.2.1. Annual land     # of web visits       0         2023        -       -       -       -       -       -     TBD 3    TBD      Server IP        See REL#2
    use and zoning      which use the                                                                                               tracker
    information           impairment
    platform visits      adaptations /
    using               # of web visits
    impairment
    adaptations

 2.3. Sectors            # of sectors         0         2023        -       -       -       -       -       -      4        4       Annual GHG       See REL#2
 reporting tier 2                                                                                                                   Report
 data in the MRV
 System




1 The baseline and target data will be included in the Results Matrix prior to the Program’s kick-off workshop.
2 Ibid
3 Ibid
                                                                                                                                          Annex II – SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 8


Specific development objective 3: Strengthen MinROM and NMA’s operational conditions

    Indicators        Unit of          Baseline   Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   End of       Means of          Comments
                    measurement         value       year      1      2      3      4      5      6      7     Project     verification

3.1. MinROM         personnel that        0        2024       -      -      -      -      -      -     70%     70%       Trainings       To approve
personnel that        attended at                                                                                       attendance       personnel must
approved training    least 80% of                                                                                       records and      attend at least 80%
in organizational     the classes                                                                                       assignment       of the classes and
capacity and        and submitted                                                                                       completion       submit all required
management            all required                                                                                      reports          assignments. See
                    assignments /                                                                                                        REL#2
                       personnel
                    participating in
                        training

3.2. MinROM         personnel that        0        2024       -      -      -      -      -      -     70%     70%      Trainings        See REL#2
personnel that        attended at                                                                                       attendance
approved training    least 80% of                                                                                       records and
in non-               the classes                                                                                       photographic
discriminatory      and submitted                                                                                       evidence
practices with        all required
respect to gender   assignments /
and PwD in the         personnel
workplace and       participating in
towards public          training.
services

3.3. NMA            personnel that        0        2024       -      -      -      -      -      -     70%     70%      Trainings        To approve
personnel that        attended at                                                                                       attendance       personnel must
approved training    least 80% of                                                                                       records and      attend at least 80%
in organizational     the classes                                                                                       assignment       of the classes and
capacity and        and submitted                                                                                       completion       submit all required
management            all required                                                                                      reports          assignments. See
                    assignments /                                                                                                        REL#2
                       personnel
                    participating in
                        training
                                                                                                                                            Annex II – SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 8


         Indicators     Unit of          Baseline   Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year    End of       Means of         Comments
                      measurement         value       year      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      Project     verification

 3.4. NMA             personnel that        0        2024       -      -      -      -      -      -     70%      70%      Trainings        See REL#2
 personnel that         attended at                                                                                        attendance
 approved training     least 80% of                                                                                        records and
 in non-                the classes                                                                                        photographic
 discriminatory       and submitted                                                                                        evidence
 practices with         all required
 respect to gender    assignments /
 and PwD in the          personnel
 workplace and        participating in
 towards public           training
 services

 3.5. Average time         Days            TBD       2024       -      -      -      -      -      -     TBD 4    TBD      Correspondence   See REL#2
 for Ministry                                                                                                              system report
 response in
 dispatching
 correspondence

 3.6 Number of        # of processes        0        2024       -      -      -      -      -      -     TBD 5    TBD      Management       See REL#2
 processes                                                                                                                 system
 digitalized




4 Ibid
5 Ibid
                                                                                                                                             Annex II – SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                      Page 6 of 8



                                                                              Outputs

Component 1: Strengthening MinROM’s capacity for spatial planning, climate change and environmental management.

    Indicators            Unit of         Baseline   Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   End of      Means of           Comments
                        measurement        value       year      1      2      3      4      5      6      7     Project    verification

                                                                                                    0      0
1.1. Green                # of plans         0        2024       0      0      1      0      0                     1       Document of      See REL#2
Development                                                                                                                Green
Vision Framework                                                                                                           Development
Implementation                                                                                                             Vision
action plan                                                                                                                Framework
formulated                                                                                                                 action plan



1.2. Spatial            # of strategies      0        2024       0      0      0      0      0      1      0       1       Document of      See REL#2
planning strategies                                                                                                        Spatial
designed                                                                                                                   planning
                                                                                                                           strategy

   Milestone:               Set of           0        2024       0      0      1      0      0      0      0       1       Document with    See REL#2
   Creation of a set      guidelines                                                                                       the guidelines
   of guidelines for
   the inclusion of
   women, IP, afro-
   descendants
   and PwD in
   spatial planning
   strategies

   Milestone:             # of plans         0        2024       0      0      0      0      1      0      0       1       Document of      See REL#2
   National Spatial                                                                                                        Spatial Plan
   Development
   Plan formulated

1.3. Zoning plans         # of plans         0        2024       0      0      0      0      4      4      2       10      Zoning plans     See REL#2
for prioritized areas
formulated
                                                                                                                                            Annex II – SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                     Page 7 of 8


    Indicators           Unit of        Baseline   Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   End of       Means of           Comments
                       measurement       value       year      1      2      3      4      5      6      7     Project     verification

1.4. Zoning and        # of platforms      0        2024       0      0      0      0      0      1      0       1       Online Platform   See REL#2
Land Use public
platform launched

1.5. Single window      # windows          0        2024       0      0      0      0      0      1      0       1       GLicensing        See REL#2
for Permitting and                                                                                                       system
Licensing system                                                                                                         operating in
for Zoning and                                                                                                           government
Development set                                                                                                          website
up

1.6. Donor               # of units        0        2024       0      0      0      0      0      0      1       1       Task              See REL#2
Coordination Unit                                                                                                        description of
implemented                                                                                                              the unit, staff
                                                                                                                         for the unit
                                                                                                                         Already in
                                                                                                                         organigram

1.7. Bioclimatic and   # of buildings      0        2024       0      0      0      0      0      2      0       2       Certificate of    See REL#2
accessible                                                                                                               building
buildings                                                                                                                completion and
constructed                                                                                                              photographic
                                                                                                                         evidence of
                                                                                                                         accessibility
                                                                                                                         features for
                                                                                                                         PwD (width of
                                                                                                                         entryway
                                                                                                                         >=90cm, tactile
                                                                                                                         strip

1.8. Operational        # of training      0        2024       0      0      2      1      2      0      0       5       Attendance        See REL#2
Training Program         programs                                                                                        records
for MinROMs
institutional
capacity
implemented
                                                                                                                                           Annex II – SU-L1067
                                                                                                                                                    Page 8 of 8


Component 2: Strengthening NMA’s capacity for environmental management and climate transparency

    Indicators          Unit of          Baseline   Baseline   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   End of      Means of          Comments
                      measurement         value       year      1      2      3      4      5      6      7     Project    verification

2.1. Environmental     # of systems         0        2024       0      0      0      0      0      1      0       1       Operating        See REL#2
Information System                                                                                                        Website
published

2.2. Permit and        # of systems         0        2024       0      0      0      0      0      1      0       1       Licensing        See REL#2
licensing system                                                                                                          system
for the EAI and                                                                                                           operating in
Environmental                                                                                                             government
Permits                                                                                                                   website
implemented

   Milestone:         # of regulations      0        2024       0      0      0      1      0      0      0       1       Document with    See REL#2
   Pollution                                                                                                              pollution
   standards                                                                                                              standards
   established                                                                                                            Approved by
                                                                                                                          NMA director

2.3. Monitoring        # of systems         0        2024       0      0      0      0      0      0      1       1       MRV              See REL#2
Reporting and
Verification System
set up

   Milestone:              # of             0        2024       0      0      2      2      0      0      0       4       Inter-agencies   See REL#2
   Inter-agency        mechanisms                                                                                         MOUs
   data sharing            and
   mechanisms         arrangements
   and
   arrangements
   developed

2.4. Operational       # of trainings       0        2024       0      0      1      1      1      1      1       5       Attendance       See REL#2
Training Program                                                                                                          records
for NMA'S
institutional
capacity
implemented
                                                                                          Annex III - SU-L1067
                                                                                                   Page: 1 of 6



     Country: Suriname           Division: HUD             Operation No.: SU-L1067             Year: 2024


                          Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment
Operation Name: Strengthening Spatial Planning and Environmental Management in Suriname



I.      Fiduciary Context of Executing Agency
1.      Use of country system in the operation (Any system or subsystem that is subsequently
        approved may be applicable to the operation, in accordance with the terms of the Bank's
        validation).


      Budget                     Reports                 Information System           National Competitive
                                                                                   Bidding (NCB)


      Treasury                   Internal audit          Shopping                     Others


      Accounting                 External Control        Individual Consultants       Others



2.      Fiduciary execution mechanism

        Particularities of the             This loan will be executed by the Ministry of Spatial Planning
        fiduciary execution                and Environment.


3.      Fiduciary capacity

 Fiduciary         The result of the ICAP assessment indicates that ROM has a relatively weak
 Capacity of       capacity to undertake the implementation of the SU-L1067. However, taking into
 the EA            account ROM’s willingness to develop its project execution approach and key
                   strengths exhibited in areas such as project management, procurement
                   management systems and procedures, human resource capabilities and
                   availability, fiduciary management systems, technical quality management, health,
                   safety, environment and social policies, procedures and safeguards, in addition to
                   experience with International Development Partners such as the UNEP and World
                   Bank, implementation capacity can be strengthened. This can be achieved by
                   embracing the recommendations presented in the subsequent section.
                                                                                Annex III - SU-L1067
                                                                                         Page: 2 of 6



4.   Fiduciary risks and risk response
   Risk                                               Risk
                             Risk                                        Risk response
 Taxonomy                                             level

 Internal    If ROM’s implementation capacity        High      This risk can be mitigated through
 processes   remains limited for a project of this             the incorporation of a external
             size, scope and complexity, then                  operating unit (EOU) within the
             implementation delays across the                  executing arrangement of the
             project can materialized, and the                 project. The EOU will be dedicated
             achievement of the project’s                      to support ROM’s project
             objectives can be negatively                      implementation while transferring
             affected.                                         knowledge and building its
                                                               implementation capacity.

 Internal    If there are substantial internal       High      This risk can be mitigated through
 processes   management conflicts among                        the integration of the various
             departments within ROM, then                      departments during project
             disruption in project implementation              planning workshops, missions and
             can occur which can ultimately                    portfolio review.
             affect the long-term objectives of
             the project

 Internal    If there is a lack of project           High      This risk can be mitigated using a
 processes   coordination between ROM and                      PSC with direct oversight by the
             NMA, then the rate of project                     Minister of ROM, since ROM is the
             implementation can be reduced,                    EA. Additionally, an inter-agency
             thus causing overall delays in the                working agreement should be
             achievement of project activities                 developed, executed and
             and results.                                      monitored for its effectiveness.

 Good and    If ROM’s procurement                    Medium-   This can be mitigated through
 Services    management systems, norms and           High      capacity development initiatives
             procedures are inadequate for                     such as Bank-related training in
             project execution, then errors,                   fiduciary management with project
             omissions and delays in the                       staff.
             procurement management
             processes can occur, thus
             impeding project implementation
             and the completion of project
             activities.


5.   Policies and guides applicable to operation: Procurement and contracting will follow the
     policies for the procurement of goods and works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-15), and the
     policies for the selection and contracting of consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-15), as
     well as the fiduciary arrangements included in this document, effective January 2020.
6.   Exceptions to policies and rules: Not applicable
                                                                                           Annex III - SU-L1067
                                                                                                    Page: 3 of 6



II.    Aspects to be considered in the Special Conditions of the Loan
       Agreement

 Pre-first disbursement conditions:
 The Borrower, through the EA, shall provide evidence, to the satisfaction of the Bank of (i) the establishment
 of the transitional PIU within MinROM and the selection of its program coordinator (ii) the approval and entry
 into effect of the POM (OEL#2), in the terms previously agreed to with the Bank; and (iii) the approval by the
 Council of Ministers of the Green Development Vision (GDV) Statement. See additional environmental and
 social conditions described in Annex B of the ESRS.



 Exchange Rate: For purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the Parties agree that the
 applicable exchange rate shall be that indicated in paragraph (b)(i) of said Article. For purposes of
 determining the equivalency of expenditures incurred in Local Currency chargeable to the
 Additional Resources or of the reimbursement of expenditures chargeable to the Loan, the agreed
 exchange rate shall be the exchange rate on the effective date on/in which the Borrower, the
 Executing Agency, or any other person or legal entity in whom the power to incur expenditures has
 been vested makes the related payments to the contractor, supplier, or beneficiary.

 Type of Audit: Financial, Accounting and Institutional Inspection visits or meetings will be
 performed to: (i) Review of the Reconciliation and supporting documentation for disbursements;
 (ii) Compliance with financial and procurement procedures; (iii) Review of compliance with the
 lending criteria; and (iv) Follow up on audit findings and recommendations. The Review of
 Disbursements will be ex post.



III.   Agreements and Requirements for Procurement Execution

       Bidding              For procurement of Works, Goods and Services Different of Consulting
       Documents            executed in accordance with the Procurement Policies (document
                            GN-2349-15), subject to ICB, the Bank's Standard Bidding Documents
                            (SBDs) or those agreed between EA and the Bank will be used for the
                            particular procurement. Likewise, the selection and contracting of
                            Consulting Services will be carried out in accordance with the Policies for
                            the Selection and Contracting of Consultants (document GN-2350-15) and
                            the Standard Request for Proposals (SRP) issued by the Bank or agreed
                            between the EA and the Bank will be used for the selection.

       Procurement          The method of supervision shall be Ex Ante.
       supervision

       Records and          The EA will have the responsibility for maintaining the files and records of
       Archives             the project. All records and files will be maintained according to standards
                            acceptable to the Bank (best practices) and kept for a minimum of seven
                            (7) years after the end of the project’s execution period.
                                                                                 Annex III - SU-L1067
                                                                                          Page: 4 of 6



Main Acquisitions
Description of the             Selection       New              Estimated Date        Estimated
procurement                    Method          Procedures/Tools                       Amount
                                                                                      000’US$

Goods

Procurement of software                                          03/01/2028           950
and hardware for: (i) the      International
Zoning and Land Use            Competitive
public platform; and (ii)      Bidding
Single window for              (ICB)
Permitting and Licensing
system for Zoning and
Development.

Works

Construction of a                                               03/01/2027            5,000
bioclimatic and accessible     International
building for the ministerial   Competitive
headquarters.                  Bidding
                               (ICB)

Non-consulting services
Procurement of Strategic       International                    10/01/2025            350
Institutional Strengthening    Competitive
and Management                 Bidding
Strategy Design and            (ICB)
Implemented

Procurement of                 International                    01/01/2027            420
Operational Training           Competitive
                               Bidding
                               (ICB)

Consulting Firms
Consultancy for the
                                Quality- and                     04/13/2026           3,045
development of: (i) the
                               Cost-Based
Environmental
                               Selection
Information System; and
                               (QCBS)
(ii) the Permit and
licensing system for the
EAI and Environmental
Permits.

Consultancy for the            Quality- and                     10/01/2025            6,300
design of Suriname's           Cost-Based
spatial planning strategy      Selection
and the development of         (QCBS)
regional structural plan,
                                                                                     Annex III - SU-L1067
                                                                                              Page: 5 of 6



 Description of the            Selection       New              Estimated Date             Estimated
 procurement                   Method          Procedures/Tools                            Amount
                                                                                           000’US$

 zoning plans, and building
 codes for each of the
 districts.

 Individuals

 Enforcers for the Permit       Selection of                         05/04/2026            1,300
 and licensing system for      individual
 the EAI and                   consultant
 Environmental Permits         (by open
 implemented.                  invitation)


Access Procurement Plan here.

IV.   Agreements and Requirements for Financial Management

      Programming and       The EA will prepare and implement an operational plan, which will include
      Budget                the budget plan, procurement plan and financial plan, consistent with a 12
                            –month financial plan that will be required. The Borrower has committed
                            to allocate, for each fiscal year of program execution, adequate fiscal
                            space to guarantee the unrestricted execution of the program.

      Treasury and          The disbursement mechanism shall be Manual and will follow the
      Disbursement          methods stated in the OP-273-12 and the Disbursement Handbook. The
      Management            currency to manage the operation is the USD. The operation will generally
                            work with a financial period of 6 months due to the planning cycle for the
                            project. The Preferential Disbursement Method will be advance of funds,
                            but other types of disbursements will be available.
                            The operation is expected to justify 80% of accumulated balances
                            pending of justification before requesting another advance of funds.

      Accounting,           Specific accounting norms: IFRS (International Financing
      information           Reporting Standards).
      systems and
                            Accounting reports: The EA will utilize the off the shelf accounting and
      reporting
                            financial management software QuickBooks currently used for the
                            accounting and financial reporting of many programs in the country.
                             Financial Statements of the program will be prepared based on IDB rules
                            given that the PFM reform is still in process. The financial specialist
                            should maintain under his/her responsibility auxiliary records and systems
                            (e.g. QuickBooks or similar).

      External control:     The Borrower and the EA, as agreed with the Bank, will hire the services
      external financial    of an audit firm through a bidding process. The audit’s scope and related
      audit and project     considerations will be governed by the Financial Management Guidelines
      reports               (document OP273-12) and the Guide for Financial Reports
                            and Management of External Audit. The annual financial audits/
                                                                              Annex III - SU-L1067
                                                                                       Page: 6 of 6



                    assurance reports should be submitted within 120 days of the end of a
                    fiscal year and within 120 days after the date of last disbursement.

Project Financial   Financial, Accounting and Institutional Inspection visits or meetings will be
Supervision         performed to: (i) Review of the Reconciliation and
                    supporting documentation for disbursements; (ii) Compliance with
                    financial and procurement procedures; (iii) Review of compliance with the
                    lending criteria; and (iv) Follow up on audit findings and
                    recommendations. The Review of Disbursements will be ex post.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/24



                   Suriname. Loan ____/OC-SU to the Republic of Suriname
                      Strengthening Spatial Planning and Environmental
                                  Management in Suriname



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Republic of Suriname, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing
aimed at cooperating in the execution of the project “Strengthening Spatial Planning and
Environmental Management in Suriname”. Such financing will be for the amount of up to
US$30,000,000, from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the
Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary
of the Loan Proposal.



                             (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2024)



LEG/SGO/CCB/EZSHARE-171363792-5446
SU-L1067
