                                                                                       PUBLIC
                                                                     SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE


                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                         PARAGUAY




                    IMPROVEMENT OF HOUSING AND HABITAT



                                          (PR-L1082)




                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Roberto Camblor
(FMM/CPR), Project Team Leader; Beatriz López (IFD/FMM) , Project Team Coleader;
Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Christopher Mays Johnson (VPS/ESG); Jorge Oyamada
(WSA/CPR); Christian Schneider (OMJ/CPR); Ignacio Fernández Admetlla (MIF/MIF);
Alberto De Egea (FMP/CPR); Mariano Perales (FMP/CPR); Marta Corvalan (CSC/CPR);
Ida M. Fernández (IFD/FMM); Felipe Morris, Hugo Roche, Víctor Vidal, and Marc Pérez
(consultants); and María Lorena Kevish (IFD/FMM).




This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank's Board of Executive
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus
superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                     CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY


I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1

       A.    Background, problems to be addressed, and rationale ................................. 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 6
       C.    Key results indicators ................................................................................... 9

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 10

       A.    Financing instruments ................................................................................ 10
       B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks ................................................... 10
       C.    Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 11
       D.    Other risks .................................................................................................. 11

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 12

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 12
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 14
                                                         - ii -



                                                       ANNEXES
Annex I        Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary
Annex II       Results Matrix
Annex III      Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                               ELECTRONIC LINKS
REQUIRED
1.   Multiyear execution plan (PEP)
2.   Annual work plan (AWP)
3.   Monitoring and evaluation plan
4.   Environmental and social management report (ESMR)
5.   Procurement plan

OPTIONAL
1.   Economic analysis
2.   Diagnostic assessment of the housing sector
3.   Environmental and social management plan (ESMP)
4.   Draft Operating Regulations
5.   Analysis of compliance with the Bank’s Public Utilities Policy (document GN-2716-4)
6.   Analysis of ability to pay for public utilities
7.   Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) and Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF)
                                      - iii -



                                ABBREVIATIONS


AFD         Agencia Financiera de Desarrollo [Development Finance Agency]
ANDE        Administración Nacional de Electricidad [National Electricity
            Administration]
AWP         Annual work plan
CASA        Crédito + Ahorro + Subsidio + ATC [Credit + Savings + Subsidy +
            Construction-related Technical Assistance]
CCLIP       Conditional credit line for investment projects
DGEEC       Dirección General de Estadística, Encuestas y Censos [Bureau of
            Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses]
EDU         Empresa de Desarrollo Urbano de Medellín [Medellín Urban
            Development Company]
EETS        Entidad Especializada en Trabajo Social [specialized social work entity]
EIRR        Economic internal rate of return
EPH         Encuesta Permanente de Hogares [Ongoing Household Survey]
ESMP        Environmental and social management plan
ESMR        Environmental and social management report
ESSAP       Empresa de Servicios Sanitarios del Paraguay [Sanitation Services
            Company of Paraguay]
FONAVIS     Fondo Nacional de Vivienda Social [National Low-income Housing
            Fund]
ICAS        Institutional Capacity Assessment System
ICB         International competitive bidding
MIF         Multilateral Investment Fund
NPV         Net present value
PEU         Program execution unit
QCBS        Quality- and cost-based selection
SCSP        Sistema de Contrataciones del Sector Público del Paraguay [Public
            Sector Contracting System of Paraguay]
SENAVITAT   Secretaría Nacional de la Vivienda y el Hábitat [National Department of
            Housing and Habitat]
SIAF        Sistema Integrado de Administración Financiera [Integrated Financial
            Administration System]
SICO        Sistema Integrado de Contabilidad [Integrated Accounting System]
SNIP        Sistema Nacional de Inversión Pública [National Public Investment
            System]
SSS         Single-source selection
USM         Unidad de salario mínimo [Minimum wage unit]
WAL         Weighted average life
                                                                 PROJECT SUMMARY

                                                             PARAGUAY
                                                 IMPROVEMENT OF HOUSING AND HABITAT
                                                            (PR-L1082)

                                                         Financial Terms and Conditions
                                                                                                                                (a)
Borrower: Republic of Paraguay                                                      Flexible Financing Facility
                                                               Amortization period:                  25 years
Executing agency: National Department of Housing and Habitat                                                     (b)
                                                               Original WAL:                         15.17 years
(SENAVITAT)
                                                               Disbursement period:                  6 years
                                                               Grace period:                         10 years
               Source                       Amount                                                   (c)
                                                               Inspection and supervision fee:
                                                               Interest rate:                        LIBOR
IDB (Ordinary Capital)                    US$30 million                                                   (c)
                                                               Credit fee:                           0.25
                                                                                                     U.S. dollars from the Bank’s
Total                                     US$30 million        Currency of approval:
                                                                                                     Ordinary Capital
                                                        Project at a Glance
Project objective/description: The objective is to improve housing conditions for the low-income population in metropolitan Asunción
through: (i) housing subsidies to improve and expand dwellings; (ii) comprehensive neighborhood improvement of La Chacarita Alta;
and (iii) improvement of the management, monitoring, and evaluation of housing programs of the National Department of Housing and
Habitat (SENAVITAT).
Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds: The no objection of SENAVITAT and the
Bank to the program Operating Regulations (see paragraph 3.1).
Special contractual conditions:
Special contractual conditions precedent to the execution of Component I: (i) signed subexecution agreements with the
participating financial institutions and credit unions; and (ii) a signed service contract with Agencia Financiera de Desarrollo (AFD) for
administration of the subsidy funds (see paragraph 3.2).
Special contractual conditions precedent to the execution of Component II: signed collaboration agreements between
SENAVITAT, the Asunción municipal government, Entidad Especializada en Trabajo Social (EETS), the Sanitation Services Company
of Paraguay (ESSAP), and the National Electricity Administration (ANDE) (see paragraph 3.3).
Exceptions to Bank policies: None.
                        (d)
Project qualifies as:                                       SV                PE                         CC                           CI
(a)
      Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, as
      well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing
      such requests.
(b)
      The original weighted average life (WAL) will be determined as of the contract signature date and may be shorter than 15.17 years.
(c)
      The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the
      Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies.
(d)
      SV (Small and Vulnerable Countries), PE (Poverty Reduction and Equity Enhancement), CC (Climate Change, Sustainable Energy, and
      Environmental Sustainability), CI (Regional Cooperation and Integration).
                            I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problems to be addressed, and rationale
1.1       Population and housing deficits. Paraguay’s population stood at 6.6 million in
          2014.1 The country’s Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses (DGEEC)
          estimated the total number of housing units in the country at 1.6 million in 2012,
          960,000 of which were in urban areas. Of the urban pool of housing, 490,000 units
          were in the Metropolitan Area of Asunción.2 The DGEEC has not yet reported the
          most recent census figures on quantitative and qualitative deficits3 at the national
          level or for metropolitan Asunción.4 The last official estimates of these deficits were
          based on the 2002 census data presented in the report on Paraguay’s housing
          deficit5 and thus are out of date. For a more recent estimate of the magnitude of
          housing deficits in the country, absolute housing deficits were calculated in 2012
          using the ratios from the 2002 census. Based on those general estimates, the
          qualitative deficit affects 1.4 million dwellings (88%) nationwide and 210,000
          dwellings (43%) in metropolitan Asunción. These figures illustrate how important it
          is for housing policy to institute programs to reduce the qualitative deficit, which is
          the larger deficit in the country.
1.2       There is no information available on the housing deficit by income level, so the
          qualitative deficit cannot be calculated for the population earning less than the
          equivalent of two minimum wage units (USMs).6 However, the classification of
          households by living conditions and poverty provided in the 2011 Ongoing
          Household Survey (EPH 2011) can be used to measure the magnitude of these
          deficits and their relevance among the poor. The survey reports the following data:
          60% of dwellings have running water inside the home, but the percentage varies
          by poverty status, with piped water installed in 67% of nonpoor households but in
          just 55% and 31% of poor and extreme poor households, respectively. Likewise,
          66% of dwellings have an indoor bathroom with sanitary plumbing, but the rate is
          72% for nonpoor households compared with 58% and 41% for poor and extreme
          poor households, respectively.
1.3       The large qualitative deficit in housing among poor households can be attributed to
          several factors, notably the following: (i) these families have meager resources,
          with 22.6% of the country’s population living in poverty (EPH 2014) and over half


     Preliminary estimates by the DGEEC.
     The Metropolitan Area of Asunción consists of the city of Asunción and the urban municipios of the
     Central Department: Capiatá, Luque, San Lorenzo, Limpio, Ñemby, Lambaré, San Antonio, Fernando de
     la Mora, Villa Elisa, Mariano Roque Alonso, and Itauguá.
     The qualitative deficit refers to housing units that are can be brought up to standard but have material,
     spatial, or service-related deficits. The quantitative deficit refers to housing units that cannot be salvaged
     due to poor conditions or unacceptable materials, plus the units needed to meet natural population
     growth.
     The 2012 Housing and Population Census experienced problems that resulted in inconsistencies in
     information that have yet to be resolved, so as of April 2015 the DGEEC had still not published findings.
     The report was prepared by the DGEEC, the National Housing Council (CONAVI), with technical
     assistance from Chile’s Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning (MINVU).
     In 2014, one minimum wage unit (USM) equalled 1,824,055 guaraníes (about US$370), so the poverty
     line for a four-person household was equivalent to 1.08 USMs at the national level and 1.38 USMs in
     metropolitan Asunción.
                                                   -2-




       earning less than two USMs;7 (ii) 21% of households have overcrowding problems,
       and 59% of this group are households with a high economic dependence index;8
       and (iii) low-income households have limited access to finance, especially if their
       income is from informal employment. Financial institutions, credit unions, and
       nongovernmental organizations support the poorest groups through medium-term
       microloans, but their coverage is very limited.9
1.4    Urbanization and high informality in settlements. From 1950 to 2012,
       Paraguay’s urban population grew from 35% to 59%. Metropolitan Asunción was
       one of the main destinations in the country for rural migrants. The absence of
       legislation on territorial and land use planning, coupled with institutional
       weaknesses in urban planning among the municipal governments in the
       metropolitan region, has led to unchecked growth and the rise of informal
       settlements of poor households on the urban fringe and in hazard-prone areas.
       There is no detailed information available to quantify the magnitude of informal
       settlements or the degree of informality of tenure in Paraguay’s cities. The
       information that is available indicates that 20% of the population lives in informal
       settlements,10 of which there are 300 in Paraguay.11 The National Department of
       Housing and Habitat (SENAVITAT), the municipal government of the City of
       Asunción, and other municipal governments in the metropolitan region have
       identified the main problems facing settlements on the north and south banks of
       the Paraguay River and on the urban fringe of metropolitan Asunción as lack of
       water, sanitary sewer, and stormwater drainage services. The institutions agree
       that the settlements located along the Paraguay River face greater challenges due
       to their geographic size, irregular urban footprint, environmental risks, and social
       vulnerabilities.
1.5    La Chacarita Alta is a consolidated settlement on the north bank of the Paraguay
       River that was established over six decades ago when squatters moved onto land
       owned by the City of Asunción. According to the housing and population census
       conducted in July 2014, La Chacarita Alta is home to 3,000 people living in
       735 dwellings. Household income varies but averages US$607 (equivalent to
       1.5 USMs). A high percentage of women identify themselves as the head of

  DGEEC, Gender Series, 2011. Women heads of household are the most affected by poverty as they
  lack a family network and do not have supplemental income from a partner.
  In the absence of income data from the census, the National Department of Housing and Habitat
  (SENAVITAT), in its Housing Deficit Study (2010), constructed an economic dependence index that is
  defined as the ratio of those who earn an income to those who do not. Dependence is regarded as high
  when a household has more than 2.5 dependents per income earner, or no income earner.
  There is no available information on the volume of funding for housing improvement microloans. By way
  of reference, as of October 2013, the country’s 24 type-A credit unions had placed 22% (US$30 million)
  of their mortgage portfolios in two- to five-year microloans made at annual interest rates approaching
  32%. A survey of the 12 most representative financial institutions (2010) calculated a microloan portfolio
  totaling US$556 million and serving 309,351 clients who received an average loan of US$1,800, with
  minimum and maximum nominal interest rates of 17% and 30%, respectively.
  This is the figure cited by the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) in its State of
  the World’s Cities 2012 report, but no source is provided.
  In the publication Problemática Habitacional de Paraguay [Housing Problems in Paraguay] (2009), Ana
  Raquel Flores López Moreira of the Organización Latinoamericana y del Caribe de Centros Históricos
  [Latin American and Caribbean Organization of Historic Centers] mentions this figure but does not cite a
  source.
                                            -3-




      household (52%). The neighborhood is strategically located on high ground on the
      north bank of the river near the historic downtown area of Asunción. It is one of the
      oldest and most densely populated informal settlements in the city. These are the
      main reasons for its selection, since addressing its needs for basic services and its
      environmental problems, urban decay, and informality will help improve quality of
      life in the neighborhood and adjacent areas, in a dense and consolidated area of
      the city that has a high historical and real estate value. The intervention will also
      contribute to the revitalization of Asuncion’s historic center and riverside districts.
1.6   There are certain problems in La Chacarita Alta that should be the starting point for
      neighborhood improvement, the main ones being the absence of sanitary sewer
      and stormwater drainage systems and the existence of gullies and streams that
      pose a risk to the community. The census found that 37% of dwellings in
      La Chacarita Alta are located in areas vulnerable to landslides. Gullies and
      streams are used as open dumps for garbage, and 59% of households report
      disposing of wastewater in them. The risks are even higher when considering the
      soil contamination that results from the improper disposal of garbage, and in
      general the health impacts associated with the accumulation of dozens of tons of
      waste in a densely populated environment (4.4 people per household) just a short
      distance from the city’s historic center. A full 98% of homes in La Chacarita Alta
      have electricity and 46% have public water services, in both cases through a
      combination of formal and informal connections. The settlement is not structurally
      integrated with the city center, nor does it follow a regular grid pattern. Rather, it is
      a warren of dead-end streets and alley and walkways laid out on hilly terrain. There
      are few social amenities and no public spaces. Furthermore, there are security
      problems associated with illegal activities.
1.7   A high proportion of households in La Chacarita Alta are without employment or a
      steady source of income. Indeed, just 37% of survey respondents between the
      ages of 14 and 65 years report being employed. In addition, many households
      earn income from the recycling of solid waste, an informal activity performed in the
      home. Accordingly, in addition to actions to promote formalization and provide
      basic urban infrastructure, households without a steady income source need
      support and guidance to formalize their activities. Job creation in the neighborhood
      is essential if these households are to rise out of poverty and informality. Income
      generation in the settlement contributes directly to improved habitability conditions
      and to the sustainability of the interventions (e.g. payment for public services). In
      this regard, it is especially important to support households that will be resettled,
      households that are headed by a woman, and households that engage in solid
      waste recycling activities. Creating income-generating opportunities for households
      in La Chacarita Alta is a viable option given the neighborhood’s location as a prime
      spot for businesses providing food and other services.
1.8   Institutional weakness of SENAVITAT. The National Department of Housing and
      Habitat (SENAVITAT) is the lead agency for the housing sector12 and runs nine
      housing programs. For some of these programs, it performs functions other than



  SENAVITAT was created in 2010 by Law 3,909/10, replacing the Consejo Nacional de Vivienda
  [National Housing Council] (CONAVI).
                                                     -4-




       those of a lead agency.13 The largest program is the National Low-income Housing
       Fund (FONAVIS), which receives the most funding from the national budget
       (US$52.5 million in 2013). The budget allocated to SENAVITAT grew from
       US$28 million in 2009 to US$135 million in 2013. Budget execution has fluctuated
       between 79% in 2010 and 49% in 2012. Although there is no consistent
       information, it is estimated that SENAVITAT builds between 3,000 and 5,000
       dwellings per year. Its payroll costs are high (approximately US$13 million per
       year) with a staff of over 600, most without professional training.14 In addition to
       these factors, the institution program administration is weak since it has no
       integrated system for managing its housing projects or tools for monitoring and
       evaluation. Since late 2014 SENAVITAT has begun to address the shortcomings
       described through an integrated plan involving changes in the policy and program
       approach, the addition of qualified professional staff, and close monitoring of
       programs and projects. This plan is consistent with the program strategy.
1.9    Program strategy. The strategy is to help ensure that Paraguay’s housing policy
       incorporates programs that are better at addressing housing and basic service
       deficits. At present, there is a strong emphasis in the country’s housing policy and
       programs on the heavily subsidized construction of new housing with no focus on
       low-income households and limited participation by the private sector. This policy
       bias towards new and heavily subsidized construction does not have an impact in
       terms of reducing deficits in housing and basic services. Public funds are not being
       put to efficient use because the large subsidies benefit just a handful of
       households, leaving the vast majority without any assistance. The number of units
       built (between 3,000 and 5,000) is very small compared with the magnitude of the
       deficits and the growth in households, which numbered 50,000 per year between
       2002 and 2012 (EPH 2012). Experience has shown that even programs benefitting
       households at the base of the pyramid, such as the Opportunities for the Majority
       program described in paragraph 1.14, are unable to reach households with income
       under 2 USM. To make a housing improvement microloan accessible to these
       households, a subsidy is required to bridge the gap between their income and
       ability to pay.
1.10   The proposed program will support SENAVITAT in its efforts to target its programs
       by introducing two new products: (i) housing improvement and expansion; and
       (ii) comprehensive improvement of informal settlements. Both products are
       consistent with the nature of the qualitative and basic services deficit and
       strengthen the facilitative role of SENAVITAT, which will delegate execution of the
       projects to local and private sector institutions while contributing financing and
       nonfinancial services. Upon program completion, SENAVITAT is expected to
       allocate resources from its current budget to scale up the products financed under
       this loan.



  As lead agency, it should not be directly involved in making housing loans, as it does under the
  Affordable Housing, Mortgage Lending, and Credit Fund for Cooperatives programs, performing
  functions for which it is unqualified. As of the end of the 2013, its portfolio consisted of 11,902 loans with
  an outstanding balance of US$58.7 million, with 87.3% of the total in varying degrees of delinquency.
  Of its 342 staff employees, 58% do not have a university degree. In the case of contractors, 70% have
  not completed university.
                                           -5-




1.11   The Bank’s country and sector strategy. The program is aligned with the targets
       set in the Report on the Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Inter-
       American Development Bank (document AB-2764), specifically poverty reduction
       and equity enhancement, as well as support for small and vulnerable countries,
       inasmuch as the various components will serve households in disadvantaged
       urban areas with income of up to 2 USMs. It will also contribute to the following
       Results Matrix outputs: (i) households with upgraded water supply and new or
       upgraded sanitary connections; (ii) kilometers of electricity transmission and
       distribution lines installed or upgraded; and (iii) number of households with new or
       upgraded dwellings. The operation is also consistent with the regional target for the
       proportion of the urban population living in dwellings with hard floors. The program
       is consistent with the guidelines set out in the Urban Development and Housing
       Sector Framework Document (document GN-2732-2), mainly those related to
       access to public and private financing for housing services for the poorest groups,
       and improvement of informal neighborhoods in areas with a large concentration of
       poor households. The program is also aligned with the Sector Strategy on
       Institutions for Growth and Social Welfare (document GN-2587-2), specifically with
       the component for access to financial services for the majority. Furthermore, it will
       contribute to the Bank’s country strategy with Paraguay for 2014-2018 (document
       GN-2769) through interventions in three priority sectors—the financial sector, water
       and sanitation, and public management.
1.12   In the financial sector, the strategy calls for housing subsidies to supplement the
       financing provided by financial institutions for low-income families. In water and
       sanitation, the program will contribute to the goals of the strategy and will be
       complemented by the Comprehensive Sanitation Program for the Bay and
       Metropolitan Area of Asunción (loan 3393/OC-PR), which will finance construction
       of the trunk and secondary sewers for the sanitary system in La Chacarita Alta.
       Program activities to strengthen SENAVITAT will contribute to the objective of
       strengthening public management. The program also supports gender
       considerations, taking into account the diversity of family and household structures,
       which means paying special attention to domestic partnerships, women heads of
       household, households comprised of a single adult, and the presence of
       secondary families headed by single mothers or fathers in extended households.
1.13   Alignment with Bank policies. The program meets the financial sustainability
       and economic evaluation conditions set out in the Bank’s Public Utilities Policy
       (document GN-2716-6). The Sanitation Services Company of Paraguay (ESSAP),
       which provides water and sewer services, will be able to generate enough revenue
       to cover operation and maintenance costs and a portion of the investment costs.
       The balance of the investment costs will be covered by State transfers that will be
       transparently allocated and used to expand capacity to provide greater access and
       improve the quality and management of existing services. The works to be
       financed are socioeconomically viable (see the Analysis of Compliance with the
       Public Utilities Policy). In addition, the operation is consistent with the following
       social and environmental policies: (i) B.1, Access to Information Policy (OP-102);
       (ii) Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP-710); (iii) Disaster Risk Management
       Policy (OP-704); (iv) Policy B.5 on environmental assessment requirements, which
       includes the environmental and social management plan (ESMP); (v) Policy B.4 on
                                                  -6-




          vulnerability to natural disasters; and (vi) Policy B.11 on pollution prevention and
          abatement.
1.14      Lessons learned. The program will draw on the lessons learned from housing
          improvement programs in Paraguay and Nicaragua. In particular, attention has
          been paid to good practices from the Juntos por tu Hogar / Improved Housing
          Program for Low-income Families in Paraguay (loan 2488/OC-PR) of the
          Opportunities for the Majority Sector (OMJ), a successful initiative that helped low-
          income families remedy qualitative housing deficits by arranging microloans from
          the financial institution Banco Visión and construction-related technical assistance
          from the nongovernmental organization Habitat for Humanity. Meanwhile, lessons
          learned from the Housing and Comprehensive Habitat Improvement Program (loan
          2565/BL-NI) include the following: (i) there was evidence of operational problems
          in coordinating microloans from the private sector with State subsidies, because
          administration of the subsidies was not delegated to a financial entity; and (ii) the
          subsidy application and management processes were unsuited to the dynamics of
          the private sector, which resulted in a slow and tedious process. Both lessons were
          considered in the design of Component I of the proposed program, which calls for
          decentralizing administration of the funds through Agencia Financiera de
          Desarrollo (AFD) and basing the subsidy application and approval process on the
          practices of the financial institutions and credit unions.
1.15      Lessons learned have been incorporated from Bank-financed operations for the
          comprehensive improvement of informal settlements in the region.15 Special
          consideration has been given to good practices for engaging the community and
          the importance of supporting physical works with assistance for production-
          oriented and violence prevention activities. Based on these lessons, the Medellín
          Urban Development Company (EDU)16 will transfer its working methodology to
          Habitat for Humanity, which will carry out the social work in La Chacarita Alta to
          ensure that the intervention proceeds in close collaboration and consultation with
          the community, fostering participation, buy-in, and productive business
          development. These activities are expected to be financed under technical
          cooperation operation PR-M1032 for the comprehensive transformation of
          La Chacarita Alta, which is being processed by the Multilateral Investment Fund
          (MIF) parallel to this operation and is slated for approval in the second half of 2015.
          Likewise, the lessons learned and experience gained from loan 2565/BL-NI will be
          transferred to SENAVITAT through the development of an automated information,
          monitoring, and evaluation system that will substantially shorten processing times
          for housing projects and make the allocation of subsidies more transparent.
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.16      Objectives. The objective is to improve housing conditions for the low-income
          population in metropolitan Asunción through: (i) housing subsidies17 to improve and

     Document GN-2732-2. The lessons are based on an in-depth analysis of 16 projects, including a
     document review and structured interviews with the team leaders of those projects, some executing
     agencies, and specialists in the Bank’s Fiscal and Municipal Management Division.
     EDU is regarded as a leader of one of the world’s best practices in the area of comprehensive
     transformation of informal neighborhoods and their integration into the formal city.
17
     For purposes of the National Public Investment System (SNIP), the term “subsidy” means “government
     contribution.”
                                                      -7-




          expand dwellings; (ii) comprehensive neighborhood improvement of La Chacarita
          Alta;18 and (iii) improvement of the management, monitoring, and evaluation of
          SENAVITAT housing programs.
1.17      Component I. Housing improvements and expansion (US$14 million) (for
          SNIP purposes: Housing improvements and expansion in the Metropolitan Area of
          Asunción). This component will benefit more than 4,600 households with direct
          housing subsidies. The beneficiary selection criteria include: (i) households with
          income of up to two USMs;19 (ii) households located in metropolitan Asunción;
          (iii) favorable rating for a microloan from a financial institution or credit union;
          (iv) onsite verification that the dwelling has qualitative deficits; (v) demonstration
          that the household has savings or is able to make an in-kind contribution;
          (vi) onsite verification that the dwelling is not in a hazard area; and
          (vii) confirmation that the household has a valid document showing title to the
          property. This requirement is described in paragraph 6.1.1 of the program
          Operating Regulations. The amount of the subsidy has been set to ensure that in
          combination with microloans and savings, sufficient funding will be available to
          cover the cost of typical home improvement projects: repairs to flooring, walls, and
          roofs, additional bathroom and bedroom, bathroom and septic tank, etc.
1.18      The savings contribution will correspond to the income level and possibilities of
          the households. Microloan amounts will be based on household ability to pay and
          will be made by financial institutions regulated by the Superintendency of Banks
          and by type-A credit unions regulated by the Instituto Nacional de
          Cooperativismo [National Institute of Credit Unions] (INCOOP). Beneficiary
          households will also receive construction-related technical assistance services.20
          The cost of that assistance will be covered with a percentage from the subsidy,
          microloan, and savings package. Construction-related technical assistance will
          initially be provided by an established firm with experience in Paraguay, which
          will train other private institutions to step into that role in the future. AFD will be
          hired as the subsidy administrator21 for a fee equivalent to 1.5% of the total


18
     Comprehensive improvement includes: safe drinking water, electricity and public lighting, sanitary
     sewers, stormwater drainage, risk mitigation works on streams, road works, street furniture and social
     amenities, housing for resettled families, investments to improve solid waste management, regularization
     of property ownership, health and environmental education, productive activities, and additional works to
     ensure connectivity with adjacent neighborhoods.
     The program will also target women heads of household, with 50% of subsidies going to this group. In so
     doing, the program seeks to serve the most vulnerable population.
20
     The entities that provide construction-related technical assistance will deliver personal, individualized
     services to each family that receives a subsidy. This assistance will primarily take the form of a
     diagnostic assessment on the condition of the home, determination in collaboration with the family of the
     activities to be financed to improve and/or expand the home, the design of construction plans and
     technical specifications, the hiring of a contractor for the project, administration of the contract, and
     project supervision to ensure that designs and technical specifications have been met. Legal services
     will also be provided to help secure property titles, as will financial education services.
     AFD has experience with this type of administration inasmuch as it executes two housing programs run
     by financial institutions and credit unions and financed by the Bank through a conditional credit line for
     investment projects (CCLIP). For the contract with AFD, the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of
     Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2350-9) will apply, in
     particular subparagraph (d), which states that the procedure is applicable “when only one firm is qualified
     or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment.”
                                                   -8-




       subsidy amount.22 The activities eligible for financing are described in paragraph
       5.1.1 of the draft Operating Regulations for the program.
1.19   Component II. Comprehensive neighborhood improvement of La Chacarita
       Alta (US$14 million) (for SNIP purposes: Improvement of habitability conditions in
       Asunción’s La Chacarita Alta neighborhood). This component will directly benefit
       735 households. The following works and activities will be financed: (i) low-cost
       communal and individual residential connections to public utilities;23 (ii) stormwater
       drainage systems; (iii) risk mitigation works on gullies and streams; (iv) new and
       improved roads; (v) construction of urban infrastructure (parks and other
       infrastructure); (vi) construction of social infrastructure (education, health, and
       daycare centers); (vii) relocation within the same neighborhood of homes in hazard
       areas; (viii) regularization and issuance of property titles; the regularization
       activities are described in Chapter 15 of the draft Operating Regulations for the
       program; (ix) training activities for the creation of jobs and productive activities;24
       (x) construction of a solid waste management facility; (xi) additional works to
       facilitate urban integration with adjacent neighborhoods; (xii) formulation of a
       comprehensive urban plan; (xiii) detailed designs for works; and (xiv) supervision
       of works. Social outreach in the community will be conducted with technical
       advisory support from an entity specializing in social work (EETS) in the context of
       urban development. The objectives of this work will be to: (i) keep the community
       informed about the scope and progress of works and activities; (ii) consult and
       prioritize with the community the types of investments that will be made;
       (iii) provide support to the families that will be resettled; (iv) provide training
       opportunities to promote productive and income-generating activities for the
       households;25 and (v) carry out activities to, for example, offer health and
       environmental education and improve informal solid waste management. An
       analysis of the ability to pay of the population of La Chacarita Alta was conducted
       during program preparation. The finding was that, for 82% of households in the
       neighborhood, expenditure on water and water and sanitation represented less
       than 3% and 5%, respectively. For the 18% of households with the lowest income
       levels (US$97), expenditure on water and water and sanitation represented 6.4%
       and 9.6%, respectively (see the Analysis of Ability of Pay). The activities eligible for

  The reason for having a financial entity handle administration of the funds has to do with the need to give
  the financial institutions and credit unions every confidence that subsidies will be disbursed quickly, an
  assurance that could not be made if the function were assigned to SENAVITAT.
  This component will be executed in close coordination with the Comprehensive Sanitation Program for
  the Bay and Metropolitan Area of Asunción (loan 3393/OC-PR). The loan for that program will finance
  the main sewer lines for the bay area where La Chacarita Alta is situated. This component will finance
  the communal and individual residential connections in the neighborhood as well as their connection to
  those main sewer lines.
  Support will be provided on a priority basis to households at risk of sinking into poverty following
  resettlement, households whose businesses are temporarily affected by improvement works, and
  households that rely on informal solid waste recycling activities to get by.
  For these activities, the program will draw on good practices in the country. In the case of businesses,
  the experience of the San Gerónimo neighborhood is relevant. Initiatives to formalize solid waste
  recycling activities will look at the lessons that the Catholic Church has learned from supporting the
  establishment of a recycling facility on the south bank of the Paraguay River, which is providing stable
  employment for some households and increasing the income of many others that work in recycling. The
  specialized social work entity (EETS) will draw on contacts already made with microfinance institutions to
  help families in this area obtain microloans for productive activities.
                                                   -9-




          financing and the estimated cost of the comprehensive improvement investments
          are itemized in Chapter 16 of the draft Operating Regulations for the program.
1.20      Component III. Management improvement at SENAVITAT (US$815,000).26 This
          component will finance consulting services to complete the development of an
          integrated system for managing housing programs, including the registration of
          applicants, and to purchase servers to host the system. The plan is to use
          resources from the technical cooperation operation to strengthen project
          management and evaluation at SENAVITAT (PR-T1169), which is still in
          preparation with an expected approval date of September 2015, to finance the
          conceptual designs and launch development of the system.
1.21      Administration       and      evaluations/audits     (US$1.185 million).     Program
          administration resources (US$890,000) will be used to finance the salaries of the
          personnel hired for the program execution unit to perform coordination,
          supervision, and evaluation of the activities planned under the three components.
          Evaluation resources (US$295,000) will finance: (i) the annual technical verification
          and financial audits; (ii) the midterm and final evaluations of the program, the latter
          to include an ex post cost-benefit analysis of the investments made in La Chacarita
          Alta; and (iii) evaluations of environmental management and the resettlement of
          households relocated in La Chacarita Alta.
1.22      Program cost. The cost of the program will be US$30 million, to be financed with
          Ordinary Capital resources. Table 1 presents a breakdown of the costs by
          component.
                                      Table 1. Program costs (US$)
                                           Categories                                         Total
          Component I. Housing improvements and expansion                                   14,000,000
          Component II. Comprehensive neighborhood improvement of La Chacarita Alta         14,000,000
          Component III. Management improvement at SENAVITAT                                   815,000
          Program administration                                                               890,000
          Evaluations and audits                                                               295,000
          TOTAL                                                                             30,000,000


C.        Key results indicators
1.23      The outcome indicators include: (i) the percentage of dwellings with qualitative
          deficits in metropolitan Asunción; (ii) property value per square meter in
          La Chacarita Alta; and (iii) the reduction in the number of months needed for
          processing of housing projects. The output indicators include the number of
          beneficiaries of improved housing solutions. See the Results Matrix (Annex II).
1.24      Economic analysis. An ex ante economic analysis was conducted for the
          program, including a cost-efficiency analysis of the housing improvement and
          expansion component and a cost-benefit analysis of the component for the
          comprehensive neighborhood improvement of La Chacarita Alta. The findings
          indicate that program investments are viable from a socioeconomic standpoint.

26
     For SNIP purposes, this component is part of the project, “Housing improvements and expansion in the
     Metropolitan Area of Asunción.”
                                          - 10 -




      The neighborhood improvement component has an economic net present value
      (NPV) of over US$1.7 million and an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
      26.2%). Component I has a cost-benefit ratio of greater than 1, with an intervention
      cost for housing improvement and expansion activities that is less than the implicit
      cost of the improvements. The sensitivity analysis included the variable of the
      incremental benefit of housing, an increase in investment and operating and
      maintenance costs, and modifications in the total number of dwellings benefited by
      the program impact. The economic viability (EIRR of 12%) of the neighborhood
      improvement component allows for an increase of up to 16% in the investment and
      operating and maintenance costs and a reduction of up to 14% in the economic
      benefit per dwelling.

                    II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.    Financing instruments
2.1   The borrower will be the Republic of Paraguay, and the executing agency will be
      the National Department of Housing and Habitat (SENAVITAT). The financing
      instrument will be a sovereign guaranteed investment loan, under the terms of the
      Flexible Financing Facility, with a six-year disbursement period. The disbursement
      schedule is given in Table 2.

                      Table 2. Disbursement schedule (US$ millions)
        Financing         Year 1     Year 2   Year 3   Year 4     Year 5   Year 6   Total
        Total IDB           1.1       3.2      6.4       7.5        7.0     4.8      30


B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks
2.2   Based on a review of the project profile, the program was classified as a category
      “B” operation, which necessitated an environmental and social assessment,
      including the preparation of an environmental and social management plan
      (ESMP) with environmental and social procedures for works and the local
      resettlement of affected households. The results are summarized in the
      environmental and social management report (ESMR) (see paragraph 2.6). The
      environmental and social assessment was conducted in September 2014 and will
      be available to the public following negotiation of the loan.
2.3   During program execution, the environmental and social impacts are associated
      with the works planned in Components I and II, which by their nature do not
      produce significant environmental impacts but rather impacts that are more
      temporary, local, and low in magnitude. The direct environmental impacts
      anticipated under the program are those typical of neighborhood improvement
      activities, such as generation of debris, dust, and noise, and safety concerns
      related to the movement of heavy machinery. With effective implementation of the
      mitigation measures set out in the environmental management plans, these
      impacts will not be significant. No adverse direct impacts on protected areas are
      anticipated, inasmuch as the program does not call for actions in protected areas,
      nor are any such areas within the program’s area of indirect impact, so no indirect
      impacts have been identified. The ESMP, which is attached to the Operating
                                           - 11 -




      Regulations as an annex, includes the environmental and social mitigation
      measures and plans.
2.4   The investments planned under Components I and II will have a strongly positive
      environmental impact by helping to improve housing conditions and access to
      basic and social services that are presently nonexistent or insufficient, directly
      improving the quality of life of the population. In Component I, participating
      households will identify and prioritize improvement and expansion projects with the
      support of the institutions providing construction-related technical assistance.
      During construction, households will be jointly responsible for taking care of
      materials and supervision. If they so decide, they may contribute their labor. In
      Component II, approximately 140 households are expected to be resettled, the
      majority of which now live in risk zones and are vulnerable to landslides.
      Resettlement will have a very positive impact on these households and on the
      neighborhood in general.
2.5   Environmental and social risks include: (i) resistance among the community of
      La Chacarita Alta to execution of the works due to lack of information on their
      scope; and (ii) a decline into poverty for some families during the resettlement
      process. These risks will be mitigated through implementation of an information
      plan designed to empower the population; support for families in the form of
      income-generating activities; transfer of responsibility for the maintenance of works
      to the Sanitation Services Company of Paraguay (ESSAP) and the National
      Electricity Administration (ANDE) and to the Asunción municipal government; and
      educational activities to encourage the local community to care for and preserve
      the works. For the resettlement of households, the guidelines of Bank Operational
      Policy OP-710 on Involuntary Resettlement will be followed. The resettlement plan
      will be delivered to the Bank for approval prior to any resettlement activities.
      Considerations related to environmental and social management have been
      incorporated into the ESMR and the ESMP, which includes the resettlement
      framework plan.
C.    Fiduciary risks
2.6   The institutional assessment for fiduciary management of the program was based
      on: (i) the fiduciary context of the country; (ii) the findings of the fiduciary risk
      assessment and the project risk management workshop; (iii) an analysis of
      SENAVITAT using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS)
      methodology; and (iv) working meetings with the project team. With these inputs,
      Annex III containing the fiduciary agreements and requirements for execution of
      the loan was prepared. Based on the assessment, it was determined that there is a
      fiduciary risk stemming from the fact that SENAVITAT does not have the technical
      capacity, proactive initiative, or facilitative attitude needed to manage the program.
      To mitigate these risks, an administrative and financial subunit and an contracting
      operations subunit will be created within the program execution unit to work
      exclusively on processing payments and contracts generated by the program.
D.    Other risks
2.7   Other risks include: (i) insufficient coordination among the institutions participating
      in the program; (ii) inadequate maintenance of the works; (iii) lack of credibility
      among people in the neighborhood with respect to the planned improvements due
                                            - 12 -




      to prior commitments that went unfulfilled; (iv) granting of subsidies by the financial
      institutions for households that do not meet the requirements established in the
      Operating Regulations; and (v) nonapproval of the MIF technical cooperation
      operation to finance social outreach. The mitigation measures include the
      following: (i) establish subexecution agreements and arrangements with the public
      and private institutions participating in the program; (ii) transfer responsibility for
      maintaining works to the ESSAP, ANDE, and the Asunción municipal government,
      and arrange educational activities to encourage the local community to care for
      and preserve the works; (iii) implement an information plan to publicize the types of
      works and activities planned and clarify the proactive role for the community;
      (iv) provide training for families with income-generating activities; (v) monitor
      SENAVITAT through audits to ensure application of the Operating Regulations;
      (vi) promote engagement between the project team for this program with the MIF
      team; and (vii) potentially provide financing for social outreach activities using
      funds from Component I.

                    III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1   As noted, the borrower will be the Republic of Paraguay, and the executing agency
      will be the National Department of Housing and Habitat (SENAVITAT). A program
      execution unit (PEU) will be created, reporting to the highest authority at
      SENAVITAT. The PEU will handle general coordination and monitoring and
      evaluation of the program components, as well as monitoring of the planning
      instruments: the multiyear execution plan, the annual work plan, and the
      procurement plan. It will also be responsible for procurements and financial
      management under Components II and III, as well as for ensuring compliance with
      the Operating Regulations. The no objection by SENAVITAT and the Bank to
      the program Operating Regulations will be a special contractual condition
      precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds.
3.2   Execution of Component I. In their role as subexecuting agencies, the
      participating financial institutions and credit unions will be responsible for
      identifying and evaluating the members and customers that qualify for the credit +
      savings + subsidy + construction-related technical assistance (CASA) product. The
      financial institutions and credit unions will be selected in accordance with the
      criteria established in the program Operating Regulations. They will also contract
      for the construction-related technical assistance services, for the purpose of
      identifying onsite the works that will be undertaken to address qualitative deficits
      and comply with environmental and legal criteria. In the case of a favorable
      evaluation, the financial institutions and credit unions will request disbursement of
      the subsidy by Agencia Financiera de Desarrollo (AFD). Upon release of the
      subsidy, the financial institutions and credit unions will transfer the funds to the
      entity providing the construction-related technical assistance, which will be
      responsible for contracting and supervision of the works. SENAVITAT will have the
      following responsibilities: (i) ensure that AFD disburses the funds in a timely
      manner; (ii) verify that the participating financial institutions and credit unions meet
      the eligibility criteria for delivery of the subsidy; and (iii) conduct supervision of the
      works and the construction-related technical assistance on a random basis and as
                                                  - 13 -




       it deems appropriate.27 Compliance with eligibility criteria will be verified on an
       ex post basis through a technical verification audit financed with the loan proceeds.
       The duties and responsibilities of the participating institutions are described in
       detail in the draft Operating Regulations. Special contractual conditions precedent
       to the execution of Component I will be: (i) signed subexecution agreements with
       the participating financial institutions and credit unions; and (ii) a signed service
       contract with AFD for administration of the subsidy funds.
3.3    Execution of Component II. SENAVITAT will be responsible for setting up two
       levels of institutional coordination. A core level will consist of SENAVITAT, the
       Asunción municipal government, and the specialized social work entity (EETS). A
       second level will additionally consist of ESSAP, ANDE, and other public and
       private institutions that provide services and support to the community of
       La Chacarita Alta. SENAVITAT will also have the following responsibilities:
       (i) commission preparation of the comprehensive urban plan and detailed technical
       designs for each work, and conduct bidding for execution of the works;
       (ii) supervise execution of the works; (iii) guarantee compliance with environmental
       and resettlement policies; (iv) supervise the social outreach work with the
       community; and (v) coordinate the execution of works with other initiatives for the
       urban renewal of the historic center. The Asunción municipal government will have
       the following responsibilities: (i) approve the comprehensive urban plan and
       detailed technical designs (with the exception of water, sanitation, and
       electricity/lighting work, which will be approved by ESSAP and ANDE,
       respectively); (ii) perform legal regularization and property registration activities;
       and (iii) assist with the supervision of works. The EETS will initiate social outreach
       work with the community in advance of the design of the comprehensive urban
       plan and continue it for the duration of the works and activities execution period
       and up to six months after completion. A special contractual condition precedent to
       the execution of Component II will be signed collaboration agreements between
       SENAVITAT, the Asunción municipal government, the EETS, and ANDE.
3.4    Execution of Component III. The PEU will be responsible for hiring a consulting
       firm to develop the integrated housing project management system, including the
       registration of applicants and purchase of the necessary computer hardware to
       host the integrated system.
3.5    Procurement and audit. The policies that will apply to this loan are: (i) the Policies
       for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document
       GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants
       Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). In addition, the electronic reverse
       auction and competitive bidding subsystems of the National Public Contracting
       System (Law 2051/03) will be used. The use of other country systems approved

  The items eligible for financing under this component will be: (i) improvement of housing: for structurally
  sound units that meet minimum habitability conditions but are in need of improvements to roofs, walls,
  floors, separation of rooms, bathrooms, water and/or sewer work, or electrical work; (ii) expansion of
  housing: for structurally sound units that meet minimum habitability conditions but due to overcrowding
  are in need of expansion in the form of new or larger rooms, kitchens, bathrooms and/or water and/or
  sewer work or electrical work; (iii) regularization of property ownership: families that need resources to
  regularize their property, including specialized services for activities such as registering property and
  obtaining title; and (iv) technical assistance: contracting construction-related technical assistance
  services, which includes technical, legal, and financial services.
                                                  - 14 -




          subsequent to approval of the program will be applicable automatically, and so
          indicated in the procurement plan. Contracts for consulting services will be
          procured using the standard request for proposals issued by or agreed upon with
          the Bank. The sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the terms of
          reference for consulting services. All procurements and/or contracting processes
          governed by Bank policies will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank, taking into
          account the government’s position on the matter. The Bank will require the
          borrower and/or executing agency to prepare and deliver audited financial reports,
          one to be delivered annually within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year, and
          one to be delivered on 30 August of each year. Single-source selection of Agencia
          Financiera de Desarrollo (AFD) as the agency to transfer the subsidies to the
          financial institutions and credit unions is envisaged, in accordance with
          paragraph 3.10(d) of document GN-2350-9. AFD is a Paraguayan government
          agency that operates in the financial market as a second-tier entity and is
          executing several Bank operations.28 For these reasons, AFD is deemed to have
          experience of exceptional value for carrying out these services.
B.        Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.6       Monitoring activities include: (i) program monitoring using the Results Matrix, the
          multiyear execution plan, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan; (ii) the
          preparation of six-monthly and annual progress reports; and (iii) technical
          verification and financial management audits. Evaluation activities include: (i) a
          midterm evaluation and a final evaluation; and (ii) an ex ante cost-benefit analysis
          that will compare the costs and benefits generated by the works in La Chacarita
          Alta (see monitoring and evaluation plan).




     These projects are the second operation under the CCLIP to provide financing to AFD (2150/BL-PR) and
     the third operation under the CCLIP to provide financing to AFD (2369/BL-PR).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PR-L1082 -Annex I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Page 1 of 1




                                                                                        Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                                      Summary
I. Strategic Alignment
1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives                                                                                                                   Aligned
                                                                                                      -Lending to small and vulnerable countries
   Lending Program                                                                                    -Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement


                                                                                                      -Paved road coverage (Km/Km2)
   Regional Development Goals                                                                         -Proportion of urban population living in dwellings with hard floor


                                                                                                      -Households with new or upgraded water supply
                                                                                                      -Households with new or upgraded sanitary connections
   Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)                                -Km of electricity transmission and distribution lines installed or upgraded
                                                                                                      -Number of households with new or upgraded dwellings


2. Country Strategy Development Objectives                                                                                                                Aligned

                                                                                                                                      - Increase the coverage of water and sewage (including wastewater
                                                                                                                                     treatment) services in the AMA.
   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                              GN- 2769              - Foster greater financial inclusion.
                                                                                                                                      - Improve the effectiveness, transparency, and integrity of public
                                                                                                                                     entities.



   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                               GN-2805              The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.



Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                        Evaluable                             Weight                              Maximum Score
                                                                                                                  8.1                                                                         10
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                           7.6                                33.33%                                   10
   3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                          2.4
   3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                        2.4
   3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                     2.8
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                     10.0                                33.33%                                      10
  4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General
                                                                                                                   4.0
Economic Analysis
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits                                                                        1.5
     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs                                                                           1.5
     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                    1.5
     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                      1.5
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                       6.8                               33.33%                                      10
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                     2.5
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                           4.3
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                                          Low
                               Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                                                Yes
                                    Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks                                                                Yes
                      Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation                                                                 Yes
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                                   B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                                     Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting,
                                                                                                                                     External control, Internal Audit.
                                                                      Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)                 Yes
                                                                                                                                     Procurement: Information System, Shopping Method, Contracting
                                                                                                                                     individual consultant, National Public Bidding.



                                                                                                                                     Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and Evaluation National
                                                                                      Non-Fiduciary                Yes
                                                                                                                                     System.



The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:


                                                                                    Gender Equality


                                                                                              Labor


                                                                                       Environment



                                                                                                                                     Technical assistance activities included: (i) A workshop for the
                                                                                                                                     counterpart undertaken to disseminate good practices from housing and
                                                                                                                                     slum upgrading programs, as well as to share experiences and lessons
Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector                                           learned from programs in other countries; and (ii) participation by a
                                                                                                                   Yes
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project                                                        team of the Urban Development Enterprise in Medellin in a meeting held
                                                                                                                                     in Asuncion with the national and local authorities regarding
                                                                                                                                     methodologies to promote community participation in the slum
                                                                                                                                     upgrading process.



The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge
gaps in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation
plan


The objective of the project is to improve the housing conditions of low income households in Asuncion. To obtain this objective the project will: provide subsidies to low income families to improve their dwellings;
and upgrade the neighborhood of La Chacarita Alta by providing and upgrading basic services, drainage, roads and public spaces, among others.

The document presents the problems to be addressed through the project as well as the factors that cause them. It also identifies the project’s beneficiaries. The magnitudes of the problems faced by the
neighborhood of La Characita Alta are presented. However, the magnitudes of the supply of subsidies directed to families with less than 2 minimum salaries for housing improvements and the qualitative
housing deficit for these families is not specified due to lack of data. The proposed interventions are linked to the problems identified in the diagnosis.

The results matrix has vertical logic. All the outcome indicators are SMART, have baselines, targets and sources of information. All output indicators are SMART , have baselines and sources of information. One
of the indicators does not have a target.

The project was analyzed using a cost-benefit analysis. The economic benefits were quantified using the increase in property values due to the improvements financed by the project. The costs reflect real
resource costs to the economy. The assumptions used were presented and a sensitivity analysis was performed.

The project has a monitoring and evaluation plan which follows the DEM guidelines. The operation will be evaluated using a reflexive methodology and an ex post cost-benefit analysis.
                                                                                                                                                                    Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 5



                                                                            RESULTS MATRIX

                           The objective is to improve housing conditions for the low-income population in metropolitan Asunción through: (i) housing subsidies
      Objective:           to improve and expand dwellings; (ii) comprehensive neighborhood improvement of La Chacarita Alta; and (iii) strengthening of the
                           National Department of Housing and Habitat (SENAVITAT) to improve the management and evaluation of housing programs.
                                                                                OUTCOMES

                                      Unit of         Baseline  Final target          Source / Means of
         Indicators                                                                                                                Observations
                                     measure           (2015) Value       Year            verification
Expected outcomes of Component I. Improve the dwellings of low-income families living in metropolitan Asunción
                                                     1
Percentage of dwellings with  % dwellings       43.2           42.1       2021    Midterm evaluation and      During the startup workshop, the percentage of
qualitative deficits in      with qualitative                                     final evaluation of program dwellings with qualitative deficits in metropolitan
metropolitan Asunción           deficits /                                        (information to be taken    Asunción will be updated, using information
                             housing stock                                        from the 2014 census and transmitted by the Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and
                                                                                  household surveys).         Censuses (DGEEC), which will be published in the
                                                                                                              second half of 2015.
Percentage of subsidies for  % households /        0           100        2021    Midterm evaluation and      A total of 4,600 subsidies are available. This indicator
housing improvements and     total available                                      final evaluation of program will help measure the targeting of the program.
expansion made to households    subsidies                                         (information to be taken
with income levels up to two                                                      from the 2014 census and
minimum wage units (USMs).                                                        household surveys).

Percentage of households          % households /          0           100        2021      Idem                         A total of 4,600 subsidies are available. This indicator
receiving program subsidies       total available                                                                       will help measure the contribution to improvements in
that improved and expanded           subsidies                                                                          the quality of existing housing.
their dwellings
Percentage of dwellings             % woman-              0            50        2021      Idem                         There are 2,300 subsidies available for
improved and/or expanded with         headed                                                                            woman-headed households with income of up to
program subsidies, belonging      households of                                                                         2 USMs. This indicator will help measure the
to woman-headed households        up to 2 USMs /                                                                        program’s contribution to gender equity.
with income of up to 2 USMs       total improved
                                     dwellings




          1
              According to data from the 2002 census, the qualitative deficit affects 31,213 dwellings in the Department of Asunción, or 27.1% of the housing stock,
              and 145,528 dwellings in Central Department, or 49.5% of the housing stock. Accordingly, for the metropolitan area of Asunción, the deficit totals
              176,741 units, or 43.2% of the housing stock.
 Annex II
 Page 2 of 5



                                       Unit of         Baseline  Final target       Source / Means of
         Indicators                                                                                                            Observations
                                      measure           (2015) Value       Year         verification
Expected outcomes of Component II. Raise private property values and improve housing conditions for the population in La Chacarita Alta
Property values in La Chacarita Average value     US$87       US$127       2021 Household survey and        The baseline and target values for the indicator were
Alta                             per square                                     final program evaluation    established based on the results of a property value
                                    meter                                                                   survey conducted during program preparation by
                                                                                                            appraisal experts.
Percentage of households with           % of               0           100        2021     Idem               According to preliminary findings of the 2014 census,
24-hour water service                households                                                               46% of the population is connected to utilities
                                                                                                              provided by ESSAP, although 24-hour service is not
                                                                                                              guaranteed. The indicator will be updated with the
                                                                                                              baseline data to be prepared by Habitat for Humanity
                                                                                                              as part of its initial social outreach work with the
                                                                                                              community.
Percentage of households with        % of           0          100       2021     Idem                        According to preliminary findings of the 2014 census,
indoor connections to the        households                                                                   3% of the population is connected to the sanitary
sewer system via lines in good                                                                                sewer system, although the legality and condition of
               2
working order                                                                                                 the connections are unknown. The indicator will be
                                                                                                              updated with the baseline data to be prepared by
                                                                                                              Habitat for Humanity.
Percentage of households with   % of dwellings      0          100       2021     Idem                        According to preliminary findings of the 2014 census,
indoor connections to the                                                                                     98% of dwellings have electricity connections, both
                            3
reinforced electricity grid                                                                                   formal and informal. The indicator will be updated
                                                                                                              with the baseline data to be prepared by Habitat for
                                                                                                              Humanity.
Expected outcomes of Component III. Make the delivery of housing subsidies for housing projects by SENAVITAT more efficient and transparent
Reduction in processing times    Number of          48          24       2018                                 Using program preparation resources, activities have
                                                                                  Integrated and automated
for subsidies from the National    months                                                                     been initiated to streamline and standardize
                                                                                  management system.
Low-income Housing Fund                                                                                       processes, requirements, and regulations for
(FONAVIS) and housing                                                             Reports by external         SENAVITAT housing programs, which will be
construction under other                                                          consultants and technical   systematized in the new integrated and automated
SENAVITAT programs.                                                               verification audit reports. project management system.
Percentage of housing projects                       0         100       2018     Idem                        Idem
                                % of projects
in which SENAVITAT operating
regulations are applied




         2
               A system in good working order is defined as a system with no overflows or residual water losses in the streets, leaks into the ground, or discharges
               into bodies of water.
         3
               A reinforced system is defined as upgraded medium- and low-voltage power lines.
                                                                                                                                                     Annex II
                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 5



                                                                      OUTPUTS
                                  Baseline                                                 Final target
                           Unit of                   Intermediate measurements                              Source / Means of
      Indicators                    2015                                                      2021                                         Observations
                          measure                                                                              verification
                                    Value   2016     2017   2018    2019    2020    2021      Value
Component I. Housing improvements and expansion
Subsidies to expand    Number of      0      100     400     800    1,200   1,200   900       4,600       Annual and six-monthly    Subsidies will be approved
and improve housing     subsidies                                                                         program monitoring        for households that meet the
                                                                                                          reports, prepared by      requirements established in
                                                                                                          the PEU, and technical    the program Operating
                                                                                                          verification audit        Regulations.
                                                                                                          reports.
Workshops on do-it-     Number of     0      10     20      30       40      40      10        150        Report by entities        Equitable participation by
yourself construction   workshops                                                                         providing construction-   men and women heads of
and legal guidance                                                                                        related technical         household in the workshops
offered by the entities                                                                                   assistance and midterm    will be verified.
providing construction-                                                                                   and final reports.
related technical
assistance
Component II. Comprehensive neighborhood improvement of La Chacarita Alta
Meters of 50-150 mm     Number of     0                            7,600                      7,600       Final works report and    The target value comes from
water lines installed    meters                                                                           annual and six-monthly    an estimate made by ESSAP
                                                                                                          program monitoring        during program preparation.
                                                                                                          reports, prepared by
                                                                                                          the PEU, and technical
                                                                                                          verification audit
                                                                                                          reports.
Residential connections    Number of    0                           735                        735        Idem                      The baseline will be
to the water system       connections                                                                                               prepared by Habitat for
installed                                                                                                                           Humanity at program start.
Meters of sewer lines     Number of     0                           8,700                     8,700       Idem                      The target value comes from
installed                  meters                                                                                                   an estimate made by ESSAP
                                                                                                                                    during program preparation.
Residential connections    Number of    0                           735                        735        Idem                      The baseline will be
to the sewer system       connections                                                                                               prepared by Habitat for
installed                                                                                                                           Humanity at program start.
Residential connections    Number of    0                           735                        735        Idem                      Idem
to the electricity grid   connections
Meters of transmission     Number of    0                           9,000                     9,000       Idem                      Idem
lines improved.             meters
  Annex II
  Page 4 of 5



                                            Baseline                                              Final target
                               Unit of                       Intermediate measurements                            Source / Means of
       Indicators                            2015                                                    2021                                    Observations
                              measure                                                                                verification
                                             Value   2016   2017   2018   2019    2020   2021        Value
Public lighting structures    Number of        0                          352                         352        Idem                 The target value comes from
erected                       structures                                                                                              an estimate made by ANDE
                                                                                                                                      during program preparation.
Alleys and walkways           Number of        0                          5,000          20,000     25,000       Idem                 The target value comes from
expanded and paved             square                                                                                                 a consulting estimate made
                               meters                                                                                                 during program preparation.
Channel works                 Number of        0                           200            800        1,000       Idem                 Idem
completed on the three          linear
streams running through       meters of
the neighborhood:              channel
México, Antequera, and
Tacuary
Works for urban and           Number of        0                            2              2           4         Idem                 Works may include parks,
social amenities                works                                                                                                 schools, daycare centers,
built/improved                                                                                                                        etc.
Dwellings built to resettle   Number of        0                                   70     70          140        Idem                 The target value comes from
families living in hazard     dwellings                                                                                               a consulting estimate made
areas                                                                                                                                 during program preparation.
Solid waste management        Number of        0                            1                          1         Idem                 The need for the facility was
facility built                 facilities                                                                                             identified during a consulting
                                                                                                                                      engagement conducted
                                                                                                                                      during program preparation.
Property titles entered in    Number of        0                           200    200     335         735        Idem                 The baseline value will be
the property register:         property                                                                                               calculated by Habitat for
• In the names of both           titles                                                                                               Humanity as part of its initial
   partners in the case of                                                                                                            social outreach work with the
   married couples;                                                                                                                   community. That same value
• In the names of both                                                                                                                will be disaggregated prior to
   partners in the case of                                                                                                            program start for the three
   couples cohabitating                                                                                                               groups of beneficiaries. This
   for more than 5 years;                                                                                                             indicator reflects the
• In the name of woman                                                                                                                incorporation of the gender
   heads of household.                                                                                                                policy into the program
                                                                                                                                      indicators.
Educational workshops         Number of        0             20     40     40      40     20          160        Idem                 The baseline value will be
on environmental and          workshops                                                                                               determined when the
sanitation topics held for                                                                                                            comprehensive urban plan is
the community                                                                                                                         designed.
                                                                                                                                                Annex II
                                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 5


                                      Baseline                                            Final target
                         Unit of                       Intermediate measurements                          Source / Means of
       Indicators                      2015                                                  2021                                    Observations
                        measure                                                                              verification
                                       Value   2016   2017   2018   2019    2020   2021      Value
Activities to help      Number of        0                    10     10      10     10        40         Idem                 The households to receive
households develop       activities                                                                                           this support will be identified
productive strategies                                                                                                         by Habitat for Humanity as
                                                                                                                              part of its initial social
                                                                                                                              outreach work with the
                                                                                                                              community.
Additional works            Number of 0                                                      TBD         Idem                 The baseline and target
completed, such as: road      works                                                                                           values for this indicator will
and other connections that                                                                                                    be determined when the
facilitate La Chacarita                                                                                                       comprehensive urban plan is
Alta’s integration with the                                                                                                   designed.
rest of the city
Component III. Management improvement at SENAVITAT
Computerized system         Number of 0                1                                       1         Idem                 This will be considered
installed for information    systems                                                                                          completed when monitoring
and monitoring of                                                                                                             is automated for the full cycle
subsidies and projects                                                                                                        of housing program
                                                                                                                              management.
                                                                                     Annex III
                                                                                   Page 1 of 8




                      FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS


Country:                     Paraguay
Project number:              PR-L1082
Name:                        Improvement of Housing and Habitat
Executing agency:            Secretaría Nacional de la Vivienda y el Hábitat [National
                             Department of Housing and Habitat] (SENAVITAT)
Prepared by:                 Alberto de Egea (FMP/CPR) and Mariano Perales (FMP/CPR)



                                 I.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.1     The institutional assessment for fiduciary management of the project was based
        on: (i) the fiduciary context of the country; (ii) the findings of the fiduciary risk
        assessment and the project risk management workshop; (iii) an analysis of the
        National Department of Housing and Habitat (SENAVITAT) using the Institutional
        Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) methodology; and (iv) working meetings
        with the project team. The fiduciary agreements for procurement and financial
        management applicable to program execution have been prepared as a result of
        this assessment.

                       II.   FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE COUNTRY

2.1     In general, the country financial management systems have a medium level of
        development. They need to be supplemented for execution of Bank-financed
        programs in the areas of external control and specific financial reports, by
        auxiliary accounting systems and the intervention of the Office of the Comptroller
        General of the Republic (CGR) for project audits, or the contracting of private
        audit firms considered eligible by the Bank. Financial control tools, such as the
        Integrated Financial Administration System (SIAF), the Integrated Accounting
        System (SICO), and other subsystems enable executing agencies to transfer
        payments through the Central Bank to suppliers of goods and services.
        Integrating these systems will make it possible in the near future to produce
        audited financial statements for a program or project through the SIAF. In the
        meantime, parallel systems are used.
2.2     In terms of country public procurement systems, in addition to the Public
        Contracting Information System already in full use for Bank operations, there are
        country subsystems for electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding for the
        amounts and categories established in the agreement on the use of country
        systems signed by the country and the Bank on 17 June 2014.
Annex III
Page 2 of 8


                 III. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

3.1     The executing agency for the program will be SENAVITAT, acting through a
        program execution unit (PEU), to be created and financed with program
        resources. SENAVITAT is a central government agency in Paraguay that reports
        to the Office of the President of the Republic. It employs approximately 677
        people, 52% of whom are permanent staff and 48% of whom are contractors.
        SENAVITAT, as currently configured, was established on 7 June 2010. Its
        organizational structure and functions are governed by Law 3909/2010.
3.2     The institutional assessment returned a score of 50.44%, which is equivalent to
        an initial level of institutional capacity development and a substantial associated
        risk level. This indicates that priority measures should be taken prior to program
        startup or early in the execution phase. The ICAS report gives a detailed account
        of the institutional weaknesses and possible mitigation measures to be
        negotiated with SENAVITAT.
3.3     Based on the ICAS findings, the plan for the execution mechanism is to use the
        structure of a PEU created and financed with program resources. However, this
        unit will require core staff in technical and fiduciary areas, since the time it takes
        within the current structure of SENAVITAT to select and contract for works,
        goods, and consulting services is regarded as a crosscutting factor with a high
        likelihood of generating risks with a substantial adverse impact on meeting the
        program objectives within the originally projected scopes, time frames, and costs
        (quality). This problem will be mitigated in part as described in paragraph 4.7 and
        also through other mitigation measures indicated in the ICAS report.

              IV. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION MEASURES

A.      Financial management
4.1     In the area of institutional capacity for control, the ICAS returned a score of
        40.52%, the lowest in the matrix, which involves the internal control system and
        the external control system.
4.2     In terms of the program Risk Matrix, a risk of possible delays in financial
        processes has been identified, primarily due to the fact that: (i) the execution of
        Component I is tied to a market demand factor; and (ii) Component II depends on
        a factor tied to negotiations with a complex social sector. For these risks, the
        following mitigation measures have been identified:
4.3     For Component I, a management agreement will be entered into between
        SENAVITAT and the Asociación Financiera de Desarrollo (AFD), to include
        Operating Regulations that will facilitate effective processes between the Bank,
        AFD, and the credit unions and financial institutions, with their beneficiaries. The
        agreement will also contain a supervision and control modality.
4.4     For Components II and III, a manual of procedures for supervision and control of
        advances and other payment modalities will be established, as well as for future
        reporting of such transactions.
                                                                                    Annex III
                                                                                  Page 3 of 8


B.    Procurement management
4.5   For the Goods and Services Administration System, the ICAS returned a score of
      68.97%, equivalent to a medium level of development and a medium level of risk.
      In addition, the program Risk Matrix identifies potential delays in procurement
      processes as a medium risk. The mitigation measures are specified in the ICAS
      report and partially described in paragraph 4.7.
4.6   The state of affairs mentioned in paragraph 3.3 constitutes a problem that
      requires mitigation. The proposal is to equip, in due time and manner, the PEU to
      be created with the right human resources for executing the program and
      achieving the proposed objectives.
4.7   The executing agency has agreed to create an operational contracting subunit
      and an administrative and financial subunit within the PEU to work directly on
      processing contracts and payments generated by the operation. The divisions
      will report to the highest authority of the PEU. SENAVITAT, using own resources,
      will seek to expedite activities to establish and staff the PEU in the first quarter of
      2015. Staff will be hired competitively for the unit and will initially be funded from
      the local contribution. They may be hired directly with program financing once
      declared eligible by the Bank.

      V.   CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT

5.1   To streamline negotiation of the contract by the project team and, principally, the
      Legal Department, the agreements and requirements to be considered in the
      Special Provisions are included below.
5.2   Program implementation will require, as a special contractual condition precedent
      to the disbursement of the loan proceeds, the no objection by SENAVITAT and
      the Bank to the Operating Regulations, which will include the fiduciary manual for
      the loan. Special contractual conditions precedent to the execution of Component
      I will be: (i) signed subexecution agreements with the participating financial
      institutions and credit unions; and (ii) a signed service contract with AFD for
      administration of the subsidies. Special contractual conditions precedent to the
      execution of Component II will be: signed collaboration agreements between
      SENAVITAT, the municipal government of the City of Asunción, the specialized
      social work entity (EETS), the Sanitation Services Company of Paraguay
      (ESSAP), and the National Electricity Administration (ANDE).

VI. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

6.1   The policies that will apply to this loan are the Policies for the Procurement of
      Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies
      for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB
      (document GN-2350-9). In addition, the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors has
      approved (document GN-2538-11) the use of the electronic reverse auction and
      competitive bidding subsystems of the National Public Contracting System
      (Law 2051/03). The use of other country systems approved subsequent to
      approval of the program will be applicable automatically and so indicated in the
      procurement plan.
Annex III
Page 4 of 8


A. Procurement execution
6.2      Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for
         works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international competitive
         bidding (ICB) will be procured using the Bank’s standard bidding documents.
         Bidding processes subject to national competitive bidding (NCB) will be
         conducted using national bidding documents agreed upon with the Bank. The
         project’s sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical
         specifications for procurement during preparation of the selection processes.
         Single-source selection of AFD for administration of the subsidies to be
         transferred to the financial institutions and credit unions is planned, in
         accordance with paragraph 3.10(d) of document GN-2350-9.2 AFD is a
         Paraguayan government agency that operates in the financial market as a
         second-tier entity and is executing several Bank operations.3 For these reasons,
         AFD is deemed to have experience of exceptional value for carrying out these
         services.
6.3      Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services
         generated under the project will be procured using the standard request for
         proposals issued by or agreed upon with the Bank. The project’s sector specialist
         will be responsible for reviewing the terms of reference for consulting services.
         Initially, there are no plans for direct contracting of consulting firms.
6.4      Selection of individual consultants. In accordance with the procurement
         policies set out in document GN-2350-9. There are no plans for direct contracting
         of individual consultants.
6.5      Use of country systems. In accordance with document GN-2538 of October
         2013, the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding
         subsystems of the Public Sector Contracting System (SCSP) in Bank-financed
         operations will apply to:
        a.    All contracts for goods and nonconsulting services eligible for use of the
              electronic reverse auction under the SCSP, for amounts below the threshold
              set by the Bank for use of the shopping method for off-the-shelf goods (for
              reference, US$250,000).
        b.    All works contracts for amounts below the threshold set by the Bank for use of
              the shopping method for complex works (for reference, US$250,000) and
              contracts for goods and nonconsulting services up to the threshold set by the
              Bank for use of the shopping method for complex goods and services (for
              reference, US$50,000).
        c.    Contracts for amounts equal to or above the aforementioned thresholds will be
              governed by Bank policies (document GN-2349-9).
6.6      Section 1 of the Bank’s policies (document GN-2349-9) will remain applicable to
         all executed contracts, regardless of the amount or procurement method. Any

1
    See document GN-2349-9, paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods.
2
    See document GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.6: Direct contracting must be duly justified. See document
    GN-2350-9, paragraph 3.9 et seq.: Single-source selection must be duly justified.
3
    These projects are the second operation under the CCLIP to provide financing to AFD (2150/BL-PR) and
    the third operation under the CCLIP to provide financing to AFD (2369/BL-PR).
                                                                                                     Annex III
                                                                                                   Page 5 of 8


         system or subsystem subsequently approved will be applicable to the operation.
         The procurement plan for the operation and updates thereto will indicate which
         contracts will be executed using the approved country systems.4
6.7      Recurrent expenditures. To ensure that the necessary conditions are in place
         for the PEU to perform its functions, loan proceeds will be used to finance
         expenditures related to leasing of office space, the purchase of an automobile for
         coordination and supervision activities, public utilities and communications,
         translations, bank fees, office supplies, advertising or announcements,
         photocopies, mail, etc. However, these overhead costs do not include wages and
         salaries for government officials.5
6.8      Advance procurement/Retroactive financing. Not planned under this operation.

           Thresholds: International competitive bidding and international short list (US$)
                          ICB                        ICB                    International short list for
          Method
                         Works        Goods and nonconsulting services         consulting services
       Threshold          3,000,000                      250,000                            200,000


6.9      Domestic preference. Not planned for this operation.

                                             Main procurements
                                                      Selection      Estimated date of     Estimated amount
                          Activity                            6
                                                       method          call/invitation          US$000
       Goods
       Procurement of computer equipment, servers,
                                                            ICB            Q4 2016                       298
       and tablets
       Works
       Works to be executed in La Chacarita Alta            ICB            Q1 2017                    13,270
       Nonconsulting services
               7
       Firms
       For software development for the information
                                                          QCBS             Q3 2016                       502
       and monitoring system
       For detailed designs of works to be executed in
                                                          QCBS             Q3 2016                       350
       La Chacarita Alta
       For inspection of works to be executed in
                                                          QCBS             Q1 2017                       230
       La Chacarita Alta
       For services to transfer subsidies to financial
                                                           SSS             Q2 2016                       210
       institutions and credit unions and AFD
       Individuals
       PEU staff                                           3CV             Q3 2016                       890


4
    In the event that the Bank validates another system or subsystem, it will be applicable to the operation in
    accordance with the provisions of the loan contract.
5
    On an exceptional basis, financing is provided to cover incremental staffing costs incurred by the
    executing agency that are specifically related to program execution (see document GN -2331-5,
    Annex I, 1.7(C)(c)(1.22)).
6
    In the case of a procurement carried out using the country system, it should be so indicated in the
    “Selection method” column.
7
    In the case of consulting services, the short list should comprise firms of diverse nationalities. See
    paragraph 2.6 of document GN-2350-9.
Annex III
Page 6 of 8


6.10      Procurement supervision. All procurement and/or contracting processes
          governed by the policies set out in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 will be
          subject to ex ante review by the Bank, taking into account the government’s
          position on the matter. Supervision of procurements and/or contracting
          processes governed by the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding
          subsystems of Paraguay’s Public Procurement System (document GN-2538-11)
          will be performed using the country system.8
6.11      Special provisions. No special provisions are anticipated other than those
          indicated in paragraph 5.1.
6.12      Records and files. Program reports will be prepared and filed using the formats
          and procedures that have been agreed upon and will be described in the
          Fiduciary Manual of Functions and Procedures.

    VII. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

7.1       Programming and budget. SENAVITAT will centralize the management of
          program execution through the PEU, which will have a general coordinator and
          administrative and operations staff, as well as technical support from the other
          divisions and units at SENAVITAT. For administration and budgeting activities, it
          will have the support of the Administration and Finances Division.
7.2       Accounting and information systems. The accrual principle of accounting is
          used, but transactions for projects partly financed by the Bank will be recorded
          on a cash basis. The SIAF is the main tool used for budget and accounting
          transactions and is connected to the SICO as an accounting subsystem. The
          executing agency should also have an accounting system set up to record
          program transactions, which will allow it to prepare reports that are accessible to
          the Bank and other financing sources. Monthly bank reconciliations between the
          two systems will be performed.
7.3       Disbursements and cash flow. The system used to process disbursement
          requests will be e-Disbursements, the Bank’s online system that makes it
          possible to electronically prepare and send disbursement requests to the Bank.
          The system offers a faster and more effective channel of communication than the
          manual option. For the life of the project, the applicable financial procedures will
          be those set out in the Guidelines for the Financial Management of Bank-
          financed Projects and its supplements.
         a.   For Component I. Disbursements will be made under the reimbursement or
              direct payment modality, as requested by the executing agency. For reporting
              to the financial institutions and credit unions on these reimbursement or direct
              payment transactions, the requirements will be established in the Operating
              Regulations that are approved as well as in the service contract with AFD.
              The regulations established on this matter with the financial institutions and
              the credit unions will establish, at a minimum, the reporting periods, reports to
              deliver, and controls on subsidies.


8
     In accordance with the scope of use of the system, supervision may be supplemented by project audits,
     in which case that fact should be mentioned in this annex.
                                                                                   Annex III
                                                                                 Page 7 of 8


      b.   For the other components. Disbursements will be made through direct
           payments, reimbursements, and/or advances of funds.
7.4   In the case of advances of funds, the amount to be disbursed will be
      corroborated with the submission of a detailed monthly financial plan covering a
      period of six months or a longer period not to exceed twelve months, in order to
      determine the program’s actual needs as reflected in the multiyear execution
      plan, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan. The second and
      subsequent disbursements of advances of funds will be subject to justification of
      80% of the total cumulative balance pending justification from the previous
      advances. This percentage may be changed on a one-time basis or permanently,
      subject to Bank approval, should the financial plan and management documents
      set a lower percentage, which in no case should be reduced to less than 50%.
7.5   The exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for accounting
      purposes under Component I will be specified in the management agreement
      with the financial institutions. The exchange rate for Component II will be the rate
      in effect on the date of conversion or the date of payment, as published by the
      Central Bank of Paraguay.
7.6   Internal control and internal audit. In the area of internal control, Paraguay’s
      Standard Model of Internal Control will be implemented. As an improvement plan,
      all manuals on functions should be implemented, updated, and disseminated
      throughout the life of the project, and procedural manuals should be available in
      the area of administration and finances. The internal audit team should include all
      execution activities related to the program in its annual work plan.
7.7   External control and reports. Program financial statements will be prepared
      annually at the close of each fiscal year and delivered within 120 days after the
      end of that period. The Bank may also request midterm reports. The annual
      financial audits and assurances will be prepared by independent auditing firms
      considered eligible by the Bank and whose scope of work will be subject to terms
      of reference approved by the Bank. At the borrower’s request, the annual
      program audits may be conducted by the CGR in accordance with procedures
      agreed upon with the Bank. The external audit reports will be subject to
      publication (Access to Information Policy).
7.8   Financial supervision plan. Financial supervision will be provided in four ways:
      (i) control of the disbursement reports and review visits; (ii) onsite supervision
      visits scheduled by the Bank at SENAVITAT, AFD, the credit unions, and the
      financial institutions; (iii) the financial information from the financial statements
      and execution reports; and (iv) an official who will be responsible for monitoring
      program execution.
7.9   Execution mechanism. Component I will be executed by AFD and the credit
      unions and financial institutions, with supervision and monitoring by SENAVITAT
      as the program executing agency. Execution of the other components will be
      handled by the PEU, which will have the following responsibilities: (i) coordinate
      all activities related to the program; (ii) prepare physical and financial status
      reports; (iii) submit requests for no objection and disbursement of loan proceeds,
      and keep accounting records for use as the primary source of information for
      preparing those requests and any financial reporting; (iv) establish and maintain
      a control system that guarantees proper use and safeguarding of resources, and
Annex III
Page 8 of 8


        maintain supporting documentation for transactions; and (v) prepare and update
        the initial project report, the annual work plans, the six-monthly monitoring
        reports, the evaluation reports, and the project completion report, in preparation
        for their delivery to the Bank. The PEU will be responsible for timely compliance
        with the clauses and agreements set out in the loan contract and performance of
        program-related activities.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/15



                    Paraguay. Loan ____/OC-PR to the Republic of Paraguay
                              Improvement of Housing and Habitat



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary
with the Republic of Paraguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing to cooperate in
the execution of a program for Improvement of Housing and Habitat. Such financing will be for an
amount of up to US$30,000,000 from the Ordinary Capital resources of the Bank, and will be subject
to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project
Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                               (Adopted on ___ __________ 2015)



LEG/SGO/CSC/IDBDOCS: 39641374
Pipeline No. PR-L1082
