                                                                                        PUBLIC
                                                                      SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                          URUGUAY




                   SUPPORT PROGRAM FOR THE
       SOCIO-URBAN INTEGRATION OF THE MIGRANT POPULATION



                                          (UR-J0001)




                                      GRANT PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Verónica Adler (HUD/CUR),
Project Team Leader; Ana María Sáiz (SCL/MIG), Alternate Project Team Leader;
Federica Gómez (INT/TIN), Alternate Project Team Leader; Conrado Mussi and
Luis Rodriguez (CSC/CUR); Ana Cuesta and Gabriel Filc (SPD/SDV); Allizon Millicich,
Emilie Chapuis, and Abel Cuba (FMP/CUR); Guillermo Eschoyez and Juan Manuel Casalino
(LEG/SGO); Alejandro Pareja (IFD/ICF); Federico Brusa (CSD/CCS); Alexandra Alvear
(INE/INE); and Luis Felipe Vera, Ana Cristina Garcia, Sofia del Castillo, Maria Villota,
Silvia Perez, and Dianela Avila (CSD/HUD).



In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been
approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version
will be made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                     CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY

I.     PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................. 1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and costs ............................................................. 12
       C.    Key results indicators ................................................................................... 15

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 16

       A.    Financing instruments .................................................................................. 16
       B.    Environmental and social safeguard risks.................................................... 19
       C.    Fiduciary risks .............................................................................................. 19
       D.    Other risks .................................................................................................... 19

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................. 20

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................. 20
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ........................................ 22




                                                    APPENDICES


Proposed resolution
                                                    - ii -



                                               ANNEXES
Annex I           Development Effectiveness Matrix – Summary
Annex II          Results Matrix
Annex III         Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                   LINKS
REQUIRED
1.   Multiyear execution plan / Annual work plan
2.   Monitoring and evaluation plan
3.   Procurement plan
OPTIONAL
1.   Project economic analysis
2.   Program Operating Regulations
3.   Migration eligibility profile
4.   Climate change analysis and recommendations
5.   Gender and diversity analysis
6.   Safeguard policy filter and safeguard screening form
                                   - iii -


                             ABBREVIATIONS


CCLIP      Conditional credit line for investment projects
CGN        Contaduría General de la Nación [Comptroller General of the Nation]
CSD/HUD    Housing and Urban Development Division
CUN        Cuenta Única Nacional [National Single Account]
DINAVI     Dirección Nacional de Vivienda [National Housing Bureau]
DNM        Dirección Nacional de Migración [National Migration Bureau]
EIRR       Economic internal rate of return
GRF        IDB Grant Facility
ICB        International competitive bidding
INE        Instituto Nacional de Estadística [National Statistics Institute]
MERCOSUR   Mercado Común del Sur [Southern Common Market]
MVOT       Ministerio de Vivienda y Ordenamiento Territorial [Ministry of Housing
           and Land Management]
NCB        National competitive bidding
PCU        Program coordination unit
SCL/MIG    Migration Unit
SIIF       Sistema Integrado de Información Financiera [Integrated Financial
           Information System]
TCR        Tribunal de Cuentas de la República Oriental del Uruguay [Court of
           Auditors of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay]
UCU        Universidad Católica del Uruguay [Catholic University of Uruguay]
UNHCR      United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
                                                     PROJECT SUMMARY
                                            URUGUAY
            SUPPORT PROGRAM FOR THE SOCIO-URBAN INTEGRATION OF THE MIGRANT POPULATION
                                           (UR-J0001)
                                                Financial Terms and Conditions
 Beneficiary:                                                                        IDB Grant Facility (GRF)(a)
 Eastern Republic of Uruguay                                          Disbursement period:               18 months
 Executing agency:
 The beneficiary, acting through the Ministry of Housing and
 Land Management (MVOT)
          Source               Amount (US$)               %
 IDB (GRF):                        5,000,000                  97.39   Currency of approval:              U.S. dollars
 Local:                             134,000                    2.61
 Total:                            5,134,000                   100
                                                         Project at a Glance
 Project objective/description: The general objective of this operation is to expand the scope of the Neighborhood Improvement
 Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) by bringing the vulnerable immigrant population and its host communities closer together. Its
 specific objectives are to: (i) foster urban integration by providing formal basic infrastructure and adequate social and urban
 services, while guaranteeing secure property tenure and enhancing social capital, taking climate change issues into account;
 and (ii) provide affordable housing to the low-income population groups, while restoring rundown urban spaces in Montevideo’s
 historic downtown area.
 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the program coordination unit (PCU)
 for the Neighborhood Improvement Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) has been designated as the execution unit for this operation,
 and a coordinator has been contracted for migration-related matters; and (ii) the program Operating Regulations for the
 Neighborhood Improvement Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) have been updated to incorporate the agreements on the execution
 of resources and the activities financed with the grant contribution funds (paragraph 3.4).
 Special contractual conditions of execution: (i) before work begins on remodeling the building for the welcome center under
 Component 1, the Ministry of Social Development (MIDES) and the Ministry of Housing and Land Management (MVOT) will
 sign an agreement establishing their responsibilities for the center’s management and maintenance and other matters; (ii) before
 funds are transferred to MIDES for the delivery of temporary housing solutions under Component 1, MVOT and MIDES will sign
 an agreement establishing their responsibilities and the mechanism for implementing those solutions; and (iii) before activities
 begin under Component 3, whose outputs are intended for the National Migration Bureau (DNM) of the Ministry of the Interior,
 MVOT and the Ministry of the Interior will sign an agreement establishing their roles and responsibilities for the implementation
 of those activities (paragraph Error! Reference source not found.).
 Exceptions to Bank policies: Waiver of fulfillment of Criterion 1 under paragraph 4.4(i) of document AB-3199, “IDB Grant
 Facility: Support to Countries with Large and Sudden Intraregional Migration Inflows” and under Section II.A of its Operational
 Guidelines (document GN-2947-6), to grant eligibility at the subnational level based on the impacts of migration flows in the city
 of Montevideo (paragraphs 2.5 and 2.6).
                                                         Strategic Alignment
 Challenges:(b)                                   SI ☒                            PI ☐                             EI ☒
 Crosscutting themes:(c)                    GE ☒ and DI ☒                    CC ☒ and ES ☒                         IC ☒
(a)   Nonreimbursable financing: the IDB Grant Facility (GRF) is the nonreimbursable financing facility of the IDB. In accordance
      with document GN-2947-6, the nonreimbursable funds for this operation are supplemental to loan 4651/OC-UR, which
      combines a maximum of 20% in nonreimbursable resources (GRF) and 80% in reimbursable resources (Ordinary Capital).
      The GRF funds will be disbursed simultaneously and proportionally with the proceeds of loan 4651/OC-UR.
(b)   SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(c)   GE (Gender Equality) and DI (Diversity); CC (Climate Change) and ES (Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional
      Capacity and Rule of Law).
                      I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Background. In November 2018, the Board of Executive Directors of the Inter-
          American Development Bank (IDB) approved the Neighborhood Improvement
          Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) for US$70 million from the Ordinary Capital as the third
          individual operation under a conditional credit line for investment projects (CCLIP)
          with the aim of improving the quality of life of persons residing in informal settlements
          in Uruguay (UR-X0003). The loan’s general objective is to help improve living
          conditions for the inhabitants of informal settlements and rundown areas. Its specific
          objectives are to: (i) foster urban integration by providing formal basic infrastructure
          and adequate social and urban services, while guaranteeing secure property tenure
          and enhancing social capital, taking climate change issues into account; and
          (ii) provide affordable housing to low-income population groups, while restoring
          rundown urban spaces in Montevideo’s historic downtown area. The operation was
          declared eligible in December 2019, and the deadline for its last disbursement is
          currently 3 July 2024.
1.2       Recent migration flows. Since 2016, Uruguay has been witnessing a significant
          inflow of immigrants, most of whom are of Venezuelan or Cuban nationality.
          According to data compiled by the National Statistics Institute (INE), a total of
          94,196 persons born outside the country were living in private dwellings in Uruguay
          in 2019. Of that total, 63% resided in Montevideo (approximately 59,000 persons),
          equivalent to 4.3% of the total resident population of the country’s capital city. In
          terms of the migration flows involved, 21,673 immigrants arrived in Montevideo
          between 2016 and 2019, increasing the proportion of immigrants relative to the city’s
          total population by 1.57% (optional link 3, Migration eligibility profile). According to
          information available on the Interagency Coordination Platform for Refugees and
          Migrants from Venezuela (R4V),1 Uruguay has received the fourth largest inflow of
          Venezuelan migrants among the Southern Cone countries. The pandemic and
          border closures temporarily halted these flows, but since the post-COVID reopening
          of national borders the migrant population is once again on the rise, especially at the
          regional level. In 2021, 14,933 applications for residency and over
          10,000 applications for asylum and refugee status were started, almost all of them
          from persons of Cuban or Venezuelan nationality, respectively.2
1.3       Between 2019 and 2022, applications for temporary resident status processed by
          the National Migration Bureau (DNM) of the Ministry of the Interior were up 129%,
          and those submitted under the terms of the Southern Common Market
          (MERCOSUR) Residence Agreement had increased 262%.3 Nearly
          20,000 applications are being processed each year by the two agencies concerned
          (the Ministry of Foreign Relations and DNM), whereas only slightly more than
          5,000 residency applications were submitted in 2014. In 2021, for example,


1     This platform is used by nearly 200 different organizations (including United Nations agencies, civil society
      organizations, religious organizations, and NGOs, and others) to coordinate their efforts under the Regional
      Response Plan for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela.
2     Estudio sociodemográfico sobre personas solicitantes de asilo, refugiadas y otras personas de interés en
      diez departamentos uruguayos (UNHCR, 2022).
3     Residency comparison, January to April (2019 and 2022), Department of Statistics, DNM.
                                                        -2-



          3,472 applications for refugee status were submitted in Uruguay, outpacing Chile
          (2,498) and Argentina (2,229).
1.4       Considerable efforts have been made over the years, even before this new wave of
          migration, to adapt to the situation: (i) Law 18,076 of 2006, which deals with asylum
          and the rights of refugees, led to the establishment of the Refugees Commission to
          exercise authority in that area; (ii) Migration Law 18,250 of 2008 called for the
          establishment of the National Migration Board4 as a coordinating and advisory body
          on immigration issues; and (iii) Law 19,254 of 20145 provides for the possibility of
          granting permanent residence status to nationals of MERCOSUR member and
          associate member countries, thereby promoting social and labor inclusion for
          refugees—including access to decent housing—on an equal footing with the local
          community. In addition, under the Rapid Response Plan that the DNM of the Ministry
          of the Interior has been implementing since 2012, foreign nationals who apply for
          permanent residency in Uruguay can submit basic documents and immediately
          receive a migration certificate that they can then use to obtain a two-year resident
          identity card. In 2015, the executive branch was empowered to grant legal residency
          to particularly vulnerable foreign nationals present in Uruguay whose migration
          status is irregular.6 Then, in 2018, authorization was given to waive the requirement
          for the notarization or apostille certification/legalization of unverifiable documents.7
          That same year, different types of consular visas for entry into the country were
          introduced.
1.5       New challenges for the program. The recent, sudden inflow of migrants poses
          new challenges for the program. Since the launch of the Neighborhood Improvement
          Program, the presence of overcrowded migrant households located in informal
          settlements and semiformal areas have posed an additional challenge, above and
          beyond those initially addressed by the program. The increase in sudden inflows of
          vulnerable migrants is putting pressure on urban service delivery and on residency
          application processing capacity and has consequently added to the barriers
          impeding access to decent housing for both the immigrant population and their host
          communities. A large percentage of recent migrants, especially the most vulnerable
          among them, live in the historic center of downtown Montevideo (the “Old Town”)
          and the surrounding area. This includes persons of Cuban, Peruvian, and Dominican
          origin, most of whom live in overcrowded boardinghouses. Data indicate that recent
          immigrants are at a disadvantage in the labor market compared to the local
          population and that the degree of inequality increased amid COVID-19. Recent
          studies have found that migrants have less of a chance of being economically active
          and have fewer job opportunities, with the unemployment rate for recent migrants


4     The National Migration Board is composed of one delegate each from the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry
      of Foreign Relations, the Ministry of Labor and Social Security, the Ministry of Social Development (MIDES),
      and civil society (the Advisory Council on Migration (CCAM)). The Board is authorized to call upon other
      institutions for consultations or advisory services.
5     Law 19,254 facilitates the granting of permanent resident status to nationals of MERCOSUR member and
      associate member countries and to persons related to naturalized or Uruguayan-born citizens (spouses,
      domestic partners, and siblings).
6     Article 162 of National Budget Law 19,355 of 2015, on the regularization of migrant status, sets out the
      implementing regulations for Decree 118/018.
7     Article 112 of Accountability Law 19,670 of 2018.
                                                      -3-



          (10.7% in 2018) exceeding the rate for the nonmigrant local population (8.3%).8
          Recent migrants are 43% less likely to be part of the labor market than nonmigrant
          nationals, and those migrants who are economically active are 55% less likely to find
          a job. Recent immigrants are also at greater risk of being employed in occupations
          for which they are overeducated and of earning less in these occupations than their
          Uruguayan counterparts. In addition, the stock of vulnerable migrant and host-
          community households has been hit hard by a decline in income levels as a
          consequence of COVID-19. A survey of immigrants indicates that some 20% of them
          lost their job or saw a considerable decrease in their wages9 as a result of the
          economic fallout from the pandemic. This, in turn, made it even harder for them to
          pay their rent, thereby generating further pressure in terms of the formation or
          redensification of informal settlements.10 The phenomenon of requests for immigrant
          assistance and support received by the Ministry of Social Development (MIDES) has
          increased fivefold over the last two years, according to data compiled by the
          International Organization for Migration (IOM). Most of these requests came from
          immigrants living in boardinghouses who were having difficulty in paying their rent.
1.6       Action therefore needs to be taken to promote the urban integration of immigrant
          households into their host communities. This can be done by providing formal basic
          infrastructure, social and urban services, and affordable housing to low-income
          people with a gender and diversity lens in the migrant population and their host
          communities. This initiative will also entail promoting the delivery of housing
          solutions that will expedite the integration of migrant households. The main problem
          identified in this connection is the increase in barriers to access to decent housing.
          Three causes of this situation have been identified, along with additional vulnerability
          factors having to do with gender and diversity and climate change impacts.
1.7       Cause 1. The migrant population has problems with access to public services, and
          information on the integrative social services available in the country is not
          systematically organized and does not reach the intended recipients as effectively
          as it should. Although existing laws guarantee access for the migrant population to
          a variety of public services on an equal footing with Uruguayan nationals, in practice
          there are various types of barriers that interfere with that access, in part as a result
          of the recent sudden increase in migrant inflows. Over half of the migrants who have
          applied for refugee status in Uruguay report that it takes more than six months for
          their applications to be processed.11 Between 2018 and 2022, the number of
          migrants receiving the Equity Plan Family Allowance12 and the Uruguay Social




8     Prieto Rosas, V., and Márquez Scotti, C. (2019). Inclusión social de inmigrantes recientes que residen en
      viviendas particulares de Uruguay, working paper FCS-PP; 04.
9     According to INE, mean income fell 10.2% in real terms during the pandemic.
10    Between 4% and 10% of these persons had to move because they were unable to pay their rent.
      UNHCR-UCU (2022).
11    UNHCR-UCU (2022).
12    The Equity Plan Family Allowance is a cash transfer granted to pregnant women, children and adolescents
      under 18 years of age, and persons with disabilities belonging to socioeconomically vulnerable households.
                                                       -4-



          Card13 rose by 20.1% and 27.4%, respectively. The Montevideo district offices of
          MIDES responded to over 16,850 requests for information and/or assistance from
          migrants in the first half of 2022 alone. Most of these requests concern food,
          documentation, cash transfers, or employment.14
1.8       Information on different procedural mechanisms and processes is scattered across
          different offices and sources, paving the way for overlaps, confusion, and
          inaccuracies. A preliminary survey indicates that at least 115 different procedures or
          public services relating to identity documents, education, social services and
          resources, human rights violations, violence and justice, employment and job
          training, health, and housing are offered by a diverse range of 18 different
          government agencies. Only two of these offices explicitly require a Uruguayan
          identification document (identity card) to be presented. Nonetheless, in practice,
          access to some of these services is limited to persons who can produce a
          Uruguayan identity card (e.g., the Uruguay Social Card, socioeducational inclusion
          grants,15 and access via WhatsApp to the Automatic Processing System of the
          Ministry of Labor and Social Security).16
1.9       Similarly, the findings of the 2022 survey conducted by the United Nations High
          Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and Universidad Católica del Uruguay (UCU)
          indicate that, even though primary education is readily accessible, the percentage
          of immigrant children and adolescents who are still not enrolled and/or do not attend
          secondary school is surprising (48.67%). Apart from respondents who stated that
          their nonattendance is due to the fact that they have only recently arrived in the
          country (24.6%), the rest of the stated reasons17 reflect a lack of information on the
          subject, as respondents did not know that the Uruguayan educational system is free
          of charge, that school materials and meals are provided to students in situations of
          vulnerability, and that a Uruguayan identity document is not required for enrollment.
1.10      Some public agencies have made efforts on their own to provide pamphlets or
          frequently asked questions (FAQs) sheets regarding the available public services to
          migrants. At least eight such guides in differing formats have been found that provide
          information that overlaps with the information on services offered by civil society or
          other institutions, such as private universities. The information provided on the main




13    This card is used to make various cash transfer payments aimed at improving people’s incomes and
      providing them with greater access to staple foods, cleaning and personal hygiene products, clothing, and
      butane and propane fuels. These transfers are made to households and persons in situations of extreme
      socioeconomic vulnerability.
14    Source: MIDES Evaluation and Monitoring Division.
15    Grants covering early childhood care and education services are provided for children between the ages of
      0 and 2 years (in exceptional cases, up to 3 years of age) from vulnerable households who live in areas that
      are underserved by public services and utilities.
16    For example, whereas Uruguay was one of the countries at the forefront of the COVID-19 response and one
      of the leaders in vaccination rates, persons who did not yet have a Uruguayan identity document were
      unable to sign up for vaccinations. Consequently, people—regardless of their age—who did not have an
      identity card had to wait for months before they could be vaccinated.
17    Among the reasons cited, 21.8% of respondents said that they did not have the necessary information,
      21.4% said that they did not have the required documentation, and 20% said that they did not have enough
      money to cover the education costs.
                                                       -5-



         government portal concerning procedures and services available to the migrant
         population is incomplete.18
1.11     Additionally, 18.6% of the migrant population say they do not have access to health
         services. This can be attributed partly to the fact that health coverage in Uruguay is
         closely linked to access to the formal labor market and, while possession of an
         identity card is not an absolute requirement, delays in obtaining that card can
         translate into delays in entering the formal labor market (and, therefore, health
         coverage). One of the main reasons cited was that the respondents did not have
         enough money to cover the cost of health services. Since health care in Uruguay is
         universal and free of charge for the migrant population, this response reflects a lack
         of information on the part of migrants about how the Integrated National Health
         System operates, how access is provided, and what benefits are offered.
1.12     At a more general level, an additional constraint is that health workers need training
         in how to serve migrant users of public health services. More specifically, MIDES is
         the only institution that has a team with experience in working with vulnerable
         migrants.
1.13     The participatory evaluations carried out by UNHCR in 2021 with immigrants and
         refugees residing in the Montevideo, Canelones, and Rocha Departments delved
         into three main subject areas: (i) socioeconomic inclusion; (ii) housing; and
         (iii) youth. In regard to access to services, respondents underscored difficulties in
         finding formal employment in their occupational area and in obtaining information
         about employment opportunities, shelters, and housing. They also underscored the
         need for more opportunities for adolescents to meet up and interact with one another
         and a lack of access to childcare services, which has a differential impact on the
         labor inclusion of women.19
1.14     It is believed that part of the solution for these problems can lie in promoting urban
         integration by providing formal basic infrastructure and adequate social and urban
         services, while guaranteeing secure property tenure and enhancing social capital,
         taking climate change issues into account.
1.15     Cause 2. The mechanisms in place for providing housing solutions are not geared
         to meeting the needs of immigrants. The current immigration situation in the country
         is having a negative impact on access to essential services, particularly housing.
         This is reflected in the fact that a large percentage of immigrants live in
         boardinghouses (shared-use dwellings with common spaces) in which
         overcrowding, especially in the case of Peruvian and Dominican migrants, has often
         reached critical levels.20 Regulated and unregulated boardinghouses are becoming
         one of the main housing solutions used by immigrant families in Montevideo.21 The

18   Migration portal on the Uruguayan government’s official website: www.gub.uy/migración.
19   Fact sheet, Results in 2021, UNHCR (March 2022).
20   Overcrowding, measured as the number of people per bedroom, is a problem faced by many migrants in
     the first dwelling that they occupy in Montevideo; this is especially a problem for those who live in
     boardinghouses (Bengochea and Madeiro, 2020). Peruvian migrants reporting that they resided in a
     boardinghouse when they first arrived in the country were subject to critical levels of overcrowding (4.3), as
     were Dominican migrants (3.6). The degree of overcrowding experienced by Cuban and Venezuelan
     migrants living in boardinghouses was more moderate (2.9 and 2.3, respectively).
21   Fossati and Uriarte, 2018; Prieto Rosas et al., 2019.
                                                       -6-



         growing supply of unregulated housing options exacerbates and perpetuates the
         situation of immigrants living in boardinghouses that fail to meet minimum habitability
         standards. In addition, because of the problems that immigrants have in finding a
         decent housing solution, these boardinghouses often charge exorbitant prices that
         further impede the socio-urban integration of migrants. According to the census of
         boardinghouses conducted by Montevideo City Hall in 2018, 39% of the people
         residing in them were foreign nationals, and in Montevideo there were
         233 temporary lodging establishments (boardinghouses), 80% of which had some
         type of structural defect. There is also another category of unregistered
         boardinghouses where overcrowding conditions and structural defects are even
         more critical.
1.16     In the lowest two income quintiles, which include 52.5% of migrant households,
         migrant household expenditure on rent represents 54% and 37% of total income,
         respectively, which is above the recommended international standard.22
         Furthermore, the rents paid by these households is proportionally higher than the
         rents paid by Uruguayans. The difficulties encountered in gaining access to formal
         housing solutions are chiefly attributable to the following factors: (i) Immigrants
         generally know little about the Uruguayan real estate market. In fact, 91% state that
         they are unfamiliar with the country’s housing plans. As a result, a large percentage
         of them live in boardinghouses or other poor-quality housing. The data also indicate
         that only 34% of the immigrant population lives in rental housing, while the other
         76%23 resides in improvised shelters or settlements, on the street, in boardinghouses
         or rooming houses, although they tend to find better housing as their situations
         improve; (ii) Few regulatory or other tools are in place in Uruguay to meet the
         housing needs of the population at a time when immigration inflows are fueling
         demand. No rental subsidization mechanism currently in place is tailored to the
         migrant population, there are no temporary shelters set aside for them, and no
         agency or center focuses on supporting them in their search for other housing
         solutions;24 25 and (iii) This population’s income levels are too low to allow entry into
         the formal housing market.
1.17     Cause 3. Instructions regarding the information that has to be supplied in connection
         with various types of applications and procedures are not readily accessible, and the
         wait times for the processing of some of them are unclear, which hinders immigrants
         from gaining access to social services. Uruguay has made headway in standardizing
         entry and documentation procedures, but the increasing number of residency
         applications in recent years, as documented by the Ministry of the Interior, has


22   On average, migrant households use 40% of their income to pay for where they live. This prevents or delays
     their integration.
23   UNHCR, 2022.
24   Assistance will be provided to beneficiaries in the selection of a dwelling, and they will be coached on how
     to care for their home and run it efficiently (ways of saving on energy, water use and waste management
     techniques, etc.).
25   MVOT has formal arrangements with 17 different agencies for the provision of rental subsidies to vulnerable
     members of the population, chiefly with “Mujeres para Mujeres” [“Women for Women”], an initiative to
     support women in their efforts to leave situations where they are subject to gender violence; the Institute for
     Children and Adolescents of Uruguay; a witness protection agency; and an agency serving returnees,
     representing approximately 1,100 subsidies per year.
                                                        -7-



         slowed the processing of those applications. This, in turn, has made it take longer
         for immigrants to obtain a Uruguayan identity card.26 Without that card, access to the
         formal labor market, housing, health care, and even education is more difficult.
         These delays are attributable, in part, to two issues: (i) 60% of the target population
         states that the process of applying for refugee status takes between 7 and
         25 months, while 76.7% say that the main problems in obtaining a migrant visa are
         a lack of familiarity with and/or access to the necessary information, which is not
         available from a centralized source, and the difficulty for some highly vulnerable
         people of submitting applications online without support; and (ii) the agencies
         responsible for issuing resident visas have been overwhelmed by the number of
         applications because they lack a streamlined, modern system that would allow them
         to process applications for identity cards more rapidly.27
1.18     Gender and diversity challenges. Some 54% of the vulnerable immigrants arriving
         in the country between 2009 and 2014 were women,28 primarily from the
         Dominican Republic, Cuba, Peru, and Venezuela. Migrant women are the heads of
         most single-parent households, generally work in the informal domestic service
         sector, and have the highest unemployment rates (18% higher than the rate for
         Uruguayan women and 6 times higher than the rate for male immigrants).29 Migrant
         women in Uruguay are also more likely than Uruguayan women to be victims of
         gender-based violence. In 2020, of all the women in Montevideo who required care
         as a consequence of gender-based violence, 40.5% were Uruguayan and 59.5%
         were women of other nationalities (optional link 5) (optional link 3). These factors will
         be taken into consideration in the design of this operation.
1.19     Challenges posed by diversity-related factors. Persons of African descent are
         the population group facing the most discrimination and exclusion. Members of this
         group represent 11% of the Uruguayan population, are generally among the poorest,
         and more have at least one unmet basic need30 (51.3% of Afro-descendants versus
         32.2% of persons not belonging to this group).31 MIDES data indicate that more
         migrant women of African descent are heads of household as compared to their
         peers (13.5% versus 10.3%) and their unemployment rate is higher as well (14%
         versus 6.6%).32 The trans population in Montevideo includes a large percentage of


26   To obtain an identity card, the applicant must have a residency certificate or a certificate issued by the DNM
     showing that they are applying for refugee status.
27   Sociodemographic study on asylum-seekers, refugees, and other groups in 10 Uruguayan departments,
     UNHCR, 2022.
28   United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and MIDES. 2017. Caracterización de las nuevas corrientes
     migratorias en Uruguay: Nuevos orígenes latinoamericanos: estudio de caso de las personas peruanas y
     dominicanas.
29   Idem.
30   The Uruguayan government uses a system of unmet basic needs metrics in which certain items are
     identified as basic needs and thresholds are set for each one. If access falls below those thresholds, the
     level of deprivation is classified as critical. The elements used to calculate these unmet basic needs are:
     (i) access to decent housing; (ii) drinking water supply; (iii) sanitation services; (iv) electricity; (v) basic
     household amenities; and (vi) education.
31   Cabella W. et al. 2011. Atlas sociodemográfico y de la desigualdad del Uruguay. La población afro-uruguaya
     en el Censo.
32   MIDES post on Twitter, 2015. Inequidades persistentes: datos sobre la situación de las mujeres afro en
     Uruguay.
                                                       -8-



         migrants from other parts of Uruguay or abroad (35%).33 National data indicate that
         most of this population group live in outlying areas and are subject to overcrowding,
         5% are homeless, fewer have access to housing title (16% versus 59% of the
         general population), 45% live in substandard housing,34 and 45% are victims of
         violence connected with their gender identity. Relatively little data on the migrant
         population in Uruguay is disaggregated by race, disability, ethnicity, and gender
         identity. But, taking an intersectional approach to analysis of the data,35 it can be
         assumed that the challenges faced by Afro-descendants and LGBTQ+ persons are
         even greater if they are also migrants (optional link 5).36 These considerations will
         be incorporated into the design of activities under this operation involving the
         delivery of services to these population groups, and records will be kept on the
         services provided to different population groups.
1.20     Barriers associated with climate change impacts. In 2021, Uruguay unveiled its
         National Long-Term Climate Strategy for achieving a low-emissions, climate-
         resilient form of development37 in fulfillment of the commitments it has made under
         the Paris Agreement. This strategy establishes an aspirational scenario of achieving
         CO2 neutrality by 2050 and delivering on the pledge to make adaptation a national
         climate policy and action priority for Uruguay, which is particularly vulnerable to the
         impacts of climate change. The housing sector has a role to play in attaining this
         goal, since it is a source of greenhouse gas emissions, primarily from:
         (i) construction; (ii) energy and water use; and (iii) urban solid waste and
         wastewater management. In addition, severe climate events (chiefly flooding and
         droughts) have an impact on the sector that extends to households, their residents,
         urban infrastructure, utilities, livelihoods, and the economy. According to estimates
         of the National Water Resources Bureau, over 95,000 people in Uruguay reside in
         floodplains.38 Their situation could become more tenuous, given current climate
         projections for the country, which point to increased precipitation and temperatures
         under the strong influence of El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO).39 In view of the
         challenges posed by climate change and in keeping with the international
         commitments assumed by the country, the National Policy on Climate Change was
         approved in 2017. One of the objectives of that policy is to promote the development
         of sustainable cities, communities, human settlements, and infrastructure that are
         resilient to climate change and climate variability while helping to reduce greenhouse



33   Montevideo City Hall. 2016. Sexual Diversity and Social Equality Agenda 2016-2020.
34   World Bank. 2020. Social Inclusion in Uruguay.
35   The concept of intersectionality has to do with the fact that each person may suffer oppression as a result
     of their association with many different social categories, such as gender, ethnicity, race, age, nationality,
     disability, and gender identity. As one example, a woman migrant of African descent might be subject to
     intersectional discrimination.
36   National Census of Trans Persons, 2016, MIDES.
37   Long-term climate strategy for low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development (Uruguay,
     2021).
38   Estimates prepared by the National Water Resources Bureau (DINAGUA) indicate that 95,375 people are
     living in floodplains (2021). Accessed in July 2022, available at https://www.gub.uy/ministerio-
     ambiente/politicas-y-gestion/inundaciones.
39   Fourth National Communication to the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
     Convention on Climate Change, Uruguay, 2016.
                                                    -9-



         gas emissions.40 The activities to be funded by the program, including the
         refurbishments of buildings, will take climate change impacts into account and thus
         contribute to the implementation of the national policy. In addition, the work to be
         done in the area of housing subsidies will be designed to avoid the formation of
         informal settlements and will be guided by established standards for the placement
         of rental housing and the materials to be used. These considerations have been
         incorporated into the program design (see paragraph 1.32).
1.21     The country’s sector strategy. An absence or shortfall of decent housing interferes
         with access to basic social services. It is difficult for people to find work, go to school,
         or obtain health care if they do not have a dwelling that meets basic standards of
         habitability. The country’s strategy aims to change this situation by providing support
         to families from the time they enter the country until they are in a position to
         participate in the habitat and housing programs that Uruguay has in place. This
         support continuum starts with the provision of temporary lodging and continues on
         to rental subsidies, the government-run Rental Guarantee Fund41 or other market-
         based options (40% of this fund’s resources were granted in the form of guarantees
         to migrants in 2019), and lastly, the housing solutions offered by the government,
         such as subsidies for house payments, cooperative housing, and others.
1.22     Request. In view of the foregoing, the Government of Uruguay, acting through the
         Ministry of Economy and Finance, expressed interest in accessing resources from
         the IDB Grant Facility to Support Countries with Large and Sudden Intraregional
         Migration Inflows. Preparation of an investment grant operation was requested to
         supplement the third individual operation (loan 4651/OC-UR), now in execution,
         under the conditional credit line for investment projects (CCLIP) for the
         Neighborhood Improvement Program (UR-X1003). This operation will strengthen
         the components of loan 4651/OC-UR by improving the access of the immigrant
         population in Montevideo to affordable housing and job opportunities. The request
         meets the eligibility requirements for use of such nonreimbursable resources as set
         out in documents AB-3199 and GN-2947-6 (see paragraphs 2.2 and 2.3). The
         program also has synergies with other Bank operations now in the design stage,
         including a program to increase financing to improve habitability conditions for
         households in informal settlements.
1.23     Progress of loan 4651/OC-UR. This third individual operation under the CCLIP for
         the Neighborhood Improvement Program (UR-X1003) was approved by the Bank’s
         Board of Executive Directors on 1 November 2018 and met the relevant eligibility
         requirements on 18 December 2019. To date, two disbursements for a total of
         US$7.05 million have been made out of the total financing of US$70 million. The last
         disbursement of the US$30 million in local counterpart funds is currently scheduled
         for 3 July 2024. The program has generated an investment project portfolio involving
         at least 20 informal settlements. Headway has also been made on the
         implementation of Component 2 with approval of the bidding specifications for the
         rehabilitation of four buildings. The activities to be supported by this operation will
         complement those of program 4651/OC-UR, which will increase its disbursements
         and improve its performance due to two factors: (i) an increase in the physical space


40   National Policy on Climate Change (2017).
41   The Rental Guarantee Fund will enable recipients to obtain a government-backed guarantee certificate.
                                              - 10 -



       agreed upon with the Ministry of Economy and Finance for this program; and (ii) a
       possible one-year extension for the corresponding resource commitments. The
       investment grant financing operations will be agreed upon with the beneficiary
       country, reflecting the pari passu disbursement requirements described in
       paragraph 3.7, so the two operations will be interdependent. The actions of this
       investment grant will thus make it possible to expand the program’s scope in:
       Component 1, through the generation of urban services for social and urban
       integration with emphasis on human capital; in Component 2, through rental housing
       subsidies to prevent the formation of new informal settlements; and Component 3,
       through the strengthening of government agencies involved in granting residency
       status allowing access to social and urban services. All actions as part of this
       operation will focus on the Department of Montevideo, based on the eligibility criteria
       listed below in paragraph 2.5.
1.24   Strategic alignment. This operation is aligned with the second Update to
       the Institutional Strategy: Development Solutions that Reignite Growth and Improve
       Lives (document AB-3190-2). Specifically, it is aligned with the development
       challenges to: (i) social inclusion and equality, as many of the immigrants who have
       recently arrived in Uruguay are women; and (ii) economic integration, as it will seek
       to improve living conditions for migrant households as a means of promoting their
       integration into the labor market. It is also aligned with the IDB Group Corporate
       Results Framework 2020-2023 (document GN-2727-12), specifically the indicators
       of: (i) social inclusion and equality, indicator 6 (beneficiaries of initiatives that support
       migrants and their host communities); and (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law,
       indicator 26 (agencies with strengthened digital technology and managerial
       capacity). Additionally, it is aligned with the crosscutting themes of: (i) gender
       equality and diversity, as it prioritizes women heads of household, persons with
       disabilities, Afro-descendants, and the LGBTQ community; (ii) institutional capacity
       and rule of law, as it will take steps to strengthen institutions and instruments of the
       Government of Uruguay in order to better serve the immigrant population; and
       (iii) climate change and environmental sustainability, as it will focus on degraded
       areas subject to climate risk and support housing solutions in centrally located areas.
       According to the joint methodology of the multilateral development banks, 21.53%
       of the operation’s resources are invested in climate change mitigation and
       adaptation activities. These resources contribute to the IDB target of increasing
       financing for climate-related projects to 30% of approvals in 2022.
1.25   The operation is also aligned with the IDB Group Country Strategy with Uruguay
       2021-2025 (document GN-3056) and specifically with the strategic objective of
       facilitating urban services and housing in the priority area of equality and social
       inclusion. Additionally, it is consistent with three of the four lines of action of the
       Housing       and    Urban       Development      Sector     Framework      Document
       (document GN-2732-11), particularly as it will help to overcome structural social
       exclusion by improving informal neighborhoods and promoting access to adequate
       housing, build climate resilience by averting the formation of new informal
       settlements, and promote urban good governance by strengthening data
       management capacity, improving coordination, and fostering citizen participation.
       The operation is also aligned with the Gender and Diversity Sector Framework
       Document (document GN-2800-8), as it puts priority on regularizing the property title
       of women heads of household. It is aligned with the objectives of the IDB Grant
                                            - 11 -



       Facility to Support Countries with Large and Sudden Intraregional Migration Inflows
       (documents GN-2947-1 and AB-3199). Lastly, it was included in Annex III of the
       Operational Programming Report 2022 (document GN-3087).
1.26   Lessons learned. The Migration Unit (SCL/MIG) and the IDB Grant Facility to
       Support Countries with Large and Sudden Intraregional Migration Inflows are fairly
       new additions to the Bank. The Housing and Urban Development Division
       (CSD/HUD) has recently approved an operation that will use GRF funds to help
       reduce the number of local and immigrant households residing in informal
       settlements in Chile (loan 5313/OC-CH; grant 5314/GR-CH). That operation will
       seek both to improve existing informal settlements and to prevent the establishment
       of new ones. There have also been a number of success stories around the world
       that involve the application of comprehensive migrant service models, especially in
       the areas of housing and urban integration. For example, the German town of Altena
       has set up an integrated center that provides support for new arrivals and helps them
       to enroll in school, find housing, and become a part of the local community. Ashley
       Community Housing in the United Kingdom (2009) is another example, as this
       initiative has succeeded in ensuring that refugees become self-sufficient, find work,
       and make a positive contribution to the economy of their new community.
1.27   “Fundación Idas y Vueltas” (the “Coming and Going Foundation”) in Montevideo
       helps uphold the right to migrate by providing advisory assistance and information
       to the migrant population about rental guarantees and following up on the progress
       being made by people applying for a rental contract in order to identify any potential
       blockers. The program has demonstrated that making information available in a
       clear and organized fashion helps to empower vulnerable people and promote the
       use of legal protections.
1.28   Another innovative example is the Co-Housing and Case Management for
       Unaccompanied Young Adult Refugees project in Antwerp, Belgium (CURANT),
       which promotes the social integration of refugees there. This initiative uses a
       combination of tools to provide a safe living environment for people between 17 and
       22 years of age who wish to share affordable housing with local inhabitants. This
       project puts social bonds at the heart of the conversation around migration issues.
       In most cases, the close bonds that are formed among these young people when
       they share the same dwelling better prepare foreign nationals for their new life in an
       unfamiliar society and counter social prejudice against them. Another interesting
       case is that of Startblok Riekerhaven. This initiative of the Amsterdam municipal
       government has set up a residential cooperative where the participants not only live
       together but also engage in cultural and social integration experiences.
1.29   “Chile Te Recibe” (“Chile Welcomes You”) is a Latin American initiative focused on
       safeguarding the rights of migrants under 18 years of age by regularizing their
       migration status. This is accomplished by providing these immigrants with special
       visas, regardless of the migration status of their families, that give them access to
       educational, health, recreational, and other services. Another initiative is MigrApp in
       Chile, a website and smart phone application of the Jesuit Migrant Service (SJM),
       provides a virtual platform that facilitates migrants’ and refugees’ access to relevant,
       personalized information about their rights and a digital means of connecting with
       members of the local population. All these experiences have facilitated dialogue in
       the country around finding innovative solutions for the housing access problems
                                                       - 12 -



         faced by the migrant population and will be incorporated into the design of the
         proposed solutions.
1.30     More recently, some countries have begun to offer rental subsidies to the migrant
         population. One of those countries is Colombia, where the migrant population
         accounted for a large percentage of total rentals in 2019, especially in cities such as
         Cúcuta (27.4%) and Barranquilla (14.7%). In 2021, Colombia introduced the
         “Semillero de Propietarios” (“Homeowner Incubator”) low-income rental program.
         The regulations governing that program defined the category of “migrant household,”
         the corresponding targeting standards, and the main operational aspects and
         parameters of the subsidy. They also set a ceiling of the equivalent of 0.4 times the
         minimum wage for up to 12 months at 100%, together with a guarantee covering
         nonpayment of rent and utilities, and provided for an authorized real estate broker
         to act as an intermediary. This subsidization program was not actually used during
         its first year, however, mainly because of the lack of available housing for this
         population group and because of the size of the subsidy. In June 2022, new
         regulations were issued that increased the subsidy and did away with the provision
         for a real estate broker to play an intermediary role; instead, the regulations now
         provide for a third party, proposed by the renter, to verify the quality of the living
         conditions afforded by the dwelling in question. In addition, the Office of the Mayor
         of Bogotá has implemented the supply-side Plan Terrazas (“Terraces Plan”) based
         on the idea that families in Bogotá could build an additional unit on the second floor
         of their house as a way of expanding the supply of available rentals. The lessons
         learned from the programs introduced in Colombia have been taken into account in
         calculating the sizes of the subsidies to be offered under this operation and the
         management mechanisms to be used.
B.       Objectives, components, and costs
1.31     The general objective of this operation is to expand the scope of the Neighborhood
         Improvement Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) by bringing the vulnerable immigrant
         population and its host communities closer together. Its specific objectives are to:
         (i) foster urban integration by providing formal basic infrastructure and adequate
         social and urban services, while guaranteeing secure property tenure and enhancing
         social capital, taking climate change issues into account; and (ii) provide affordable
         housing to the low-income population groups, while restoring rundown urban spaces
         in Montevideo’s historic downtown area.42




42   Paragraph 4.2 of the Operational Guidelines for the Use of Resources from the IDB Grant Facility to Support
     Countries with Large and Sudden Intraregional Migration Inflows states: “… In order to ensure that the
     migration component or operations financed through loans and a grant with GRF resources follow a common
     vertical logic and to facilitate the pari passu disbursement, a single results matrix will be used for the loan
     and the associated grant. For both, the loan and the GRF grant, the progress monitoring report (PMR) will
     use the performance methodology applicable to the corresponding lending instrument and modality of the
     loan, as stated in document OP-1072-5.” The indicators have been designed on the basis of the existing
     execution period for loan 4651/OC-UR on the understanding that, for the time being, no extension has been
     granted and that this is a matter that will be considered during the next portfolio review to be undertaken
     with the country. The indicators for this matrix focus on this grant. The rest of the indicators are being
     captured by operation 4651/OC-UR.
                                                      - 13 -



1.32     Component 1. Neighborhood improvement (Welcome Center for the Migrant
         Population) (GRF: US$2,016,900). Financing will be provided for opening a Migrant
         Welcome Center for activities aimed at increasing the socio-urban integration of the
         migrant population. To support the implementation of this comprehensive migrant
         services management model, financing will be provided for: (i) a Welcome Center
         for the Migrant Population. The welcome center will be located in a building
         belonging to the Ministry of Housing that will be remodeled and equipped with
         improved infrastructure for that purpose. The building will be managed by the
         Ministry of Housing in coordination with MIDES and will be used to provide the
         immigrant population with appropriate information and support for accessing
         government social services and the labor market. This building is located in
         downtown Montevideo (“Old Town”), where a majority of the immigrant population
         in Montevideo lives.43 The design of the welcome center will incorporate gender and
         diversity and climate change considerations; (ii) the design and implementation of a
         comprehensive management model for migrant services provided by the
         government and possibly other agencies with a view to expediting the social and
         urban integration of the migrant population. This will include at least nine services
         dealing with gender and diversity issues.44 The welcome center will keep
         administrative records on the population it serves that consider gender, disability,
         race, gender identity, and other factors. It will also have a grievance system;
         (iii) temporary housing solutions for particularly vulnerable members of the
         immigrant population, giving priority to households headed by women and
         households located in nonmitigable risk areas.45 An estimated 430 subsidies are to
         be provided for periods of between three and six months, with the expectation being
         that these households will then go on to take part in the pilot rental subsidy program
         or make use of other solutions offered by Uruguay’s housing system. The family
         eligibility requirements and prioritization criteria for participation in these
         arrangements will be described in the program Operating Regulations and will
         include such variables as ties with networks in the migrants’ place of origin, recent
         arrivals, women heads of household or single-parent households, and
         diversity-related factors such as race, disability, and sexual orientation or identity;
         and (iv) social services support for families in finding housing solutions and their
         subsequent maintenance/use starting at the stage of the temporary housing
         solutions.46
1.33     Component 2. Pilot project for the socially driven restoration of centrally
         located rundown buildings (Rental Subsidy for the Immigrant Population)
         (GRF: US$2,000,000). Financing will be provided for actions aimed at improving the
         quality of housing and access to public services for the immigrant population by


43   During the operation’s design stage, support was provided to the country to ensure that the remodeling plans
     met Edge climate-change certification requirements and incorporated gender and diversity elements such
     as breastfeeding rooms, playrooms for children, at least one gender-neutral bathroom (for LGBTQ+
     persons), universal-access infrastructure for persons with mobility disabilities, and signage appropriate for
     hearing- and sight-impaired persons. The welcome center will also have areas for future activities for
     members of both the host community and immigrants, such as courses on starting a business and finding a
     job, financial education courses, technology bootcamps, and other courses on job categories that are in high
     demand; some of these will focus on women and other diverse groups, with their exact nature to be
     determined depending on the demand for services.
                                                       - 14 -



         designing and launching a pilot project for providing rental subsidies to migrants,
         giving priority to socioeconomically vulnerable migrant households. The purpose of
         these subsidies will be to provide access to adequate rental housing in the private
         real estate market. The eligibility and prioritization criteria both for families and for
         housing units will be described in the program Operating Regulations47 and will
         include such factors as household income level, status as a single-parent
         household, and gender and diversity considerations. The criteria to be used in
         selecting housing units will include such factors as good access to urban services
         and location in areas not prone to flooding. Rental subsidies are to be provided for
         an 18-month period to approximately 264 households as a means of expediting their
         social and urban integration. Administrative records will be kept on the subsidies that
         cover gender identity, ethnicity, sex, disability status, and other factors.
1.34     Component 3. Institution-strengthening (GRF: US$850,000). This component
         seeks to strengthen the delivery of comprehensive services to immigrants by
         streamlining and facilitation processes and procedures. The emphasis will be on the
         creation of a single system for residency procedures48 to facilitate centralized access
         to information on the various steps involved such procedures. The Migrant Welcome
         Center will provide a physical location as a one-stop window to provide information
         and referrals for all the different government services and procedures relating to
         immigration and residency. Financing will be provided for: (i) the design and
         implementation of information and communication technology (ICT) systems used
         by the National Migration Bureau (DNM) of the Ministry of the Interior49 to process
         residency applications; (ii) office computer equipment;50 (iii) training in use of the new
         system and outreach materials, including specialized training on gender and
         diversity in the migrant context, to orient DNM public agents in terms of basic


44   Gender- and diversity-related services to be provided at the welcome center include: (i) advisory services
     concerning the procedures for changing a person’s name and sex as registered in administrative records;
     (ii) applications for the “Accesos” social and employment inclusion program, which includes affirmative
     action components (with quotas) for women, trans persons, and Afro-descendants; (iii) information on the
     Uruguay Social Card and how trans persons can apply for it; (iv) access to training for trans persons;
     (v) applications for reparation pensions for trans persons; (vi) guidance and referrals to services for victims
     of gender-based violence; (vii) contact information for the Sexual Diversity Department; (viii) Contact
     information for CRAm (an LGBT+-friendly psychological support service provided for under an agreement
     between MIDES and university psychology department); and (ix) contact information for the Public Policy
     for Afro-descendants Division.
45   The eligibility requirements for housing as stated in the Low-Income Housing Performance Standards and
     Requirements include: (i) environmental conditions; (ii) risk conditions; (iii) basic infrastructure; and
     (iv) topographic conditions.
46   The support to be provided to households will include assistance from teams of social workers under
     Components 1 and 2.
47   As in the case of temporary housing solutions, the criteria to be used will include single-parent households,
     family income levels, and membership in such groups as Afro-descendants, households whose members
     include persons with disabilities, and LGBTQ persons.
48   This new interoperable back-end single system for residency procedures will make it possible for the
     different agencies involved to align the criteria that they use and will provide a channel for strengthening
     them and providing them with training, especially with regard to regularization, entry, residency, and
     documentation procedures.
49   The systems will need to be designed in such a way as to permit the necessary coordination with the Ministry
     of Foreign Relations.
50   This computer hardware will have a high energy-efficiency rating.
                                                        - 15 -



         knowledge and the specific needs and challenges of women, Afro-descendants, and
         LGBTQ+ persons in the migration context, to combat discrimination, xenophobia,
         unconscious bias, and gender violence; and (iv) strengthening of the offices of the
         National Housing Bureau (DINAVI) for implementation of the subsidies.
1.35     Management, evaluation, and audit (Total: US$267,100. IDB: US$133,100;
         Counterpart funds: US$134,000). These funds will cover the cost of program
         audits and capacity-building of the program coordination unit (PCU) to administer
         the grant. They will also finance the evaluation of the various pilots and program
         management expenses.51
1.36     Beneficiaries. The target population will be migrants living in Montevideo. The
         program is expected to directly benefit approximately 430 migrants, 54% of whom
         are women. The program will also benefit the rest of the population of Montevideo
         because the welcome center will be a multicultural space offering programs intended
         to attract other residents of Montevideo and contribute to the integration
         phenomenon. The rental subsidy pilot project will also benefit the rest of the
         population because Uruguay currently has no rental subsidy program, so this pilot
         will provide a model for the design and development of such a program for the
         Uruguayan population.
C.       Key results indicators
1.37     Results. The expected outcomes are as follows: Components 1 and 3:
         (i) percentage of procedures available for the migrant population at the welcome
         center; and (ii) residency system improved and in operation. Component 2:
         (i) households that, after receiving the rental subsidy, access one of the housing
         policies of the Ministry of Housing and Land Management (MVOT) and/or other
         market solutions; and (ii) housing solutions52 located in Montevideo’s historic center
         as a % of total subsidies granted.
1.38     Economic viability. The economic assessment methodology has been selected for
         the ex ante economic evaluation of this program (optional link 1). The ultimate aim
         of all actions under the three program components is the urban integration of
         immigrant families. The migrant welcome center, the comprehensive services pilot
         model, as well as the temporary housing response, Rental Subsidy Fund, and the
         single system for residency procedures are all intended to expedite and improve the
         migrant population’s process of regularization and access to services for better
         socioeconomic integration.
1.39     The analysis, using a 12% discount rate and a 15-year evaluation horizon, yielded
         a positive net present value of US$399,000 on an investment of US$5,134,000
         (US$5,031,000 at economic cost) and an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
         15.8%. The sensitivity analysis indicates that there are nine key variables that do not
         reverse the conclusion in favor or the program, in negative and positive scenarios
         with variations of up to 20%, since the EIRR remains above the rate used for the


51   The Neighborhood Improvement Program has arranged for the United Nations Development Programme
     (UNDP) to manage some of the program’s contracts, and it is expected that the grant will be managed in
     the same manner.
52   The term “housing solution” is understood to refer to a rental housing unit located in the historic center or its
     area of influence in Montevideo.
                                                        - 16 -



          opportunity cost even in the negative scenarios, or very near it. However, there are
          three other variables that do not support the conclusion in favor or the program in
          the negative scenarios because they yield a lower EIRR, which indicates conditions
          in which the program benefits would not outweigh the opportunity costs of the funds
          used for these interventions. These variables are, in descending order of impact, the
          percentage of the amount borne by MIDES and MVOT for continuation of the pilots
          on temporary housing solutions and rental subsidy funds, the amount of the current
          cost for MIDES of the temporary housing solutions for migrants, and the number of
          migrants recently arriving in the country.

                             II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       The program is structured as an investment operation to be financed by an
          investment grant of US$5 million from the IDB Grant Facility (GRF) and a local
          counterpart contribution of US$134,000. The GRF financing will be drawn from the
          resources authorized for the support of countries with large and sudden intraregional
          migration inflows (per documents AB-3199 and GN-2947-6). The estimated costs
          for each component are shown in Table 1. The disbursement period will be
          18 months according to the flows in Table 2, under which the GRF funds will be
          disbursed simultaneously and proportionally with the loan proceeds of the
          Neighborhood Improvement Program (loan 4651/OC-UR).53




53    The project will be executed in 18 months (following the execution timetable for loan 4651/OC-UR), due to
      the following factors: (i) the country is already working on the bidding specifications for the work involved in
      remodeling the buildings and managing the Migrant Welcome Center; (ii) the rental subsidy component will
      not take long to implement because it will be carried out by means of bank transfers; and (iii) contracting will
      be conducted by a management firm already working on loan 4651/OC-UR, thereby making it possible to
      meet the contracting deadlines established in Annex III.
                                                     - 17 -



                                    Table 1. Estimated program costs (US$)

                Subcomponents/Categories           Total budget         IDB (GRF)       Counterpart
                Component 1                              2,016,900        2,016,900
                Component 2                              2,000,000        2,000,000
                Component 3                               850,000          850,000
                Administration, total                     267,100          133,100            134,000
                Total                                    5,134,000        5,000,000           134,000

                                     Table 2. Disbursement flows (US$)

                                          Year 1               Year 2                 Total
                   IDB (GRF)              3,595,533             1,404,467             5,000,000
                   Counterpart              109,360                  24,640           5,134,000
                   Percentage (%)                   72                   28                   100


2.2       Eligibility. In accordance with document GN-2947-6 (paragraph 4.4), the operation
          is eligible for GRF financing via a supplementary investment grant when: (i) there
          are components of the operation whose original scope can be scaled up in order to
          directly benefit migrants living in overcrowded conditions in informal settlements in
          Montevideo; (ii) the operation meets all eligibility criteria (see paragraph 2.5 and
          optional link 3); and (iii) not more than 30% of the original loan amount has been
          disbursed.
2.3       Additionality of the grant funds. The unprecedented migrant flows present
          Latin America and the Caribbean with a novel challenge and could have adverse
          effects on host communities, if not dealt with appropriately. Responding to these
          exceptional circumstances, the IDB Board of Governors approved the use of up to
          US$100 million in Ordinary Capital resources, through the IDB Grant Facility to
          Support Countries with Large and Sudden Intraregional Migration Inflows
          (documents GN-2947-6 and AB-3199). The use of this facility is intended to help
          countries to design appropriate actions for migrants and their host communities to
          access to basic and social services, and to provide economic opportunities
          benefitting both groups, to promote inclusive development and foster a positive
          relationship.
2.4       Fulfillment of migration GRF eligibility criteria and partial waiver of Criterion 1.
          The results of an analysis of the eligibility criteria established in the Operational
          Guidelines for the Use of Resources from the IDB Grant Facility to Support Countries
          with Large and Sudden Intraregional Migration Inflows (document GN-2947-6) and
          of the need for a waiver of Criterion 1, to establish eligibility at a subnational level
          based on the impacts of the migration flows described in optional link 3 are
          summarized as follows: (i) Uruguay is not on the list of eligible countries, as defined
          in document GN-2947-1 and in paragraph 3.2 of the Operational Guidelines, but the
          21,673 immigrants (1.57% of the total population, well in excess of the 0.5%
          requirement)54 who arrived in the City of Montevideo (a subnational geographic area;


54    Optional link 3.
                                            - 18 -



      see paragraph 2.5) between 2016 and 2019 are compromising the response
      capacity of vulnerable subnational host communities; (ii) this is a rapid, massive
      inflow in which: (a) many of the immigrants are living in what are often overcrowded
      conditions (see paragraph 1.5) in boardinghouses (shared-use dwellings with
      common areas); and (b) the immigrants living in unregulated boardinghouses are
      the ones who are most likely to be so poor that they are obliged to live in informal
      settlements far from places of employment and bereft of social safety nets, which
      heightens their vulnerability; (iii) this operation is consistent with the thematic area
      of intervention of the migration facility described in subparagraph 3.16(iii) of
      document AB-3199 (GN-2947-1), as it will provide access to basic services and
      benefit both the migrant population and host communities; (iv) the potential
      beneficiary migrant population for the operation is composed of approximately
      430 vulnerable migrants, the overall migrant population, and, in particular,
      the women in that population, who account for 54% of recent migrants, in addition
      to the members of their host communities residing in informal settlements
      in Montevideo; and (v) the operation is included in Uruguay’s 2022 country
      programming document (UR-O1159, paragraph 1.31). A detailed account of the
      fulfillment of those criteria is provided in optional link 3.
2.5   Rationale for waiver of Criterion 1. Criterion 1 as set out in paragraph 4.4(i) of
      document AB-3199, IDB Grant Facility: Support to Countries with Large and Sudden
      Intraregional Migration Inflows, and in Section II.A of document GN-2947-6 is that:
      “the beneficiary country received a number of intraregional cross-border immigrants
      in the last three years equivalent to 0.5% of its total population.” The partial waiver
      of this criterion being sought so that a subnational unit may be deemed eligible, as
      provided for in paragraph 4.5 of document AB-3199, is necessary because the
      Eastern Republic of Uruguay as a country does not currently meet that requirement.
      The subnational unit covered by this operation is the City of Montevideo. This legally
      defined administrative area for program activities to be financed by GRF resources
      has received a migrant population three times as great as the 0.5% benchmark,
      which is jeopardizing the response capacity of vulnerable host communities (see
      paragraph 2.4), thereby meeting the requirements set out in paragraphs 2.4 to 2.6
      of document GN-2947-6. In 2021, a similar waiver was authorized by the Board of
      Executive Directors for the Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Program
      (ProWomen) (loan 5404/OC-UR and UR-J0002).
2.6   The possibility of using GRF funds to support countries with large and sudden
      intraregional migration inflows in operations at the subnational level is expressly
      provided for in document AB-3199 (paragraph 4.5) and document GN-2947-6 in the
      Operational Guidelines (paragraphs 2.4 to 2.6). Specifically, paragraph 4.5 of
      document AB-3199 states that the Board of Executive Directors “may approve a
      waiver for the eligibility criterion outlined in paragraph 4.4(i) if an operation presents
      data to support the impact of large and sudden intraregional migration flows in
      recipient communities at the subnational level. A clear justification of the waiver
      request, including an analysis of the migration and population data, must be included
      in every loan proposal.” The project team has reviewed and analyzed the data
      furnished by the Government of Uruguay at the time that the GRF resources were
      requested and has verified the fulfillment of the requirements established in
      document GN-2947-6 for a program focused on the City of Montevideo (optional
      link 3).
                                                    - 19 -



B.        Environmental and social safeguard risks
2.7       The social benefits of the original program associated with this operation
          (loan 4651/OC-UR) are positive and improve the living conditions of the residents of
          informal settlements and rundown areas.
2.8       The activities ultimately planned under this operation consist of small-scale civil
          works55 that do not involve structural elements of a building currently being used to
          store discarded furniture from various government offices. Consequently, it is not
          expected to have any negative environmental or associated social impacts and has
          therefore been reclassified as category “C.”
C.        Fiduciary risks
2.9       The fiduciary performance of the Ministry of Housing and Land Management
          (MVOT) in connection with loan contracts 2052/OC-UR, 3097/OC-UR, and
          4651/OC-UR has been good. The overall fiduciary risk level is low, given the fact
          that MVOT has an adequate organizational and administrative structure and
          sufficient fiduciary systems in place for execution of the operation. In the course of
          program preparation, a medium-high risk was detected in connection with: (i) the
          time required to process the payment of eligible expenditures owing to prior review
          actions by the Court of Auditors (TCR) and the Comptroller General’s Office (CGN);
          and (ii) the transfer system used by MVOT (the Temporary Housing Fund and Rental
          Subsidy Fund) and the time it takes the Ministry of Social Development (MIDES),
          the National Housing Bureau (DINAVI), and the National Migration Bureau (DNM)
          to provide fiduciary information to MVOT (a mitigation measure is identified in
          paragraph 3.7). The Bank will continue to implement its risk identification and
          management procedures during execution.
D.        Other risks
2.10      Additional risks identified include the following: (i) some of the program actions will
          entail coordinating work with various government agencies at the national level and
          subnational level (Department of Montevideo), especially in connection with the
          welcome center under Component 1. The work will also have to be coordinated with
          a number of different government ministries in order to arrange for the various
          services to be provided to the migrant population. This may lead to delays in the full
          operation of the welcome center; (ii) delays could arise in the conclusion of
          agreements with the agencies concerned, which could slow down the
          implementation of program activities; and (iii) if the Neighborhood Improvement
          Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) does not execute its resources as planned and on
          schedule, the requirement for pari passu disbursements may not be met. The Bank
          team will continue to implement risk identification and management procedures
          during execution.




55    The operation’s environmental and social impacts were originally classified as category “B” because the
      procurement plan provided for a wide range of construction works in boardinghouses occupied by
      socioeconomically vulnerable migrants, which would have required them to be temporarily relocated in
      other lodgings.
                                            - 20 -



2.11   To mitigate these risks, work will be done to raise awareness of the program with
       the various agencies that provide services to the migrant population in order to
       ensure their participation at the welcome center. To mitigate the second risk
       identified above, model agreements are being prepared and will soon be signed. To
       mitigate the third risk identified above, the contracting activity of the Neighborhood
       Improvement Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) is being monitored on a weekly basis.

                     III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.     Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1    The program executing agency will be the Ministry of Housing and Land
       Management (MVOT), which will execute the activities through the program
       coordination unit (PCU) of the Neighborhood Improvement Program
       (loan 4651/OC-UR). The PCU will be responsible for liaison with the Bank and for
       coordinating the necessary actions with the Ministry of Social Development
       (MIDES), the National Housing Bureau (DINAVI), and the National Migration Bureau
       (DNM) for the execution of Components 1, 2, and 3, respectively. PCU capacity will
       be strengthened for program execution with the contracting of a coordinator for
       migration-related matters. The PCU will also assume the same functions as under
       program 4651/OC-UR in relation to the grant resources.
3.2    For the execution of Component 1, MVOT will coordinate the following areas of work
       with MIDES: (i) the remodeling of the building that will house the welcome center, to
       be managed by MIDES; (ii) implementation of the temporary housing solutions; and
       (iii) social support services for the families. For Component 2, the PCU will
       coordinate with DINAVI, which reports to MOVT. DINAVI will be responsible for the
       technical aspects involved in the delivery of the subsidies, and specific measures
       will be adopted to strengthen its capacity for this purpose. Migrant families will be
       provided with assistance in the selection of housing solutions, which must meet
       certain requirements in terms of location, habitability conditions, and other criteria.
       For Component 3, MVOT will have the support of the DNM of the Ministry of the
       Interior. The DNM will coordinate with the Ministry of Foreign Relations and the e-
       Government and Information and Knowledge Society Agency (AGESIC). Detailed
       execution requirements will be incorporated into the program Operating Regulations.
       The PCU will be responsible for the meeting Bank fiduciary requirements. Any
       resource transfers will be covered in the relevant agreements as outlined in
       paragraph 3.5. The Operating Regulations will include the appropriate guidelines
       and will specify the supporting documentation required for the justification of
       advances of funds disbursed by the Bank.
3.3    Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the
       Operating Regulations of the Neighborhood Improvement Program
       (loan 4651/OC-UR), which will be updated to include this operation. The Operating
       Regulations establish guidelines and operational procedures regarding: (i) the
       structure of program execution and the responsibilities of the PCU; (ii) the
       responsibilities of other agencies and offices involved in its implementation;
       (iii) procedures for planning and programming the activities to be financed;
       (iv) technical management, financial administration, and procurement procedures
       and processes; and (v) operational instructions for monitoring and evaluation
       (included in optional link 2).
                                          - 21 -



3.4   Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the
      financing: (i) the program coordination unit (PCU) for the Neighborhood
      Improvement Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) has been designated as the
      execution unit for this operation, and a coordinator has been contracted for
      migration-related matters; and (ii) the program Operating Regulations for the
      Neighborhood Improvement Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) have been updated
      to incorporate the agreements on the execution of resources and the activities
      financed with the grant contribution funds.
3.5   Special contractual conditions of execution: (i) before work begins on
      remodeling the building for the welcome center under Component 1, MIDES and
      MVOT will sign an agreement establishing their responsibilities for the center’s
      management and maintenance and other matters; (ii) before funds are transferred
      to MIDES for the delivery of temporary housing solutions under Component 1,
      MVOT and MIDES will sign an agreement establishing their responsibilities and the
      mechanism for implementing those solutions; and (iii) before activities begin under
      Component 3, whose outputs are intended for the DNM of the Ministry of the Interior,
      MVOT and the Ministry of the Interior will sign an agreement establishing their roles
      and responsibilities for the implementation of those activities.
3.6   Procurement. Procurements financed in whole or part with grant funds will be
      conducted in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works
      Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-15) and
      the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the
      Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2350-15). Use of the country
      procurement system, as approved by the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors via
      resolution of 26 February 2020, is subject to the limitations set out in the approval
      document, the provisions established in Annex III to this document, and the
      procurement plan for this operation.
3.7   Disbursements and audits. The grant funds will be disbursed on a pari passu basis
      in accordance with fiduciary agreements and requirements similar to those applied
      to loan 4651/OC-UR, and with the requirements of documents AB-3199 and
      GN-2947-6. Disbursements will primarily in the form of advances of funds or other
      modality as specified in the Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed
      Projects (document OP-273-12). Advances of funds will be made in accordance with
      a financial plan covering the project’s actual liquidity needs for up to 12 months.
      Advances subsequent to the first will be processed when justification has been
      provided for at least 60% of the total cumulative balances pending justification. This
      is necessary because sufficient funds must be available to MVOT in the project bank
      account to contract new obligations. In addition, the processing of payments calls
      for prior review by the Court of Auditors (TCR) and the Comptroller General’s Office
      (CGN). This is also required for the system used by MVOT to make transfers to the
      relevant technical offices. MVOT will use the National Single Account (CUN) to
      manage the funds. MVOT will deliver final audited financial statements under the
      terms and on the dates required by Bank policies. The financial statements may be
      audited by an independent auditing firm or by the TCR.
                                            - 22 -



3.8    Direct contracting. The coordinator for the Migration Unit is expected to be
       contracted directly for a total sum of US$57,600 under the terms of paragraph 5.4(d)
       of document GN-2350-15. The auditing firm engaged to audit loan 4651/OC-UR by
       means of a competitive process is also expected to audit this grant.
3.9    Advance procurement and retroactive financing. A total of US$370,000 in
       retroactive financing may be requested, divided into up to US$70,000 for consulting
       services for the design of the welcome center and up to US$300,000 to cover the
       expenditures involved in providing temporary housing solutions. These expenditures
       must have been made on or after 5 May 2021 but will not in any case include
       expenditures incurred more than 18 months before the grant approval date. (See
       document GN-2349-15, document GN-2350-15, and the Bank Policy on
       Recognition of Expenditures, Retroactive Financing, and Advance Procurement
       (document GN-2259-1)).
3.10   Maintenance. After the work involved in remodeling the welcome center has been
       completed, the borrower, acting through the executing agency, will ensure that the
       works and equipment financed by the program are satisfactorily maintained in
       accordance with generally accepted technical standards. The borrower, acting
       through the executing agency, must develop an annual maintenance plan and
       deliver an annual maintenance report to the Bank on the status of the program works
       and equipment in the first quarter of each calendar year, starting in the year that the
       first construction project financed by the program is completed and continuing on
       until the year after the disbursement period has ended.
B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.11   The executing agency and the Bank have agreed to monitor program execution
       closely in order to track progress, using a results matrix, program execution plan,
       annual work plans, and six-monthly performance monitoring reports. To facilitate
       monitoring, the Housing and Urban Development Division (CSD/HUD) and/or the
       Migration Unit (SCL/MIG), in cooperation with the IDB Country Office in Uruguay,
       will, insofar as possible, make periodic field visits and meet with the work team to
       discuss needs as identified in those reports. A project completion report will be
       prepared at the end of program execution. The monitoring and evaluation plan
       (required link 2) describes the monitoring activities to be conducted. Financing for
       the evaluation is included in the program budget.
                                                                                                                                                                              Annex I - UR-J0001
                                                                                                                                                                                      Page 1 of 1




                                                                            Development Effectiveness Matrix
                                                                                      Summary              UR-J0001
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Strategic Priorities and CRF Indicators
                                                                                                   -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                   -Economic Integration
                                                                                                   -Gender Equality and Diversity
   Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Issues
                                                                                                   -Climate Change
                                                                                                   -Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law



                                                                                                   -Households with improved access to water and sanitation (#)
                                                                                                   -Households with improved access to energy services (#)
                                                                                                   -Beneficiaries of initiatives that support migrants and their host communities (#)
   CRF Level 2 Indicators: IDB Group Contributions to Development Results                          -Targeted beneficiaries of public services that have been adapted for diverse groups (#)
                                                                                                   -Beneficiaries of enhanced disaster and climate change resilience (#)
                                                                                                   -Agencies with strengthened digital technology and managerial capacity (#)



2. Country Development Objectives

                                                                                                                              Priority area of equity and social inclusion and the strategic
   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                         GN-3056
                                                                                                                              objective of facilitate urban services and housing.



   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                          GN-3087            The intervention is included in the 2022 Operational Program.


   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
   strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                                 Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                          9.2
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                       2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                                     3.2
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                                  3.5
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                                     7.5
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                              1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                            3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                                  0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                                    2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                         1.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                     9.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                                   4.0
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                         5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                        Medium Low
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                     C
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                              Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and
                                                                                                                              Reporting, External Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                    Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)              Yes
                                                                                                                              Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison,
                                                                                                                              Contracting Individual Consultant, National Public Bidding.



                                                                                   Non-Fiduciary              Yes             Strategic Planning National System.


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                              Yes                                            0
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




Evaluability Assessment Note: The proposal presents an operation for a total of US$5,134,000 to be financed through a Non-Reimbursable Fund (GRF) in the amount of
US$5,000,000. This operation is associated with the "Neighborhood Improvement Program III (PMB III) (UR-L1146)". The specific objectives of this operation will be : (i) foster urban
integration by providing formal basic infrastructure and adequate social and urban services, while guaranteeing secure property tenure and enhancing social capital, taking climate
change issues into account; and (ii) provide affordable housing to low-income population groups, while restoring rundown urban spaces in Montevideo’s historic downtown area. The
achievement of these objectives will contribute to the General Objective of complementing the scope of the PMB III (UR-L1146), linking the vulnerable immigrant population and its
host community.

The proposal presents an adequate diagnosis of the problem. Specifically, the main problem identified is the increase in barriers to access to decent housing, particularly among the
migrant population. The proposed solutions are appropriate to respond to the identified problem and its contributing factors, and are related to the General Objective. The results
matrix is congruent with the vertical logic of the project and includes appropriate indicators at the outcome level associated with several of the Specific Objectives' attributes and the
General Objective. The result indicators are correctly defined to measure the achievements attained by the program and the contribution to the fulfillment of its specific objectives,
while the strategic alignment with cross-cutting themes is reflected in output and result indicators.

The proposal presents a cost-benefit analysis for the two projects that make up the program. The IRR for the program interventions is 15.8%. Given that the reference rate is 12%, the
aggregate analysis suggests that the project is socioeconomically viable. The methodology for monetizing the benefits consists of valuing the effects of access to housing on human
capital, mainly on health and education.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is in line with Bank standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured following two approaches:
an ex-post cost-benefit analysis approach and a before-after comparison to verify the achievement of goals. These analyses are planned to use the information from the external
verification of results.
                                                                                                                                                                                         Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 7




                                                                                       RESULTS MATRIX


    Project objective:      The general objective of this operation is to expand the scope of the Neighborhood Improvement Program (loan 4651/OC-UR) by bringing the vulnerable
                            immigrant population and its host communities closer together. Its specific objectives are to: (i) foster urban integration by providing formal basic infrastructure
                            and adequate social and urban services, while guaranteeing secure property tenure and enhancing social capital, taking climate change issues into account;
                            and (ii) provide affordable housing to the low-income population groups, while restoring rundown urban spaces in Montevideo’s historic downtown area.1


                                                                                SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

                                                                Base-        Base-
                                                                                                                     End of              Means of
               Indicators                Unit of measure         line         line       Year 1        Year 2                                                              Comments
                                                                                                                     project            verification
                                                                value        year
    Specific development objective 1. To foster urban integration by providing formal basic infrastructure and adequate social and urban services, while guaranteeing secure property
    tenure and enhancing social capital, taking climate change issues into account.
    Procedures2 available for the                %                 0         2022         50%           80%           80%3         (*) Six-monthly           There are 42 different procedures for
    migrant population at the                                                                                                      reports indicating the    social programs processed by the
    welcome center                                                                                                                 volume of services        Ministry of Social Development
                                                                                                                                   provided at the           (MIDES) using the ATC-SMART
                                                                                                                                   welcome center            system, which will be made available
                                                                                                                                                             at the welcome center.




1      Paragraph 4.2 of the Operational Guidelines for the Use of Resources from the IDB Grant Facility to Support Countries with Large and Sudden Intraregional Migration Inflows
       states: “… In order to ensure that the migration component or operations financed through loans and a grant with GRF resources follow a common vertical logic and to facilitate
       the pari passu disbursement, a single results matrix will be used for the loan and the associated grant. For both, the loan and the GRF grant, the progress monitoring report
       (PMR) will use the performance methodology applicable to the corresponding lending instrument and modality of the loan, as stated in document OP-1072-5.” The indicators
       have been designed on the basis of the existing execution period for loan 4651/OC UR on the understanding that, for the time being, no extension has been granted and that
       this is a matter that will be considered during the next portfolio review to be undertaken with the country. The indicators for this matrix focus on this grant. The rest of the indicators
       are being captured by operation 4651/OC UR.
2      The expression “available applications and other procedures” is understood to refer to systems that are in operation and/or staff members assigned by the Government of
       Uruguay to process applications or carry out other procedures using the corresponding protocols.
3      In the medium term, these 42 application procedures will be available at the welcome center but, given that the execution period is 18 months in duration, a more conservative
       target has been set.
Annex II
Page 2 of 7


                                                             Base-       Base-
                                                                                                                End of              Means of
              Indicators               Unit of measure        line        line       Year 1       Year 2                                                           Comments
                                                                                                                project            verification
                                                             value       year
    Procedures available for the                                                                                 80%5        (*)                     (**) In addition to access to the above
    migrant population with a                                                                                                                        procedures, there are another nine
    gender and diversity lens4                                                                                                                       services dealing with gender and
                                                                                                                                                     diversity groups that will be offered at
                                                                                                                                                     the center.6 Additional vulnerability
                                                                                                                                                     gaps faced by women migrants and
                                                                                                                                                     migrants belonging to diverse groups
                                                                                                                                                     are associated with additional
                                                                                                                                                     constraints that interfere with their
                                                                                                                                                     social and urban integration, such as
                                                                                                                                                     their caregiving responsibilities,
                                                                                                                                                     greater difficulty in entering the labor
                                                                                                                                                     market, and a disconnect between
                                                                                                                                                     self-perceived gender and the sex
                                                                                                                                                     identity listed on identity documents.
                                        % of procedures         0         2022
                                          for women
                                        % of procedures         0         2022                                               (*)                     (**)
                                           for Afro-
                                         descendants
                                        % of procedures         0         2022                                               (*)                     (**)
                                         for LGBTQ+
                                            persons




4      This indicator is disaggregated so that administrative records can be disaggregated by type of population group.
5      The total number of applications and other procedures will not be reached because people who start the process of applying for some of the social housing solutions offered by
       the Ministry of Housing and Land Management (MVOT).
6      Gender- and diversity related services to be provided at the welcome center include: (i) advisory services concerning the procedures for changing a person’s name and sex as
       registered in administrative records; (ii) applications for the “Accesos” social and employment inclusion program, which includes affirmative action components (with quotas) for
       women, trans persons, and Afro-descendants; (iii) information on the Uruguay Social Card and how trans persons can apply for it; (iv) access to training for trans persons;
       (v) applications for reparation pensions for trans persons; (vi) guidance and referrals to services for victims of gender-based violence; (vii) contact information for the Sexual
       Diversity Department; (viii) Contact information for CRAm (an LGBT+-friendly psychological support service provided for under an agreement between MIDES and university
       psychology department); and (ix) contact information for the Public Policy for Afro-descendants Division.
                                                                                                                                                                             Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 7


                                                            Base-       Base-
                                                                                                              End of             Means of
              Indicators               Unit of measure       line        line       Year 1      Year 2                                                          Comments
                                                                                                              project           verification
                                                            value       year
    Residency system improved                  0               0         2022          1                         1         Most recent six-
    and in operation7                                                                                                      monthly report,
                                                                                                                           including verification
                                                                                                                           that the system is in
                                                                                                                           operation
    Specific development objective 2. To provide affordable housing to the low-income population groups, while restoring rundown urban spaces in Montevideo’s historic downtown
    area.
    Households that, after receiving   % of households         0         2022          0          30%           30%        Analysis of a
    the rental subsidy, access one                                                                                         representative
    of the MVOT housing policies                                                                                           sample of
    and/or other market solutions8                                                                                         beneficiary migrant
                                                                                                                           households residing
    Households that, after receiving   % of households         0         2022          0          10%           10%        in individual
    the rental subsidy, access one       headed by                                                                         dwellings as a % of
    of the MVOT housing policies           women                                                                           total households that
    and/or other market solutions                                                                                          applied for housing
                                                                                                                           assistance
    Housing solutions9 located in       % of subsidies         0         2022        20%                        20%        Six-monthly reports
    Montevideo’s historic center as                                                                                        indicating the
    a % of total subsidies granted                                                                                         number of housing
                                                                                                                           solutions in the
                                                                                                                           historic center as a
                                                                                                                           % of total housing
                                                                                                                           solutions




7      This refers to the launch of the DNM’s back-end system for processing residency visas.
8      Given the grant’s short disbursement period, access to market-based solutions is understood to be situations in which people have begun the process of applying for the housing
       solutions offered by programs run by MVOT or for other available options.
9
       A “housing solution” is understood to be a rental housing unit located in the historic center or its area of influence in Montevideo.
Annex II
Page 4 of 7



                                                                    OUTCOME INDICATORS (PHYSICAL)

                                  Unit of     Baseline   Baseline                          End of
         Indicators                                                 Year 1     Year 2                   Means of verification                    Comments
                                 measure       value       year                            project
Component 1
The welcome center is fully       Number         0        2022        1          0            1      Final works report and the      “Fully operational” means that all
operational, and its design                                                                          report of the external          the physical alterations have been
incorporates criteria for                                                                            consultant contracted by the    performed and all the services
mitigating climate change                                                                            Bank to review climate          provided for in the design and
impacts and gender and                                                                               change and gender-related       programming for the repurposed
diversity considerations                                                                             considerations along with the   welcome center are available.
                                                                                                     services provided at the
                                                                                                     welcome center
The service delivery              Number         0        2022        1          0            1      Final consultant report         “Management model” refers to all
management model for the                                                                             approved by the executing       the various mechanisms involved in
migrant population has been                                                                          agency, along with the          the governance, operational
designed, including                                                                                  migrant service management      financing, and protocols for
administrative record-keeping                                                                        model                           services to be offered sustainably
on the population served,                                                                                                            at the welcome center. The
taking gender, disability                                                                                                            different fields to be filled in the
status, race, and gender                                                                                                             administrative records will make it
identity into account                                                                                                                possible to generate a report on the
                                                                                                                                     population served that covers
                                                                                                                                     various gender and diversity factors
                                                                                                                                     that will serve as input for
                                                                                                                                     subsequent public policies.
Temporary housing solutions        Persons       0        2022       72         143                  SMART system report             Temporary subsidies granted for
for the vulnerable migrant        receiving                                                          validated by MIDES with         the vulnerable migrant population
population granted in areas      temporary                                                           temporary subsidies granted     means temporary lodging for the
subject to low climate-related     housing                                                           for the vulnerable migrant      vulnerable population served by the
risks                             solutions                                                          population                      MIDES.
                                                                                             430
                                   Women         0        2022       72         143
                                  receiving
                                 temporary
                                   housing
                                  solutions
                                                                                                                                                                          Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 7


                                   Unit of     Baseline     Baseline                               End of
         Indicators                                                      Year 1       Year 2                        Means of verification                   Comments
                                  measure       value         year                                 project
Support for households           Households        0          2022         430         430           430        Consultant report approved
accessing the housing             supported                                                                     by the executing agency,
subsidy10                                                                                                       indicating the number of
                                                                                                                instances in which support
                                                                                                                has been provided
Component 2
Months of rent subsidized in      Months           0          2022        3,173       1,586         4,759       Consultant report approved
areas of low climate risk11                                                                                     by the executing agency,
                                                                                                                indicating the number of
                                                                                                                subsidies granted
Component 3
Design of the DNM                 Number           0          2022          1            0            1         Final consultant report
information system for                                                                                          approved by the executing
processing residencies                                                                                          agency
Residency granting offices        Number           0          2022          1            1            1         Six-monthly report with a
equipped                                                                                                        sample of equipped offices
Personnel trained in use of       Number           0          2022          80          20           100        Partial and final training
the new system                                                                                                  reports
Specialized gender and            Number           0          2022          80          20           100        Final consultant report         The purpose is to orient DNM
diversity training for the DNM                                                                                  approved by the executing       public agents in terms of basic
                                                                                                                agency                          knowledge and the specific needs
                                                                                                                                                and challenges of women, Afro-
                                                                                                                                                descendants, and LGBTQ+
                                                                                                                                                persons in the migration context, to
                                                                                                                                                combat discrimination, xenophobia,
                                                                                                                                                unconscious bias, and gender
                                                                                                                                                violence.
DINAVI offices strengthened       Number           0          2022          1            1            1         Final consultant report
                                                                                                                approved by the executing
                                                                                                                agency



10   Support for these households will be provided by teams of social workers under Components1 and 2.
11
     The average amount of the subsidy will be US$420 per month. Housing solutions will be located in low-risk areas in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.
Annex II
Page 6 of 7


                                                                     OUTCOME INDICATORS (FINANCIAL) (US$)

                                     Unit of        Baseline     Baseline                                   End of          Means of
          Indicators                                                           Year 1       Year 2                                            Comments
                                    measure          value         year                                     project        verification
Component 1
The welcome center is fully          Number             0          2022       664,600          -            664,600     Six-monthly project
operational, and its design                                                                                             performance
incorporates criteria for                                                                                               monitoring reports
mitigating climate change
impacts and gender and
diversity considerations
The service delivery model for       Number             0          2022       342,667      171,333          514,000     Six-monthly project
the migrant population has been                                                                                         performance
designed                                                                                                                monitoring reports
Temporary housing solutions for       Persons           0          2022        69,000      138,000          414,000     Six-monthly project
the vulnerable migrant               receiving                                                                          performance
population granted in areas         temporary                                                                           monitoring reports
subject to low climate-related        housing
risks                                solutions
                                    Women or            0          2022        69,000      138,000
                                  diverse groups
                                      receiving
                                     temporary
                                       housing
                                      solutions
Support for households             Households           0          2022       282,867      141,433          424,300     Six-monthly project
accessing the housing subsidy12     supported                                                                           performance
                                                                                                                        monitoring reports
Component 2
Months of rent subsidized in         Months             0          2022       1,333,333    666,667          2,000,000   Six-monthly project
areas of low climate risk13                                                                                             performance
                                                                                                                        monitoring reports




12   Support for these households will be provided by teams of social workers under Components1 and 2.
13
     See footnote 11.
                                                                                                                                   Annex II
                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 7


                                   Unit of   Baseline   Baseline                      End of        Means of
             Indicators                                            Year 1    Year 2                                   Comments
                                  measure     value       year                        project      verification
Component 3
Design of the DNM information     Number        0        2022      497,000     -      497,000   Six-monthly project
system for processing                                                                           performance
residencies                                                                                     monitoring reports
Residency granting offices        Number        0        2022      128,000     -      128,000   Six-monthly project
equipped                                                                                        performance
                                                                                                monitoring reports
Personnel trained in use of the   Number        0        2022      35,000    30,000   65,000    Six-monthly project
new system                                                                                      performance
                                                                                                monitoring reports
Specialized gender and            Number        0        2022       5,000    5,000    10,000    Six-monthly project
diversity training for the DNM                                                                  performance
                                                                                                monitoring reports
DINAVI offices strengthened       Number        0        2022      100,000   50,000   150,000   Six-monthly project
                                                                                                performance
                                                                                                monitoring reports



                                   Unit of   Baseline   Baseline                      End of        Means of
             Indicators                                            Year 1    Year 2                                   Comments
                                  measure     value       year                        project      verification
MIG coordinator                                                    59,067    34,033   93,100    Six-monthly project
                                                                                                performance
                                                                                                monitoring reports
Auditing                                                                     4,500     4,500    Six-monthly project
                                                                                                performance
                                                                                                monitoring reports
Evaluation                                                                   40,000   40,000    Six-monthly project
                                                                                                performance
                                                                                                monitoring reports
Other                                                              106,360   23,140   129,500   Six-monthly project
                                                                                                performance
                                                                                                monitoring reports
                                                                                                  Annex III
                                                                                                Page 1 of 7



     Country: Uruguay             Division: HUD         Operation number: UR-J0001            Year: 2022


                              FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Executing agency:           Ministry of Housing and Land Management (MVOT)
Operation name:             Support Program for the Socio-Urban Integration of the Migrant Population

                             I.    FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1. Use of the country system in the operation.1

     Budget                 Reports                  Information system        National competitive
                                                                                   bidding (NCB)

     Cash flow              Internal audit           Price comparison          Other

     Accounting             External oversight       Individual consultants    Other


2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

     Special features of                The executing agency is the Ministry of Housing and Land
       fiduciary execution                Management (MVOT), which has fiduciary responsibility for the
                                          operation. The Ministry of Social Development (MIDES), the
                                          National Housing Bureau (DINAVI), and the National Migration
                                          Bureau (DNM) will have technical responsibility for execution of
                                          the components. Agreements for transfer of the proceeds of the
                                          financing (Temporary Housing Fund and Rental Subsidy Fund)
                                          will be signed in accordance with the fiduciary guidelines
                                          established in the program Operating Regulations.


3. Fiduciary capacity

    Fiduciary capacity of         The operation has a waiver of the ICAS requirement. The grant
    the executing agency          supplements the third individual operation (loan 4651/OC-UR), now in
                                  execution, under the conditional credit line for investment projects
                                  (CCLIP) for the Neighborhood Improvement Program (UR-X1003) and
                                  has the same executing agency. MVOT previously executed
                                  loan 2052/OC-UR (closed) and loan 3097/OC-UR (closure in process).
                                  The fiduciary performance of all the operations has been good. The
                                  overall fiduciary risk level is low, given the fact that MVOT has an
                                  adequate organizational and administrative structure and sufficient
                                  fiduciary systems in place for execution of the operation. The fiduciary
                                  agreements and requirements established for this program are based on
                                  MVOT’s track record as an executing agency.



1    Any system or subsystem that is subsequently approved may be used in the operation in accordance with
     the terms of its validation by the Bank
Annex III
Page 2 of 7


4. Fiduciary risks and risk response

      Risk
                                 Risk                 Risk level             Risk response
   taxonomy

 Planning           If the response times of the      Medium-      Considering recent experiences
                    Comptroller General’s Office       High        with loan contracts 3097/OC-UR
                    (CGN) and the Court of                         and 4651/OC-UR, greater flexibility
                    Auditors (TCR) are longer                      is proposed for the justification
                    than ONE month, it will not be                 percentage of cumulative balances
                    possible to make the planned                   of advances for this operation. As
                    payments according to the                      an additional measure, MVOT
                    financial planning, making it                  should consider the work of the
                    impossible to provide the                      CGN, TCR, MIDES, DINAVI, and
                    Bank with justification of                     the DNM in planning program
                    payments of balances of                        payments.
                    advances in a timely manner.
                    A similar situation would arise
                    with regard to the transfers by
                    MVOT, if MIDES, DINAVI, and
                    the DNM take longer to deliver
                    fiduciary information to MVOT.


5. Applicable policies and guidelines: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed
   by the IDB (document GN-2349-15), Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants
   Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-15), and the policies of the country procurement
   system in the cases identified in the procurement plan, in accordance with the approved terms
   and conditions for use of the country procurement system. For financial management, the
   Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-12) or current
   version.
6. Exceptions to policies and guidelines: None.


              II.    CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE AGREEMENT


 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement:

 Exchange rate: For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties agree that
 the exchange rate to be used will be the rate stipulated in Article 4.10(b)(ii). For such purpose, the
 agreed exchange rate will be the exchange rate in effect on the date when the borrower, the
 executing agency, or any other person or corporation with delegated authority to incur expenditures
 makes the respective payments to the contractor, vendor, or beneficiary.

 Audits: The final audited financial statements for the program will be delivered within 120 days after
 the date of the last disbursement, or as extended, if prepared by an independent audit firm
 acceptable to the Bank, or within 180 days after the date of the last disbursement, or as extended,
 if prepared by Court of Auditors (TCR) of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay.

 [Other]:
                                                                                            Annex III
                                                                                          Page 3 of 7


            III. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION


   Bidding documents         For procurements of works, goods, and nonconsulting services in
                              accordance       with    the    Bank’s      procurement       policies
                              (document GN-2349-15) subject to international competitive
                              bidding (ICB), the Bank’s standard bidding documents will be used
                              in accordance with its procurement policies. For procurements
                              subject to national competitive bidding (NCB), the documents
                              agreed upon by the executing agency and the Bank for a particular
                              procurement will be used. The selection and contracting of
                              consulting services will be conducted in accordance with the
                              consultant selection policies (document GN-2350-15). The
                              standard request for proposals issued by the Bank or another
                              document agreed upon by the executing agency and the Bank
                              for a particular selection process will be used in the case of
                              processes subject to ICB. If it is appropriate and meets business
                              needs, consideration may be given to the use of a procurement
                              document agreed upon by the relevant national authority and the
                              Bank in particular cases identified in the procurement plan. The
                              review of technical specifications and the terms of reference for
                              procurements during the preparation of selection processes will be
                              the responsibility of the project’s sector specialist. This technical
                              review may be ex ante and is independent of the procurement
                              review method.

   Use of country            MVOT is an agency under Article 2 of the Consolidated Accounting
    systems                   and Financial Administration Code, so in accordance with the
                              approval granted by the Board of Executive Directors of the Bank
                              on 26 February 2020, MVOT may use the country procurement
                              system for the processes designated in the operation’s
                              procurement plan. If the Board broadens the scope of its approval
                              for use of the country system, the expanded scope will be
                              applicable to this operation.

   Contracting and single-   The following single-source selection process is expected to be
    source selection          included in the procurement plan: (i) single-source selection of the
                              general coordinator of the PCU for a total of US$57,600 for the
                              entire execution period for this operation under Section 5.4(d) of
                              document GN-2350-15. Any technical, economic, or other
                              modification of any kind will be subject to the Bank’s ex ante
                              supervision.

   Advance procurement       The selection process for remodeling of the building to house the
    and retroactive           migrant welcome center will be conducted in advance under
    financing                 paragraph 1.11 of document GN-2349-15. During the operation’s
                              design phase, it was agreed that the contract resulting from this
                              bidding process will commence when the operation is declared
                              eligible. Additionally, a total of US$370,000 in retroactive financing
                              may be requested, divided into up to US$70,000 for consulting
                              services for the design of the welcome center and up to
Annex III
Page 4 of 7


                          US$300,000 to cover the expenditures involved in providing
                          temporary housing solutions. These expenditures must have been
                          made on or after 5 May 2021 but will not in any case include
                          expenditures incurred more than 18 months before the grant
                          approval date. (See document GN-2349-15, document GN-2350-
                          15, and the Bank Policy on Recognition of Expenditures,
                          Retroactive Financing, and Advance Procurement (document
                          GN-2259-1)).

     Procurement         The supervision method will be ex post, except in cases where
      supervision         ex ante supervision is justified. For procurements executed using
                          the country system, the country’s supervisory system will be used
                          for supervision. The [(i) ex ante, (ii) ex post, or (iii) country system]
                          supervision method will be determined for each selection process
                          in accordance with the procurement plan for the operation, which
                          will be updated in line with the program document and Bank
                          procurement policies. Ex post reviews will be carried out each year
                          in accordance with the project supervision plan, subject to change
                          during execution. The inspection will verify the existence of the
                          procurements, leaving verification of quality and compliance with
                          specifications to the sector specialist. The thresholds for ex post
                          review are as follows:


                            Executing                                               Consulting
                                                Works          Goods/Services
                             agency                                                  services
                             MVOT           US$5,000,000        US$500,000         US$200,000


     Records and files   The agreed formats and procedures described in the program
                          Operating Regulations and in accordance with the relevant policy
                          requirements will be used for the preparation and filing of project
                          reports.
                                                                                       Annex III
                                                                                     Page 5 of 7


Main procurements

                                                           New                     Estimated
                                         Selection                    Estimated
      Procurement description                           procedures/                 amount
                                          method                        date
                                                           tools                  (US$000s)

 Goods

 Computer hardware                         NCB                        Q2 2023      128,000

 Works

 Remodeling and infrastructure
 improvements for the migrant              NCB                        Q1 2023      646,950
 welcome center

 Nonconsulting services

 Firms

 Development, hosting, and             Quality- and
 maintenance of computer system        cost-based
                                                                      Q2 2023      387,000
 for processing residency               selection
 applications                           (QCBS)

 Individuals

 PCU coordinator                      Single-source
                                       selection of
                                                                      Q1 2023      57,600
                                        individual
                                       consultants

 Specialized team. Nine consultants    Selection of
 to design and implement the            individual
 comprehensive service model            consultant                    Q1 2023      428,600
                                          (open
                                        invitation)

 Specialized technical team. Nine      Selection of
 consultants for temporary housing      individual
 response                               consultant                    Q1 2023      424,300
                                          (open
                                        invitation)

 To access the 18-month procurement plan, click here.
Annex III
Page 6 of 7


               IV. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT


     Programming      The Integrated Financial Information System (SIIF) will be used to
      and budget       manage the program budget, which is part of the draft consolidated
                       national budget and approved in the Budget Act for the five-year term of
                       the government. Reprogrammings and any increases in the budget are
                       prepared by the executive branch annually when it submits the annual
                       budget execution accountability report and statement. Within six months
                       after the end of the budget exercise, the executive branch submits those
                       reports to the legislature, at which time it may propose modifications on
                       justified grounds. MVOT must therefore meet the deadlines set by the
                       Ministry of Economy and Finance as approver in the process of
                       incorporating the project budget into the national budget, and in the
                       process of making modifications to the project budget involving increases
                       in the credits allocated by law to MVOT. (Increases in the budget from
                       MVOT’s own resources do not require approval from the Ministry of
                       Economy and Finance.)

     Cash flow and    The grant funds will be disbursed on a pari passu basis in accordance
      disbursements    with fiduciary agreements and requirements similar to those applied to
                       loan 4651/OC UR, and with the requirements of documents AB-3199 and
                       GN-2947-6. The grant funds will be managed through the National Single
                       Account (CUN), for which the National Treasury will, at MVOT’s request,
                       set up a special account in the Central Bank of Uruguay (BCU) for the
                       deposit of the Bank resources, and a specific bank account for the project
                       at the State-owned commercial bank Banco de la República Oriental del
                       Uruguay (BROU) for the program to make payments. The currency to be
                       used for this operation is U.S. dollars, and the exchange rate to be used
                       is identified in Section II. Disbursement requests will be processed via the
                       Online Disbursement system (or current system). The preferred
                       disbursement modality will be advances of funds. The operation will
                       generally work with a 12-month financial plan using a justification
                       threshold of 60% of the cumulative balances pending justification for the
                       following reasons: (i) the central government entities of which MVOT is a
                       part must have funds in the BCU account to contract new obligations;
                       (ii) MVOT payment procedures call for prior review by the Court of
                       Auditors (TCR) and the Comptroller General’s Office (CGN), whose
                       response times are beyond MVOT’s control; and (iii) the execution
                       mechanism calls for transfer of the loan proceeds, which, while subject to
                       the fiduciary guidelines to be established in the program Operating
                       Regulations, will also be subject to the response times of MIDES, DINAVI,
                       and DNM (see document OP-273-12, Annex 1, paragraph 3.3, criteria (c)
                       and (d)).
                                                                                            Annex III
                                                                                          Page 7 of 7



   Accounting,        Accounts will be recorded in the Memory system, which is used by MVOT
    information        to record and report transactions for all the projects under its
    systems, and       responsibility. The SIIF country system will also be used to manage the
    reporting          budgetary credits approved for the project, since it is also used to allocate
                       and execute them. In processing project-related commitments and
                       payments, MVOT will follow the relevant procedures established by the
                       CGN and TCR. The program Operating Regulations with the documented
                       definition of workflows and internal controls will be used as a supplement
                       to the policies and guidelines applicable to the operation.

   Internal control   The country system will be used as a basis in accordance with the laws
    and external       and regulations now in force. In light of MVOT’s experience with
    audit              loan contracts 3097/OC-UR and loan 4651/OC-UR, the program
                       Operating Regulations will set out the applicable framework for financial
                       management in accordance with Bank guidelines and instructions, which
                       complement MVOT financial processes under the applicable local laws
                       and regulations.

   External control   External control will be exercised by a Bank-eligible independent audit
    and financial      firm, as has been done for loan contracts 3097/OC-UR (closure in
    reports            process) and 4651/OC-UR (now in execution). However, the TCR may
                       also audit the program. Project audits will be conducted in accordance
                       with terms of reference previously agreed upon with the Bank. The cutoff
                       dates and delivery deadlines are identified in Section II. The additional
                       time for the TCR is based on the time required for its internal procedures
                       for approving audited financial statements before forwarding them to the
                       Bank, the executing agency, and the General Assembly. Pursuant to the
                       Consolidated Accounting and Financial Administration Code, the TCR
                       must conduct prior review all expenditures related to execution of the
                       operation.

   Financial          The supervision plan may be adjusted on the basis of program execution
    supervision plan   and external audit reports. The following activities are planned: monitoring
                       of program progress and instruments, review of disbursement requests,
                       and in-person or virtual visits to MVOT.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                              PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/22



                    Uruguay. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-UR to the
                    Eastern Republic of Uruguay. Support Program for the
                      Socio-urban Integration of the Migrant Population


       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility, hereinafter
referred to as the “Account”, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary with
the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, as beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable
financing to cooperate in the execution of the Support Program for the Socio-urban Integration of
the Migrant Population. Such nonreimbursable investment financing will be for an amount of up
to US$5,000,000, which form part of the Account, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial
Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the
Nonreimbursable Financing Proposal.



                                  (Adopted on __ ______ 2022)


LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1028536987-12378
UR-J0001
