                                                      Safeguard Screening Form


Operation Information
Operation
BR-L1497 Vitória Urban Development and Citizen Security Program (Phase One of the Sustainable
            Vitória Action Plan)
Environmental and Social Impact Category            High Risk Rating
B
Country                                             Executing Agency
BRAZIL                                              BR-PMVITORIA - Prefeitura Municipal de
                                                    Vitoria)
Organizational Unit                                 IDB Sector/Subsector
Env, Rural Dev & Disaster Risk                      URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING
Team Leader                                         ESG Primary Team Member
 MICHAEL G. DONOVAN                                  LIDIA MARCELINO REBOUCAS
Type of Operation                                   Original IDB Amount       % Disbursed
Loan Operation                                      $100,000,000              0.000 %
Assessment Date                                     Author
9 May 2018                                          LIDIAMA ESG Primary Team Member
Operation Cycle Stage                               Completion Date
ERM (Estimated)                                     17 Jan 2018
QRR (Estimated)                                     23 May 2018
Board Approval (Estimated)
Safeguard Performance Rating


Rationale




Operation Classification Summary
Overriden Rating                            Overriden Justification


Comments




Safeguard Screening Form                                                                        1
                                                       Safeguard Screening Form

Conditions / Recommendations
Category "B" operations require an environmental analysis (see Environment Policy Guideline:
Directive B.5 for Environmental Analysis requirements)

The Project Team must send to ESR the PP (or equivalent) containing the Environmental and
Social Strategy (the requirements for an ESS are described in the Environment Policy Guideline:
Directive B.3) as well as the Safeguard Policy Filter and Safeguard Screening Form Reports. These
operations will normally require an environmental and/or social impact analysis, according to, and
focusing on, the specific issues identified in the screening process, and an environmental and
social management plan (ESMP). However, these operations should also establish safeguard, or
monitoring requirements to address environmental and other risks (social, disaster, cultural, health
and safety etc.) where necessary.



Summary of Impacts / Risks and Potential Solutions
Moderate Greenhouse Gas Emissions are predicted.
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Assessment: The borrower should promote the reduction of project-
related greenhouse gas emissions in a manner appropriate to the nature and scale of project
operations and impacts. The borrower should quantify direct emissions from the facilities owned or
controlled within the physical project boundary and indirect emissions associated with the off-site
production of power used by the project. Quantification and monitoring of GHG emissions should be
conducted annually in accordance with internationally recognized methodologies (i.e. IPCC -
http://www.ipcc.ch/). In addition, the borrower should evaluate technically and financially feasible
and cost-effective options for the reduction/offset of emissions that may be achieved during the
design and operation of the project. The Sustainable Energy and Climate Change Initiative (SECCI)
can help with this task (http://www.iadb.org/secci/).

A natural hazard is likely to occur or be exacerbated due to climate-related changes and the likely
severity of the impacts to the project is moderate.
A Disaster Risk Assessment, that includes a Disaster Risk Management Plan (DRMP) may be
necessary, depending on the complexity of the project and in cases where the vulnerability of a
specific project component may compromise the whole operation. The DRMP should propose
measures to manage or mitigate these risks to an acceptable level. The measures should consider
both the risks to the project, and the potential for the project itself to exacerbate risks to people and
the environment during construction and operation. The measures should include risk reduction
(siting and engineering options), disaster risk preparedness and response (contingency planning,
etc.), as well as financial protection (risk transfer, retention) for the project. They should also take
into account the country's disaster alert and prevention system, general design standards and other
related regulations. For details see the DRM policy guidelines.

Generation of solid waste is moderate in volume, does not include hazardous materials and follows
standards recognized by multilateral development banks.




Safeguard Screening Form                                                                               2
                                                        Safeguard Screening Form

Solid Waste Management: The borrower should monitor and report on waste reduction,
management and disposal and may also need to develop a Waste Management Plan (which could
be included in the ESMP). Effort should be placed on reducing and re-cycling solid wastes.
Specifically (if applicable) in the case that national legislations have no provisions for the disposal
and destruction of hazardous materials, the applicable procedures established within the Rotterdam
Convention, the Stockholm Convention, the Basel Convention, the WHO List on Banned
Pesticides, and the Pollution Prevention and Abatement Handbook (PPAH), should be taken into
consideration.

Project construction activities are likely to lead to localized and temporary impacts (such as dust,
noise, traffic etc) that will affect local communities and workers but these are minor to moderate in
nature.
Construction: The borrower should demonstrate how the construction impacts will be mitigated.
Appropriate management plans and procedures should be incorporated into the ESMP. Review of
implementation as well as reporting on the plan should be part of the legal documentation
(covenants, conditions of disbursement, etc).

The negative impacts from production, procurement and disposal of hazardous materials (excluding
POPs unacceptable under the Stockholm Convention or toxic pesticides) are minor and will comply
with relevant national legislation, IDB requirements on hazardous material and all applicable
International Standards.
Monitor hazardous materials use: The borrower should document risks relating to use of
hazardous materials and prepare a hazardous material management plan that indicates how
hazardous materials will be managed (and community risks mitigated). This plan could be part of
the ESMP.

The project is located in an area prone to coastal flooding from storm surge, high wave activity, or
erosion and the likely severity of the impacts to the project is moderate.
A Disaster Risk Assessment, that includes a Disaster Risk Management Plan (DRMP), may be
necessary, depending on the complexity of the project and in cases where the vulnerability of a
specific project component may compromise the whole operation. The DRMP should propose
measures to manage or mitigate these risks to an acceptable level. The measures should include
risk reduction (siting and engineering options), disaster risk preparedness and response
(contingency planning, etc.), as well as financial protection (risk transfer, retention) for the project.
They should also take into account the country's disaster alert and prevention system, general
design standards, coastal retreat and other land use regulations and civil defense
recommendations in coastal areas.

The project is located in an area prone to inland flooding and the likely severity of the impacts to the
project is moderate.




Safeguard Screening Form                                                                                    3
                                                       Safeguard Screening Form

A Disaster Risk Assessment, that includes a Disaster Risk Management Plan (DRMP), may be
necessary, depending on the complexity of the project and in cases where the vulnerability of a
specific project component may compromise the whole operation. The DRMP should propose
measures to manage or mitigate these risks to an acceptable level. This must take into
consideration changes in the frequency and intensity of intensive rainfall and in the patterns of
snowmelt that could occur with climate change. The DRMP includes risk reduction measures (siting
and engineering options), disaster risk preparedness and response (contingency planning, etc.), as
well as the financial protection (risk transfer, retention) of the project. The DRM Plan takes into
account existing vulnerability levels and coping capacities, the area's disaster alert and prevention
system, general design standards, land use regulations and civil defense recommendations in flood
prone areas. However, the options and solutions are sector- and even case-specific and are
selected based on a cost analysis of equivalent alternatives.

The project is located in an area prone to landslides and the likely severity of the impacts to the
project is moderate.
A Disaster Risk Assessment, that includes a Disaster Risk Management Plan (DRMP), may be
necessary, depending on the complexity of the project and in cases where the vulnerability of a
specific project component may compromise the whole operation. The DRMP should propose
measures to manage or mitigate these risks to an acceptable level. The measures should consider
both the risks to the project, and the potential for the project itself to exacerbate risks to people and
the environment during construction and operation. The measures should include risk reduction
(siting and engineering options), disaster risk preparedness and response (contingency planning,
etc.), as well as financial protection (risk transfer, retention) for the project. They should also take
into account the country's disaster alert and prevention system, general design standards and other
related regulations.

The project is located in an area prone to sea level rise and the likely severity of the impacts to the
project is moderate.
A Disaster Risk Assessment, that includes a Disaster Risk Management Plan (DRMP), may be
necessary, depending on the complexity of the project and in cases where the vulnerability of a
specific project component may compromise the whole operation. The DRMP should propose
measures to manage or mitigate these risks to an acceptable level. The measures should consider
both the risks to the project, and the potential for the project itself to exacerbate risks to people and
the environment during construction and operation. The measures should include risk reduction
(siting and engineering options), disaster risk preparedness and response (contingency planning,
etc.), as well as financial protection (risk transfer, retention) for the project. They should also take
into account the country's disaster alert and prevention system, general design standards and other
related regulations.

The project will result in a minor to moderate increase in community risks from disease or natural
resources risks.
Manage Increased Risk of Disease:Where a project will generate environmental health risks
(such as increased risk from disease and environmental hazards), the borrower should be required
to develop a environmental health risk plan (this will require input from professionally competent
advisers/ consultants). There should be engagement with affected communities and compliance
with the plan should be monitored and reported. Where specific diseases are endemic in
communities in the investment area of influence, the borrower is encouraged to explore
opportunities to reduce their incidence.




Safeguard Screening Form                                                                               4
                                                    Safeguard Screening Form

Transport of hazardous materials (e.g. fuel) with minor to moderate potential to cause impacts on
community health and safety.
Hazardous Materials Management: The borrower should be required develop a hazardous
materials management plan; details of grievances and any independent health and safety audits
undertaken during the year should also be provided. Compliance with the plan should be monitored
and reported. Depending on the financial product, this information should be referenced in
appropriate legal documentation (covenants, conditions of disbursement etc). Consider
requirements for independent audits if there are concerns about commitment of borrower or
potential outstanding community concerns.


Disaster Risk Summary
Disaster Risk Level

B

Disaster / Recommendations




Disaster Summary
Details




Actions

Operation has triggered 1 or more Policy Directives; please refer to appropriate Directive(s).
Complete Project Classification Tool. Submit Safeguard Policy Filter Report, PP (or equivalent) and
Safeguard Screening Form to ESR.




Safeguard Screening Form                                                                            5
