                                                                                      PUBLIC
                                                                   SIMULTANEOUS DISTRIBUTION

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                           PANAMA




           PROGRAM OF COMPREHENSIVE URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                 OF CITIES WITH TOURISM POTENTIAL




                                          (PN-L1154)




                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Jesús Navarrete
(CSD/HUD), Project Team Leader; Juliana Bettini (CSD/RND) and Omar Garzonio
(INE/WSA) Project Team Co-leaders; Tatiana Kopelman, Stephanie van Doorn (HUD/CPN);
Julia Miguez and Andrea Gaviano (VPS/ESG); Ana Cuesta (SPD/SDV); Andrea Ruy
(KIC/ICD); Ezequiel Cambiasso and David Ochoa (VPC/FMP); Álvaro Sanmartín and
María Greco (LEG/SGO); Sandra López (CSD/CCS); Sergio Deambrosi (INE/TSP);
Waldo Tapia (SCL/LMK); Mariesther López (CID/CPN); and Mauricio Bouskela,
Raimundo Arroio, Luis Schloeter, Catarina Mastellaro, Federica Volpe, Marcelo Facchina,
Jessica Guzmán, Beatriz Gonzales, and Dianela Ávila (CSD/HUD).



This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus
superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                    CONTENTS



PROGRAM SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 9
       C.    Key results indicators ................................................................................. 12

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 13

       A.    Financing instruments ................................................................................ 13
       B.    Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 14
       C.    Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 14
       D.    Other key issues and risks .......................................................................... 14

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 16

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 16
       B.    Summary of results monitoring arrangements ............................................ 19
                                                   - ii -



                                             ANNEXES
Annex I        Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix
Annex II       Results Matrix
Annex III      Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                                  LINKS
REQUIRED
1.   Multiyear execution plan/annual work plan
2.   Monitoring and evaluation plan
3.   Environmental and social management report
4.   Procurement plan
OPTIONAL
1. Program economic analysis
2. Program Operating Regulations
3. Program fiduciary manual – annex to the program Operating Regulations
4. Analysis of the Public Utilities Policy
5. Projects of the sample
6. Gender annex
7. Climate change annex
8. Environmental and social management plan
9. Environmental and social management framework
10. Smart management
11. Master plan for sustainable tourism in Panama
12. Poverty and inequality in Panama
13. Regional development of tourism clusters in Panama – management and governance report
14. Comprehensive urban development support for medium-sized Panamanian cities
15. Bibliographic references
16. Supplemental information on footnotes
17. Safeguard policy filter and safeguard screening form
                                  - iii -



                            ABBREVIATIONS


AAUD     Autoridad de Aseo Urbano y Domiciliario de Panamá
           [Panama Urban and Household Sanitation Authority]
AIG      Autoridad Nacional para la Innovación Gubernamental
           [National Authority for Government Innovation]
AMPyME   Autoridad de la Micro, Pequeña y Mediana Empresa
           [Micro, Small, and Medium-sized Enterprise Authority]
ATP      Autoridad de Turismo de Panamá [Panama Tourism Authority]
CCI      Creative and cultural industries
CGR      Office of the Comptroller General of the Republic
CIC      Cultural Innovation Centers
CNT      National Tourism Council
CRT      Corporate Results Framework
DAF      Administration and Finance Division [of the ATP]
ESMP     Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESMR     Environmental and Social Management Report
GDP      Gross domestic product
ICB      International competitive bidding
IDAAN    Instituto de Acueductos y Alcantarillados Nacionales
           [National Water and Sewer Systems Institute]
INEC     Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censo
           [National Institute of Statistics and Census]
IRR      Internal rate of return
ISTMO    Integration and Technological Solutions of the Operational Management
         Model [system]
LIBOR    London Interbank Offered Rate
MSMEs    Micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises
NCB      National competitive bidding
PEU      Program execution unit
PMTS     Master Plan for Sustainable Tourism in Panama
QCBS     Quality- and cost-based selection
SMCTPs   Small and medium-sized cities with tourism potential
                                                               PROGRAM SUMMARY
                                                         PANAMA
                                      PROGRAM OF COMPREHENSIVE URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                                            OF CITIES WITH TOURISM POTENTIAL
                                                       (PN-L1154)

                                         Financial Terms and Conditions
 Borrower:                                                               Flexible Financing Facility(a)
 Republic of Panama                                       Amortization period:                   20 years
 Executing agency                                         Disbursement period:                   6 years
 Panama Tourism Authority (ATP)                           Grace period:                          6.5 years(b)
           Source            Amount (US$)          %      Interest rate:                         LIBOR-based
                                                                                                 (c)
                                                          Credit fee:
 IDB (Ordinary Capital):        100 million          97                                          (c)
                                                          Inspection and supervision fee:
 Local:                           3 million           3   Weighted average life:                 13.25 years
 Total:                         103 million         100   Approval currency:                     U.S. dollar
                                              Program at a Glance
 Program objective/description: The program’s objective is to support urban and socioeconomic development of small
 and medium-sized cities with tourism potential (SMCTPs) in Panama. Its specific objectives are to: (i) improve access to
 and the quality of services, infrastructure, and urban management; (ii) boost tourism development by improving
 infrastructure and promoting productive community development using a gender-based approach; and (iii) strengthen the
 planning, management, and promotion of sustainable and resilient tourism cities at the national and local levels.
 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: The Panama Tourism Authority
 (ATP) will provide evidence that it has: (i) signed an agreement with the Ministry of the Economy and Finance for the
 transfer of program resources and program execution, pursuant to the terms and conditions previously agreed upon with
 the Bank; (ii) signed the corresponding interagency collaboration agreements with the Municipio of Pedasí; the Municipio
 of Boquete; the Municipio of Bocas del Toro; the Municipio de Tierras Altas; the Municipio of Taboga; the Municipo de
 Soná; the Ministry of the Environment; the Panama Maritime Authority; the Micro, Small, and Medium-sized Enterprise
 Authority (AMPyME); the National Institute of Culture; the National Authority for Government Innovation (AIG); the
 Ministry of Housing and Land-use Planning; the National Land Administration Authority; the National Water and Sewer
 Systems Institute (IDAAN); and the Panama Urban and Household Sanitation Authority (AAUD); (iii) formed the program
 execution unit and hired or appointed, as the case may be, its key personnel (program general coordinator, planning and
 monitoring specialist, procurement specialist, financial specialist, legal specialist, environmental specialist, and social
 specialist); and (iv) approved the program Operating Regulations, pursuant to the terms and conditions previously agreed
 upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.9). Additionally, the borrower will fulfill the special contractual conditions precedent to
 the first disbursement of the loan, set forth in Annex B of the environmental and social management plan (ESMR).
 Special contractual conditions for execution: (i) prior to the bidding process for works, a specific agreement for each
 work will be signed between the ATP and the corresponding ministry and/or municipality for the purpose of executing
 each project, which will include, inter alia, the relevant operating and maintenance conditions, including the allocation of
 resources required to that end; and (ii) prior to initiating the works in question, the rights to legal ownership, easement,
 and/or usage will have been obtained for the land on which the works are to be implemented (paragraph 3.10).
 Additionally, the borrower will fulfill the special contractual conditions of execution set forth in the ESMR – Annex B.
 Exceptions to Bank policies: None.
                                                        Strategic Alignment
 Challenges:(d)                                           SI                                 PI                                 EI

 Crosscutting themes:(e)                                GD                                  CC                                  IC
(a)
      Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the
      amortization schedule, as well as currency, interest rate, and commodity conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management
      considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b)
      Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not
      entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)
      The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of
      the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies.
(d)
      SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(e)
      GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law).
                           I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       Panama’s economy has had the highest growth rate in all of Latin America and the
          Caribbean for the past two decades. Between 2010 and 2018 alone, the average
          annual growth rate was 6.5%, resulting in a 43% increase in per capita GDP in
          constant terms [9].1 This growth has occurred in a context of macroeconomic and
                                 F




          fiscal stability.
1.2       This economic momentum and its resulting benefits have helped reduce poverty in
          Panama, although not uniformly across regions. For instance, poverty and extreme
          poverty in 2015 affected 13% and 3% of the population of the district of Panama,
          respectively, whereas the corresponding figures for the district of Bocas del Toro
          were 52% and 29%, and 49% and 20% for the district of La Pintada, respectively
          [10]. Economic growth has been concentrated in the metropolitan areas of the
          Pacific and Atlantic coasts, mainly in Panama City, and more recently in Colón,
          with these areas accounting for 84% of the country’s GDP and 75% of its
          4.1 million inhabitants [7]. In contrast, Panama’s small and medium-sized cities
          have lower levels of economic development [10], as well as more pronounced
          gender gaps than those observed at the national level, owing to labor market
          access-related issues.2 These cities include the category of small and medium-
          sized cities with tourism potential (SMCTPs).3
1.3       Urban development challenges for SMCTPs. The Master Plan for Sustainable
          Tourism in Panama 2007-2020 (optional link 11) identifies 26 tourist destinations
          in the country, 24 of which are categorized as SMCTPs. Generally speaking,
          SMCTPs have low levels of development with deficient infrastructure and basic
          services. Official data for 2018 indicate that the average level of satisfaction with
          basic services in SMCTPs (including water, sewage, and solid waste) was 52%
          (although there are extreme cases, such as Besiko—located in the Ngäbe Buglé
          indigenous region—with 13.1%. In Panama City, however, satisfaction levels
          were 96.4%.4 With regard to access to potable water specifically, coverage in
          Panama City is 100%, whereas average coverage in SMCTPs is around 60% in
          places like Bocas del Toro, Santa Fé (province of Veraguas), and Sambú, where
          coverage gaps are 39%, 34.3%, and 28.3%, respectively. There are similar or
          greater shortcomings in SMCTPs concerning access to and quality of
          infrastructure and other urban services, including roads, sanitary sewers, and solid
          waste collection [7].
1.4       Weak urban management in SMCTPs is also evident. Generally speaking,
          SMCTPs do not have the necessary administrative and technical capacity,
1    Optional link 15 contains the bibliographic references for note numbers enclosed in brackets [#].
2    On average, women’s labor participation in the provinces of Bocas del Toro, Los Santos, and Chiriquí is
     10 percentage points lower than the national average (48% versus 58%).
3    SMCTPs are cities that have a population of between 1,500 and 100,000 inhabitants (according to the
     categories set forth in Basic Law 77 of 2001 of the National Water and Sewer Systems Institute
     (IDAAN)), as well as natural and/or cultural attractions with tourism potential. For more information, see
     (optional link 16).
4    The same occurs with poverty rates in these cities: a very low poverty rate of 3.7% in Chitré, and a very
     high rate of 91.6% in Calovébora (optional link 16).
                                                    -2-



         planning instruments, or financial resources for effective urban management.5
         Unlike Panama’s major cities (Panama City, David, and Colón), none of the
         SMCTPs have binding land-use management plans [12] or the technical capacity
         to execute the investment funds that are allocated to them annually.6 In fact, even
         though Law 66 of 2015 requires that a minimum number of city management
         professionals be hired,7 no SMCTP has the minimum number of staff with the
         required technical qualifications. Thus, an SMCTP like Pedasí only executes
         between 13% and 30% of the resources allocated to it, due to difficulties in
         designing projects and carrying out bidding processes [2]. These weaknesses
         further indicate that SMCTPs do not have the capacity to meet the demands of
         citizens in a structured way due to their limited use of new technologies and
         information systems, nor do they have the capacity to address the challenges of
         climate change (which are starting to become evident). The foregoing can have a
         significant economic impact on these cities [13].
1.5      Tourism development challenges in SMCTPs. In recent decades, Panama’s
         tourism model has tended to concentrate tourism offerings and investment in
         established destinations, such as Panama City and the Panama Canal.
         Consequently, there is less tourist activity in SMCTPs, due to a lack of
         infrastructure and appropriate conditions for welcoming visitors, as well as a limited
         supply of tourism services and products, all of which hinder these cities’ economic
         development. For instance, although 15 SMCTPs focus on developing coastal
         marine activities, only 10 have dock facilities or other marine infrastructure.
         Furthermore, only 13 of the 24 SMCTPs have adequate tourist signage,
         just 11 have tourism information kiosks, and only two have interpretation centers.
         This situation is reflected in the lower numbers of tourists visiting SMCTPs, among
         other indicators, especially compared to the number of tourists that visit Panama
         City. In fact, the total number of tourists that visited the 24 SMCTPs in 2016
         accounted for just 62% of those who visited Panama City. Given this situation, the
         2018 Master Plan for Tourism 20188 identified tourism infrastructure improvements
         in the SMCTPs as a critical factor for promoting the decentralization and
         diversification of the country’s tourism offerings.
1.6      The governance challenges in Panama’s tourism sector are significant, especially
         because of the vast network of relationships between public and private actors at
         both the national and local levels. At the national level, the Panama Tourism
         Authority (ATP) and the National Tourism Council (CNT)9 are responsible for
         formulating, implementing, and monitoring policies and plans for the tourism

5   Regional development of tourism clusters in Panama. IDB/ARUP, Report 3B, 2018 (optional link 13).
6   The Law on Decentralization of Public Management of 2015 specifies the annual transfers to be made
    for Panama’s various districts (optional link 16).
7   The minimum required team consists of an engineer, a legal advisor, an administrator, a planner, a
    manager of citizen services, and a manager of city services.
8   This is the updated Master Plan for Sustainable Tourism 2007-2020.
9   The National Tourism Council (CNT) is made up of the Minister of Trade and Industry, the Minister of the
    Economy and Finance, the Minister of the Interior and Justice, the Minister of Public Works, the Minister
    of Foreign Affairs, or their delegates, as well as four main representatives and their alternates who are
    members of the Panama Tourism Chamber, selected from shortlists presented by tourism chambers to
    the CNT’s executive board.
                                                   -3-



          sector. Since the ATP was created in 2008, improvements have been observed in
          the sector’s management, thanks to legislation that supports planning and
          prioritizes decentralization. Nevertheless, significant weaknesses persist.
          According to recent studies,10 these include: (i) limitations associated with the
          qualifications of staff, procedures, and internal regulations; (ii) outdated tools for
          tourism planning; (iii) a lack of statistics on the tourism sector, especially as
          regards tourism demand; (iv) a dearth of marketing planning; and (v) weaknesses
          in project management, coordination among sectors, and technical assistance
          provided at the local level [4]. These weaknesses are caused by a lack of:
          (i) manuals that spell out operating procedures, strategies, and support, as well as
          project execution; (ii) georeferenced statistical information systems; (iii) staff
          trained on project design and monitoring; and (iv) mechanisms of interagency
          coordination, as well as coordination with private and community stakeholders.
          These shortcomings are even more evident in the eight ATP regional offices [3].
1.7       As a result of the foregoing, tourism management at the local level also has
          shortcomings. Municipal governments in the SMCTPs generally lack organizational
          structures for tourism management,11 since only five of the 24 SMCTPs have local
          tourism promotion units. Other specific deficiencies include: (i) a lack of tourism
          planning tools; (ii) a lack of qualified staff and specific budget lines for the tourism
          sector; and (iii) scant participation and representation of the private sector and civil
          society in tourism promotion associations. It is also important to bear in mind that
          few other economic activities are as climate-dependent as tourism. However,
          urban and tourism management in SMCTPs does not currently have the technical,
          institutional, or financial capacity to address challenges associated with climate
          change. According to projections related to these challenges, SMCTPs are
          vulnerable to rising sea levels, temperature increases, and changes in rainfall
          patterns, which also affect tourism in these cities (optional link 7). Fifteen of the
          SMCTPs are coastal cities, meaning that they will be exposed to floods,
          displacement of wetlands, and erosion of coastal areas.
1.8       Gender equity (optional link 6). Despite the gender gaps in economic
          participation in Panama, tourism is a sector that offers greater job opportunities for
          women, especially in terms of employment and entrepreneurial initiatives.12
          Overall, women currently occupy more than half of the jobs in this sector, or 54%,
          which is 11 points above the national average for other sectors (43%). 13 However,F




          there are considerable differences in economic activities within this sector: artistic
          and creative activities are the least feminized (25%), and activities involving travel
          agencies and restaurants are the most feminized (72% and 60%, respectively),
          although these tend to be family businesses that do not offer a very structured
          offerings. In that regard, agencies like the Competitiveness Center for the Western
          Region of Panama (CECOMRO) and tourism chambers are working to step up
          investment in tourism infrastructure and strengthen job training and technical

10   ATP (2018) Analysis of Tourism Governance. (Master Plan for Sustainable Tourism in Panama, 2008).
     This study was carried out as part of the preparations for this program.
11   Ibid; ATP (2008) Master Plan for Sustainable Tourism in Panama.
12   Source: World Trade Organization (2010). Global Report on Women in Tourism (optional link 6).
13   ENRED Panamá S.A. (2017). Analysis of the tourism and handicrafts sector in Panama (optional link 6).
                                                  -4-



          assistance for entrepreneurs, with the aim of diversifying and promoting more and
          better tourism-related businesses and jobs. Achieving greater and better
          participation of women will help stimulate local economies, as well as further
          promote female labor participation in the tourism sector. In turn, this will help
          promote the economic empowerment of women and their families and narrow
          Panama’s gender gap in economic participation.
1.9       Social cohesion. Poverty and social inequality in Panama have weakened social
          cohesion among the country’s various populations. In SMCTPs, one factor that
          contributes to this situation is the arrival of new groups that do not necessarily
          integrate into the local population. Individuals from inside Panama and abroad
          often come to SMCTPs in order to retire or invest. Estimates suggest that foreign
          residents account for 10% to 15% of SMCTP populations in places like Bocas del
          Toro and Boquete (of the 105 formal hospitality accommodations in Bocas del
          Toro, nearly 80% are foreign-owned). These new residents are introducing new
          ways of life and social coexistence, which has weakened local cultural identity and
          greatly eroded the local population’s interest in becoming involved community and
          local management issues. In Bocas del Toro, for instance, it is estimated that of
          the 16 local organizations (commerce or civic), 30% do not include members from
          the local population, while 20% of these organizations are run by individuals from
          foreign countries or other parts of Panama (optional link 11).
1.10      Cultural identity. In spite of traditions, celebrations, and festivals that attract a
          significant number of visitors to SMCTPs,14 these events are not used as a way to
          strengthen local identity and cultural diversity. According to information from the
          Ministry of Trade and Industry, Boquete and Bocas del Toro do not currently have
          programs that support the development of handicrafts or cuisine, despite having
          considerable local and cultural experience in these areas. Thus, stimulating and
          promoting creative and cultural industries could be a tool for strengthening local
          creative ecosystems and using cultural identity and diversity as a competitive
          advantage. Like other local cultural activities, creative and cultural industries also
          offer a way to strengthen local cultural identity and social cohesion among various
          population groups. 15 Unfortunately, none of the SMCTPs have cultural meeting
                               F




          places that would help encourage interaction and social harmony among these
          groups.
1.11      Smart management (optional link 10). Regarding smart urban management,
          Panama has favorable conditions in terms of connectivity infrastructure and
          regulations,16 and SMCTPs are formally involved in digital modernization projects
          at the national level (such as those run by the AIG). However, SMCTPs have
          difficulty operating and incorporating new technological tools, mainly due to the
          lack of adequate operating systems and skilled human resources. For instance,



14   The ATP makes a distinction between tourists, referring to individuals who spend the night in a
     destination, and visitors, which include tourists, cruise passengers, and excursionists.
15   In Panama, data from the National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC) for 2010 indicate that
     creative and cultural industries generated US$797 million in revenue.
16   Panama is number one in the IDB Broadband Development Index. Broadband Development.
                                                    -5-



          Bocas del Toro is connected to the national 311 Citizen Services Center.17                     F




          However, the city does lack the necessary operational interface and workflows for
          responding to the requests that it receives and for which it is responsible.
          Additionally, technical staff of the Municipio of Bocas del Toro generally only have
          basic technological and digital knowledge. These examples show that SMCTPs
          have untapped potential for using technology to improve their management
          performance.18   7F




1.12      Developing SMCTPs as a national priority. The challenges presented above
          limit the SMCTPs’ capacity for diversification and economic growth, especially
          when it comes to developing tourism potential and productive participation of the
          local population. In 2017, the tourism sector accounted for 5.9% of Panama’s GDP
          [15] and was identified as among the sectors with the greatest potential for
          contributing to the country’s diversification and production-related growth,19
          especially through the development of SMCTPs. However, the lack of basic
          services, tourism infrastructure, as well as weaknesses with regard to governance
          and viable initiatives for public and private participation have limited tourist flows to
          these cities and hindered their sustainable and resilient development. The many
          issues affecting SMCTPs have been identified as a priority area for Panama that
          requires special attention from national authorities.
1.13      In order to address these issues, the Panamanian government has requested
          Bank technical assistance to develop an intervention methodology to focus on
          current challenges in SMCTPs. With technical cooperation financing through
          “Support for Integral Urban Development of Medium-sized Cities in Panama” (loan
          ATN/OC-16434-PN) (optional link 14), detailed diagnostic assessments and
          participatory strategic planning exercises will be carried out in some SMCTPs,
          which will help identify priority actions for their sustainable and resilient
          development. The plans and actions identified have laid the groundwork for the
          design of this operation.
1.14      Program strategy. The proposed operation prioritizes strategic actions that will
          help improve living conditions for populations in participating SMCTPs, strengthen
          urban and socioeconomic development in SMCTPs, and strengthen them as
          tourist destinations. A multisector investment loan is recommended to
          comprehensively address the many weaknesses in urban infrastructure and
          services, tourism infrastructure, and urban and tourism management. The strategy
          also aims to strengthen social cohesion, local cultural identity, and gender equity;
          step up community activities to foster creative and cultural industries; and
          modernize urban and tourism management through the use of new digital
          technologies. The operation includes building technical capacity of the ATP and


17   The 311 Citizen Services Center falls under the National Authority for Government Innovation (AIG) and
     serves as a liaison between the government and citizens who wish to submit complaints, reports, ideas,
     suggestions, and requests for information and public services.
18   It is estimated that for every 1% increase in digitalization, there is an increase of 0.5% in GDP and
     0.13 points in the Human Development Index (optional link 16).
19   The lack of detailed statistics makes it difficult to determine the tourism sector’s impact on local
     economies. This is one of the issues that will be addressed by this program.
                                                     -6-



          local units that promote tourism in the selected SMCTPs with the aim of improving
          their technical capacity and interaction with sector entities and private actors.
1.15      Representative sample. The ATP selected Boquete, Bocas del Toro, and Pedasí
          as representative cities of SMCTPs in Panama. These cities were selected based
          on the following criteria:20,21 (i) population of more than 1,500 inhabitants; (ii) better-
                                        f




          than-average score on the evaluation of tourist attractions and facilities (ATP
          methodology); (iii) lack of urban services, such as drinking water, solid waste
          management, and sewer systems;22 (iv) good connectivity with the main urban
          centers in each province; and (v) priority status in the country’s development plans.
          The main characteristics of the SMCTPs selected are as follows:
          a. Boquete. This SMCTP has 21,370 inhabitants and is located in the highlands
             of Chiriquí province. It has a mountainous landscape, a spring-like climate,
             and many cultural and natural attractions (optional link 11). The main natural
             attraction is the Barú Volcano, while cultural attractions include a flower and
             coffee fair and a Jazz and blues festival. These events attract an average of
             180,000 visitors per year, with 100% hotel occupancy during the high season
             and estimated economic earnings of US$12 million. However, the arrival of
             tourists causes the city to collapse, overwhelming its basic services. Mobility
             is also a problem owing to, inter alia, inadequate access roads, a dearth of
             signage and parking, as well as a lack of technological tools for monitoring
             the city and coordinating teams that help improve citizen security and the
             optimal use of public spaces.
          b. Bocas del Toro. Thanks to its great natural and cultural heritage, Bocas del
             Toro is one of Panama’s main tourist attractions, drawing more than
             60,000 visitors per year. With a population of 16,585, 23 most tourist activities
                                                                                F




             in the Bocas del Toro district are located on Colón Island, including
             ecotourism, diving, and boating. However, its capital, Bocas del Toro, does
             not have the necessary infrastructure to provide services that meet
             international standards. The city does not provide appropriate solid waste
             treatment (its landfill is not sustainably managed) nor does it have the
             technical and financial capacity for waste collection, transfer, and final
             disposal. It does not use technology to efficiently support waste management
             and other public services, even though a national service—the 311 Citizen
             Services Center—is officially available to the city. Additionally, the problem of
             the city’s insufficient drinking water supply becomes exacerbated during
             festivals, with the arrival of some 1,500 tourists each day. According to
             estimates of the Master Plan for Sustainable Tourism in Panama 2007-2020,


20   These criteria were identified as critical in the results evaluation document from the evaluation of the
     objectives of the PMTS 2007-2020 (ATP, 2018).
21   The selection also aimed for representation of the various types of tourist attractions in SMCTPs.
22   Various authors have made connections between the level of development of transportation
     infrastructure and basic services (water, energy, telecommunications, sanitation) and the volume of
     international arrivals to destinations (Tang and Rochananond, 1990, in Thailand; Kim et al., 2000, in
     South Africa; and Seetanah et al., 2011, in Mauritius) (optional link 16).
23   According to the 2010 census.
                                                  -7-



              this destination could significantly increase tourism revenues by investing in
              basic and tourism infrastructure, as well as better city management.
          c. Pedasí. Located in the province of Los Santos, Pedasí has a population of
             4,000. As the point of access for visitors to the wildlife refuge on Iguana
             Island, the town is in a prime location and has many cultural and natural
             attractions. Although it receives more than 13,000 visitors each year, Pedasí
             does not have an information center; it lacks the infrastructure required to
             accommodate tourists bound for Iguana Island (wharves, parking, public
             restrooms); and does not effectively manage local tourism service providers
             [14]. While the town has a collection system and a landfill for solid waste,
             they are not managed in a sanitary and sustainable way. Pedasí’s road
             network is insufficient and its public spaces are in poor condition, thus limiting
             access to the main points of interest. While the Chamber of Tourism24 is in
             the process of being strengthened, it needs support to attract a greater
             variety of actors within its structure. Furthermore, the city is exposed to
             frequent floods due to the lack of stormwater drainage systems, making it
             vulnerable to climate change.
1.16      Table 1 lists the projects that are included in the program’s representative sample,
          which was used to conduct the technical, economic, and socioenvironmental
          analyses of the program and to move forward with the project development
          processes needed for timely execution. The sample includes eligible prototype
          projects from the three targeted SMCTPs and represents 30% of the investment.

                         Table 1. Projects of the representative sample (US$ millions)
               City                                     Project                           Amount
          Pedasí           Comprehensive solid waste management (Component I)             6,100,000
                           Alternative urban mobility modes (Component II)                2,500,000
                           Rehabilitation of El Arenal beach facilities (Component II)       90,000
          Boquete          Comprehensive solid waste management (Component I)             3,900,000
                           Comprehensive sustainable tourism mobility (Component II)      4,350,000
                           Public spaces improvement (Component II)                       2,420,000
          Bocas del Toro   Feasibility study – comprehensive solid waste management         200,000
                           project (Component I)
                           Water supply system (Component I)                             10,500,000
                                                Total                                    30,060,000


1.17      In addition to the three aforementioned SMCTPs, the program will target another
          three cities.25 These were selected in consultation with the national authorities,
          based on preestablished criteria. All participating cities will receive comprehensive
          support for the urban, tourism, and management considerations outlined in the
          program strategy.


24   Chambers of tourism are private organizations made up of tourism companies that are looking to
     develop tourist activity in various destinations.
25   The three additional SMCTPs that were selected in collaboration with the authorities are: Volcán,
     Municipio of Tierras Altas; Santa Catalina, Municipio of Soná; and Taboga, Municipio of Taboga.
                                             -8-



                                      Figure 1. Prioritized SMCTPs




1.18   Lessons learned. This operation includes lessons learned from Bank programs
       for comprehensive urban development, such as promotion of cultural heritage in
       the Program to Revitalize Neighborhoods and Heritage Infrastructure
       (loan 3564/OC-CH); and tourism sector projects, including the National Tourism
       Development Program in Salvador (loan 3682/OC-BR) and the Tourism
       Development Program – Colonial City of Santo Domingo (loan 2587/OC-DR).
       Lessons taken into account for this program include: (i) the importance of private
       sector participation in tourism throughout the various program phases to increase
       the likelihood of success for programs in the sector; (ii) prioritizing the needs of the
       population to improve its quality of life and make tourism development processes
       viable; and (iii) adopting multisector approaches that simultaneously address
       infrastructure needs and management weaknesses in both urban and tourism
       development.
1.19   Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional
       Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and the Corporate Results Framework
       2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6), by promoting social inclusion and equality and
       infrastructure services. It is also aligned with the crosscutting areas of: (i) gender
       equality and diversity, by increasing women’s participation in the labor market and
       improving the well-being of women and children through access to quality public
       services; (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law, by building public sector capacity
       to formulate and execute projects; and (iii) climate change and environmental
       sustainability, by promoting ways to reduce the vulnerability of tourist destinations
       to climate change and minimizing their carbon footprint. In all, 39.13% of this
       operation’s resources are invested in adaptation to climate change activities,
       according to the joint methodology of the multilateral development banks for
       tracking climate change adaptation finance. These resources contribute to the IDB
       Group target of increasing financing for climate-related projects to 30% of
       approvals by year-end 2020. The operation is also consistent with the Urban
       Development and Housing Sector Framework Document (document GN-2732-6),
       as it expands access to basic urban services for the local population (Dimension of
       Success 2); the Climate Change Sector Framework Document (document
       GN-2835-8), as it finances interventions that mitigate the effects of climate change
       on cities (Dimension of Success 4); the Water and Sanitation Sector Framework
       Document (document GN-2781-8), as it finances solid waste management
       projects; Transportation Sector Framework (document GN-2740-7), as it finances
                                                    -9-



          road improvements and pedestrian infrastructure; and the Gender and Diversity
          Sector Framework Document (document GN-2800-8), as it promotes women’s
          entrepreneurship in cities (Dimension of Success 5). The program is aligned with
          the priority area of improving basic service delivery to populations living in poverty,
          as set forth in the IDB Country Strategy with Panama 2015-2019
          (document GN-2838). It is also included in the 2019 Operational Program Report
          (document GN-2948-2) and addresses the Panamanian government’s priorities
          concerning regional inequality by prioritizing the development of small and
          medium-sized cities and promoting the tourism sector as a strategy for sustaining
          economic growth and diversifying Panama’s production.
1.20      Compliance with the Public Utilities Policy (document GN-2716-6)
          (optional link 4). The program and sector objectives at the national level are
          consistent with the principles of this policy and meet the conditions of financial
          sustainability and economic evaluation for the program’s water, sanitation, and
          solid waste works. Regarding water and sanitation projects, the National Water
          and Sewer Systems Institute (IDAAN), which provides these services nationally,
          currently covers its operational and maintenance costs through a combination of
          revenue from fees and transfers from the Panamanian government that are made
          both timely and transparently—meaning that there is a subsidy for supply.
          Additionally, a plan is in place to improve the operational and financial
          sustainability of the IDAAN in upcoming fiscal years, which will be strengthened
          through other Bank programs, including the Program to Improve the Operational
          Management of the National Water and Sewer Systems Institute in the Panama
          City Metropolitan Area (loan 4434/OC-PN), approved in 2017. With regard to solid
          waste management, SMCTPs municipal government provide solid urban waste
          collection, transfer, and final disposal services. Their operational and maintenance
          costs would be covered by a combination of city budget resources,26 revenue from
          sanitation fees, and fees from strategic partnerships with other stakeholders.
          Similarly, the works to be financed under the program are socioeconomically
          viable, according to the economic analysis of the project sample (optional link 1).
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.21      The program’s objective is to support urban and socioeconomic development of
          small and medium-sized cities with tourism potential (SMCTPs) in Panama. Its
          specific objectives are to: (i) improve access to and the quality of services,
          infrastructure, and urban management; (ii) boost tourism development by
          improving infrastructure and promoting productive community development using a
          gender-based approach; and (iii) strengthen the planning, management, and
          promotion of sustainable and resilient tourism cities at the national and local levels.
          The operation is structured into three components:
1.22      Component I. Infrastructure and urban management (IDB US$63.05 million).
          The aim of this component is to improve access to and the quality of urban
          management services. It will finance: (i) infrastructure and urban services, such as
          water, sewer systems, solid waste, mobility, public spaces, and adaptation to

26   This special condition for execution calls for agreements to be signed in order to ensure execution and
     sustainability of the waste projects.
                                                     - 10 -



          climate change measures; and (ii) modernization of urban management, including
          the design of regional development plans, technical support for municipios to
          improve urban services management and the monitoring of mobility and public
          security through the use of new technologies and smart systems. For infrastructure
          and urban services, as well as for the plans supported by this component, the aim
          is also to incorporate measures and technologies that help reduce greenhouse
          gases and increase the selected cities’ resilience to climate change.
1.23      Component II. Tourism infrastructure and community development
          (IDB US$22 million). The aim of this component is to improve the quality of
          tourism infrastructure and promote production-oriented community development. It
          will finance: (i) strategic tourism infrastructure in urban centers, such as docks,
          interpretation centers, and signage systems; and (ii) the implementation of cultural
          innovation centers,27 including the development of production-oriented projects and
          communities to foster entrepreneurship, cultural identity, and social cohesion. As
          part of the cultural innovation centers, financing will be provided to refurbish
          buildings, purchase furniture and computer equipment, design a self-management
          model, and cover operating costs for up to two years. Financing will also be
          provided for activities such as training, technical assistance, and competitive
          projects for microenterprises in sectors of opportunity for tourism.28 Community
          projects will include events to raise awareness and promote local cultural
          production, social integration activities, and community-based tourism promotion
          programs. Both activities will include projects related to creative and cultural
          industries and will adopt a gender-based approach.
1.24      Component III. Modernization of tourism governance (IDB US$9.40 million).
          This component focuses on strengthening tourism management at the national
          and local levels. In the case of the former, the following will be financed:
          (i) development of new management models for the ATP; (ii) procurement of
          equipment and software; (iii) training of national- and provincial-level tourism
          management and planning staff; (iv) diagnostic assessment of and improvements
          to the national tourism statistics system; and (v) updating instruments for tourism
          planning and tourism marketing planning. At the local level, the following will be
          financed: (i) design of tourism development plans; (ii) tourism management and
          planning training for technical staff in participating mayor’s offices, to include
          environmental sustainability and climate change; (iii) institutional strengthening of
          local chambers of tourism and participating councils; and (iv) support for
          developing tourism investment pilot projects through specialized technical
          assistance for teams from government and local tourism agencies.
1.25      Administration costs (IDB US$5.55 million; Local US$3 million). Financing will
          be provided to cover the costs of forming the program execution unit (PEU),

27   The cultural innovation centers will be used for training, knowledge exchange, and incubation activities;
     centers for creation, exhibition, and marketing; and social and community centers. As part of their
     implementation, financing will be provided for the design of a self-management model. Partnerships will
     also be explored with the private sector and civil society so that these centers can be independent and
     sustainable in the medium and long term.
28   These activities will be coordinated with those sponsored by the Program to Support Productive
     Development through Human Capital (loan 4689/OC-PN), which focuses on the western region of
     Panama and includes the tourism sector as one of its pillars.
                                                      - 11 -



          program audits, and any evaluations, monitoring, and studies required under the
          environmental and social management framework. The local contribution will only
          be used to cover PEU staff expenses during program execution years.
1.26      Crosscutting actions. Through its components, the program will finance
          crosscutting actions for each of the participating SMCTPs in the following key
          areas:
          a. Gender equity, cultural identity, and social cohesion. Strengthening
             cultural identity, social cohesion, and gender inclusion will be promoted
             through cultural innovation-center activities, with support for production- and
             community-oriented projects. To that end, cultural innovation centers will
             focus on strengthening local creative ecosystems, training for production-
             oriented development, and promoting community activities that foster local
             cultural identity and cohesion among different social groups. Accordingly, the
             cultural innovation centers will serve as a tool for enhancing the use of local
             cultural resources for productive community development and inclusive
             cultural identity. In promoting gender inclusion, the specific needs of men and
             women will be taken into account when identifying the activities to be carried
             out. Special events and training will be offered specifically for women’s
             economic empowerment (optional link 6).
          b. Smart management. The use of new technological tools will be promoted in
             accordance with local institutional and financial capacity. As part of the
             comprehensive mobility project in Boquete, financing will be provided to
             install monitoring cameras and a control center to facilitate collaboration of
             public officials and local management capacity, especially for organizing large
             events. For the cities of Boquete and Pedasí, financing will be provided for
             wireless connectivity services in public spaces targeted by the operation.
             Lastly, financing will be provided to the three cities in order to develop
             workflows for the 311 urban services, which are the responsibility of
             municipal governments, along with staff training.29
          c. Climate change. The program will support strategic activities to help ensure
             the sustainability and environmental resilience of the selected cities.
             Accordingly, all project infrastructure will include: (i) ecofriendly technologies
             that promote efficient use of resources (e.g. energy, water consumption, and
             recyclable materials); and (ii) measures that enhance the resilience of
             program infrastructure to the effects of climate change; for instance, using
             permeable paving materials. In that regard, studies will be financed in each
             SMCTP to identify the main sources of greenhouse gas emissions and
             measures to mitigate them, as well as urban risks associated with climate

29   In order to ensure that the proposed interventions are sustainable, one or more of the following three
     criteria were incorporated into the design: (i) having a direct relationship with the operating plans of
     projects that already exist or that will be financed by the program, so that no additional resources are
     needed for operations or maintenance (i.e. the monitoring cameras); (ii) having the program offer initial
     operational support (two years) and then transferring it to the responsible national institution, as
     supported by the framework agreement (i.e. Wi-Fi); and (iii) using municipalities’ existing responsibilities
     for national programs, with the necessary technical strengthening for effective and sustainable
     operations (i.e. the 311 system).
                                                    - 12 -



              change. These studies will serve as input for a training program and will
              guide the design of program interventions.
C.        Key results indicators
1.27      The program will provide comprehensive support to six SMCTPs.30 The program’s
          expected impact is an increase of at least 20% in property value per square meter
          in targeted SMCTPs, with the following outcomes: (i) narrowing of the gap in
          drinking water coverage between the district of Panama and the SMCTPs;
          (ii) substantially improvement in the SMCTPs’ solid waste collection; (iii) increase
          hotel occupancy rates as a result of tourist activity in the SMCTPs; (iv) greater
          women’s participation in new startups; and (v) improvement in ATP’s institutional
          capacity performance and tourism management in beneficiary municipios (see
          Annex II, Results Matrix).
1.28      Beneficiaries. The main beneficiaries will be SMCTP residents who will enjoy
          greater access to urban services; local tourism and economic actors who will
          experience increased demand; and ATP and municipal governments who will have
          better tools for managing the tourism sector.
1.29      Economic analysis (optional link 1). The ex ante economic evaluation was
          conducted using a cost/benefit analysis of the total cost of the projects planned in
          the three cities of the program’s representative sample. The methodology for
          estimating the economic impact of the projects in terms of improving urban and
          tourism infrastructure took into account the appreciation in real estate values for
          properties that would directly benefit from the program. The result of the
          cost/benefit analysis shows that the three selected SMCTPs account for a set of
          projects with high economic returns—i.e. an internal rate of return (IRR) of 26%.
          The level of sensitivity is medium, with cut-off values of +15% for investment cost
          and -12% for economic benefits.
1.30      For each of the three cities, the economic return on the projects is greater than
          12%, but the sensitivity level varies. Specifically, Pedasí and Bocas del Toro (IRR
          of 15% and 22%, respectively) are more sensitive to changes in investment cost
          and economic benefits. While their rates of return are 15% and 22% respectively,
          the cut-off values are only 2%/-2% for Pedasí (very high sensitivity) and +26%/-
          21% for Bocas del Toro. Boquete has a positive rate of return (IRR of 35%) and
          medium sensitivity for estimated economic impact and investment cost. If
          investment costs increase by 29% or economic benefits decline by 23%, then the
          project would no longer be viable.
1.31      The results of the cost/benefit analysis for the projects of the representative
          sample demonstrated an economic return above 12% due to the high priority
          placed on improving basic services, urban improvement, and tourism potential in
          these three cities. According to the sensitivity analysis, the economic return on the
          projects in the three SMCTPs remains robust even if investment costs increase.




30   This number may vary depending on the projects costs for addressing urban and tourism priorities in the
     participating cities.
                                                - 13 -



                      II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.    Financing instruments
2.1   The total cost of the program is US$103 million, financed with a US$100 million
      investment loan from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital. The program has been
      designed as an investment loan for multiple works since it includes projects for
      different types of separate infrastructure that meet the eligibility criteria. It also
      includes a representative sample for evaluation and execution. There will be a
      local counterpart contribution of US$3 million. The execution period will be six
      years, which is the amount of time needed to develop and implement the priority
      projects. Additionally, this period will ensure that there is collaboration and
      coordination with the agendas of the participating national sector entities.
2.2   Selection criteria for program projects. The selected cities will be eligible for
      comprehensive interventions, supplementing investments made in basic services
      infrastructure and tourist infrastructure, and/or actions geared toward improving
      urban management, tourism governance, and productive community development.
      The selection criteria will be included in the program Operating Regulations
      (optional link 2). The program will prioritize infrastructure projects that address
      gaps in urban basic services in the following sectors: (i) solid waste management
      (ii) sanitation; and/or (iii) drinking water. Priority will also be accorded to tourism
      infrastructure projects that meet the following criteria: (i) must be located on public
      land; (ii) must complement the city’s tourism projects and tourism infrastructure;
      and (iii) must improve and/or diversify local tourism offerings. The specific projects
      to be financed will be technically viable, aligned with the prioritized sectors
      (i.e. urban, tourism, urban and tourism management, and productive community
      development), and have moderate environmental and social impacts
      (category “B”).


                             Table 2. Estimated program costs (US$ millions)

      a                     Components                                 IDB       Local      Total      %
        Component I. Infrastructure and urban management                63.05         -      63.05    61.22
        Component II. Tourism infrastructure and community              22.00         -      22.00    21.36
        development
        Component III. Modernization of tourism governance 3             9.40         -       9.40     9.13
      . Administration costs                                             5.55         3       8.55       8.3
        Total                                                             100         3        103      100


                         Table 3: Disbursement schedule (US$ millions)
      Financing source      Year 1     Year 2       Year 3     Year 4        Year 5       Year 6     Total
      IDB (total)             2.7       12.6         19.4       23.3          28.8         13.2      100
      %                       2.7       12.6         19.4       23.3          28.8         13.2      100
                                          - 14 -



B.    Environmental and social risks
2.3   The program is classified as a category “B” operation and has a moderate level of
      potential negative environmental and/or social impacts. The main environmental
      impacts are related to potential pollution of soil and waterways during landfill
      operations in Boquete and Pedasí, where there is also an insignificant risk of
      conversion/degradation of natural and/or critical habitats. There is a risk of
      environmental liabilities due to pollution of soil and groundwater in the landfills of
      Boquete and Pedasí, as these do not currently have waterproofing systems. The
      main social impacts involve the resettlement of two families that live on one of the
      landfills and the informal recyclers who work there. The program will not finance
      projects that could adversely impact indigenous communities, significantly degrade
      or convert natural habitats, or cause damage to critically important cultural sites.
2.4   Because this is a multiple works program, an environmental and social analysis
      was performed, along with the corresponding environmental and social
      management plan (ESMP) (optional link 8) for the three projects of the sample,
      and an environmental and social management framework (optional link 9) for the
      program. From 27 to 29 March, consultations on the program and its
      socioenvironmental management measures were carried out with the population
      and other interested parties in the three cities of the sample. The main concerns
      raised during the consultations have to do with prioritization of projects that the
      participants consider to be key, but that are not included in the sample; the
      participation of local actors in program monitoring; and the accelerated degradation
      of biodiversity that is being caused by increased tourism flows to these areas. The
      reports on the consultations are available on the Bank’s website.
C.    Fiduciary risks
2.5   Two medium-level fiduciary risks were identified: (i) the executing agency’s (ATP)
      lack of familiarity with Bank operational policies on financial matters and questions
      about the agency’s technical capacity in that regard; and (ii) the executing
      agency’s unfamiliarity with Bank operational policies for procurement/contracting of
      services and questions about the agency’s technical capacity in that regard.
      Mitigation measures have been identified, including: (i) technical assistance and
      training for PEU staff and staff of the ATP’s Administration and Finance Division
      (DAF) who are responsible for financial management, to be provided by fiduciary
      specialists of the IDB Country Office, and hiring a financial specialist with the
      experience and capacity needed to implement and interpret IDB financial
      management policies and guidelines; and (ii) technical assistance and training for
      PEU and ATP staff who are responsible for procurement, to be provided by
      fiduciary specialists of the IDB Country Office, and hiring a procurement specialist
      with the experience and capacity needed to implement and interpret IDB
      procurement policies.
D.    Other key issues and risks
2.6   The potential lack of coordination among the participating stakeholders was
      identified as a high-level risk. To mitigate this, legal technical assistance will be
      provided to develop the specific coordination agreements required for the program,
      and a program coordinator will be appointed, who will be responsible for
      coordinating with the various stakeholders on matters related to the planning and
                                                       - 15 -



          implementation of the program’s specific activities, and for matters related to
          communications.31 The following five medium-level risks were also identified:
          (i) changes in government priorities that may impact the program, associated with
          changes in government administrations at the national and local levels during
          2019; and the lack of proper communication with the new authorities regarding the
          program’s scope; (ii) technical shortcomings of the PEU that may impact the
          program’s projects and prevent them from being implemented within the planned
          scope, costs, and time frame; (iii) institutional reforms may not be adequately
          implemented due to a lack of ownership on the part of institutional staff;
          (iv) municipios may not be able to successfully strengthen their urban and tourism
          management capacity; and (v) the possibility that tourism governance may not be
          strengthened and improved. The mitigation measures for each of these medium-
          level risks are: (i) adequate communication and awareness-raising for the
          transition team and new authorities at the national, provincial, and district levels
          regarding the program’s scope and objectives, as well as opportunities for
          incorporating new projects; (ii) specialized technical assistance to support the
          PEU’s technical management of the program, including the drafting of terms of
          reference, technical specifications, and contract supervision, as well as
          awareness-raising and communication with municipal councils regarding the
          program’s expected scope and benefits; (iii) development of a change-
          management strategy and the allocation of resources for its implementation for the
          purpose of raising awareness, informing, and ensuring the adequate participation
          of ATP staff in the institutional reforms; (iv) adequate communication with and
          awareness-raising of new urban and tourism technical specialists regarding the
          program’s objectives and capacity-building activities at the municipal level; and
          (v) appropriate communication and awareness-raising with members of chambers
          of tourism and the CNT on the benefits and importance of their participation as
          strategic partners in executing the program and implementing the District Advisory
          Councils.32
2.7       Sustainability: The cost/benefit analysis found that the program’s interventions
          are economically viable, which will lead to an increase in the revenues collected by
          municipal governments and relevant entities. This is due to the fact that payment
          collection will increase as a result of service improvements. Additionally, cities will
          collect taxes owing to economic revenue from increased tourism, thereby
          generating more resources for operating and maintaining the program’s projects.



31   In order to facilitate the signing of specific coordination agreements and ensure coordination with
     national and local institutions that have authority over project activities in the program, all of the required
     framework agreements have been signed between the ATP and the Municipio of Pedasí, the Municipio
     of Boquete; the Municipio of Bocas del Toro, the Ministry of the Environment; the Panama Maritime
     Authority; the Micro, Small, and Medium-sized Enterprise Authority; the National Institute of Culture; the
     National Authority for Government Intervention; the Ministry of Housing and Land-use Planning; the
     National Land Administration Authority; the National Water and Sewer Systems Institute; and the
     Panama Urban and Household Sanitation Authority. The framework agreements between the ATP and
     the Municipios of Tierras Altas and Soná are pending.
32   The Tourism Advisory Councils work to bring together tourism stakeholders in every province, including
     a representative from the transportation sector who specializes in tourism, and also to coordinate
     regional tourism development.
                                                   - 16 -



                         III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.        Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1       The borrower will be the Republic of Panama and the executing agency will be the
          ATP, which will be supported by the participation of the beneficiary mayor’s offices
          in the selected cities, as well as national agencies responsible for providing urban
          services and infrastructure. In order to facilitate this collaboration, the ATP will
          have support from the Tourism Cabinet, an entity that falls under the Ministry of the
          Office of the Presidency and whose main objective is to ensure coordination of
          priority actions among central government and public utility institutions with the aim
          of promoting competitive tourism destinations.33 As a member, the ATP will present
          regular reports to the Cabinet on the actions, progress, and results of program
          execution. It will also submit requests for support, as needed, in order to ensure
          effective interagency coordination within the program. The ATP will also form a
          PEU within its structure that will report to the ATP’s highest authority. The PEU will
          be responsible for program execution and will have a high level of autonomy in the
          areas of planning and monitoring, technical management, environmental and
          social management, procurement management, financial management, and
          management of program communications. The PEU will receive expert specialized
          technical support from a firm specializing in project technical management; and
          project supervision, with additional support from the Office of Planning and
          Tourism Development and the ATP’s Administration and Finance Division (DAF).
3.2       The PEU will have a general coordinator who will be specifically hired or appointed
          to this position. He or she will be responsible for: (i) serving as the liaison with the
          Bank; (ii) disbursement requests; (iii) procurement/contracting proposals;
          (iv) reports on the use of the loan proceeds; and (v) submitting to the Bank the
          program’s multiyear execution plan and annual work plans, as well as progress,
          audit, and evaluation reports. The PEU will also be responsible for oversight in
          order to ensure appropriate use and transparency of the funds for which it is
          responsible.
3.3       The PEU will consist of the following team: (a) a program general coordinator; (b) a
          planning and monitoring specialist; (c) a procurement specialist; (d) a financial
          specialist; (e) a legal specialist; (f) an environmental and social specialist; (g) a
          tourism governance specialist; (h) an infrastructure specialist; and (i) three local-
          level coordinators who will be financed from counterpart resources.




33   The Tourism Cabinet was created by Executive Order 278 of 3 July 2019 and is chaired by the Minister
     of the Office of the Presidency (Vice President of Panama); its members include the main ministers and
     managing directors of agencies involved in the tourism sector.
                                          - 17 -



                             Figure 2. Proposed execution mechanism




3.4   Local monitoring committees will be created and comprised of the following:
      a representative from the ATP’s provincial-level office; the mayor or his/her
      designated representative; the governor or his/her representative; a representative
      from the city council; a representative from the local chamber of tourism; two
      representatives from civil society or civil society organizations and local
      communities. These committees will provide external support for participatory
      monitoring of the progress made on program projects in the respective
      municipalities. They will also help facilitate and coordinate actions to support the
      proper and timely implementation of these projects.
3.5   Each mayor’s office in the selected SMCTPs will coordinate its activities with the
      ATP through a program counterpart designated to provide support in the following
      areas: (i) executing and supervising contracts for program projects in the
      respective municipios; (ii) informing communities about these projects; (iii) holding
      consultations with the public; and (iv) processing city council approval for the
      projects.
3.6   Specific coordination agreements will be signed with national and local institutions
      that have authority over the specific project activities included under the program
      (i.e. municipios, IDAAN, and the Ministry of the Environment). These partnership
      agreements have a legal basis in Panama’s current legislation and are approved
      by the Office of the Comptroller General. These agreements will define the
      responsibilities regarding design, supervision, and maintenance/operation of the
      infrastructure to be provided. The ATP has extensive experience with this
      mechanism and currently has similar agreements with other entities. The ATP’s
      Administration and Finance Division (DAF) will be involved in the budget
      programming processes for the national budget and will channel and register all
      procurement in the ISTMO [Technological Solutions and Integration of the
      Operational Management Model] system, according to the instructions that it
      receives from the PEU.
                                                                - 18 -




                                           Figure 3. Execution unit structure

                                                                          Coordinador General
                                                                         del Programa PN-L1154



                                                                                                       Equipo Técnico
                                                                                                      Especializado de
                                                                                                       Apoyo Externo
                                                                                                      (Firma Consultora)



                                                                Especialista                Especialista Técnico -
                                                                  Técnico -                      Gestión y
                                                               Infraestructura              Gobernanza Turística

       Coordinación a
       nivel nacional                       Especialista
                                                                    Especialista            Especialista         Especialista       Especialista
                                          de Planificación y
                                                                  de Adquisiciones           Financiero             Legal         Ambiental y Social
                                             Monitoreo




                                 Coordinador                                     Coordinador                                Coordinador
                                 Ciudad 1 y 2                                    Ciudad 3 y 4                               Ciudad 5 y 6
       Coordinación a
         nivel local
                        Contraparte         Contraparte             Contraparte            Contraparte          Contraparte            Contraparte
                         Alcaldía /          Alcaldía /              Alcaldía /             Alcaldía /           Alcaldía /             Alcaldía /
                        Municipio 1         Municipio 2             Municipio 3            Municipio 4          Municipio 5            Municipio 6




                                                                                                              Referencias:

                                                                                                                      Dedicación exclusiva a tiempo completo
                                                                                                                      Dedicación a tiempo parcial
                                                                                                                      Personal Municipios a tiempo parcial




3.7   Program Operating Regulations (optional link 2). The loan will be executed
      according to the program Operating Regulations, which contain the program’s
      details and execution strategy. It includes: (i) the organizational structure; (ii) the
      minimum standards set forth in the various specific agreements signed for each
      work, which determine the responsibilities of the parties for executing, operating,
      and maintaining such works; (iii) the technical and operational arrangements for
      execution, including the environmental and social requirements; (iv) the schedule
      for programming, monitoring, and evaluation of results; (v) guidelines for the
      financial, audit, and procurement processes; (vi) details on the responsibilities of
      the PEU, as well as the those of other relevant agencies involved in the program;
      and (vii) specific projects designed for the municipios of the program sample. At
      minimum, the annexes will include the following: (i) results matrix; (ii) financial
      agreements and requirements; (iii) monitoring and evaluation plan; (iv) itemized
      budget; and (v) ESMP.
3.8   Procurement of goods, works, and services. Goods, works, and consulting
      services will be procured in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of
      Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document
      GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants
      Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2350-9).
3.9   Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the
      loan: The ATP will provide evidence that it has: (i) signed an agreement with
      the Ministry of the Economy and Finance for the transfer of program
      resources and program execution, pursuant to the terms and conditions
      previously agreed upon with the Bank; (ii) signed the corresponding
                                            - 19 -



       interagency collaboration agreements with the Municipio of Pedasí; the
       Municipio of Boquete; the Municipio of Bocas del Toro; the Municipio of
       Tierras Altas; the Municipio of Taboga; the Municipio of Soná; the Ministry of
       the Environment; the Panama Maritime Authority; the Micro, Small, and
       Medium-sized Enterprise Authority (AMPyME); the National Institute of
       Culture; the National Authority for Government Innovation (AIG); the Ministry
       of Housing and Land-use Planning; the National Land Administration
       Authority; the National Water and Sewer Systems Institute (IDAAN); and the
       Panama Urban and Household Sanitation Authority (AAUD); (iii) formed the
       program execution unit and hired or appointed its key personnel (program
       general coordinator, planning and monitoring specialist, procurement
       specialist, financial specialist, legal specialist, environmental specialist, and
       social specialist); and (iv) approved the program Operating Regulations,
       pursuant to the terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank.
       These conditions are necessary for ensuring that the borrower is prepared to start
       executing the program according to the terms agreed upon with the Bank; to
       transfer responsibilities to the ATP; and to appoint the minimum staff needed for
       the work of the PEU.
3.10   Special contractual conditions for execution: (i) prior to the bidding process for
       works, a specific agreement for each work will be signed between the ATP and the
       corresponding ministry and/or municipality for the purpose of executing each
       project, which will include, inter alia, the relevant operating and maintenance
       conditions, including the allocation of resources required to that end; and (ii) prior
       to initiating the works in question, the rights to legal ownership, easement, and/or
       usage will have been obtained for the land on which the works are to be
       implemented. Additionally, these agreements will include a provision stating that
       systems to be built with program resources will generate and/or receive the
       necessary resources in a transparent and regular manner so as to ensure proper
       operation and maintenance.
B.     Summary of results monitoring arrangements
3.11   Monitoring. For the purposes of monitoring and evaluating execution, a system
       will be implemented that focuses on: (i) ensuring the execution of program
       activities; and (ii) achieving the output indicators and outcomes set out in the
       results matrix. The following instruments will be used: (i) results matrix;
       (ii) multiyear execution plan and annual work plan (required link 1); (iii) monitoring
       and evaluation plan (required link 2); (iv) procurement plan (required link 4); (v) risk
       management matrix; (vi) semiannual status reports; and (vii) audited financial
       statements. The Bank and executing agency will hold an annual joint meeting to
       discuss: (i) progress made on the activities identified in the annual work plan;
       (ii) the level of achievement of the indicators for each component; (iii) the annual
       work plan for the following year; (iv) the procurement plan for the following
       18 months and possible changes to budget allocations for each component; and
       (v) monitoring of the program risk matrices.
3.12   Evaluation. The risk matrix and monitoring and evaluation plan will be used to
       conduct the evaluation. A midterm evaluation, a final evaluation, and an ex post
       cost/benefit evaluation will be conducted for the program to address technical,
       administrative, and financial considerations. The midterm evaluation will be
                                           - 20 -



       conducted once at least 40% of the loan proceeds have been disbursed, or three
       years after the effective date of the loan contract, whichever occurs first. The main
       objectives of the midterm evaluation are to review progress on all activities
       scheduled for that period; take stock of any deviations that have occurred and their
       causes; propose the implementation of corrective measures; and verify the
       midterm outputs that have been generated, any risks in the corresponding matrix
       that have materialized, and that the mitigation measures that have been
       implemented. The final evaluation for each loan will be conducted once 90% of the
       proceeds have been disbursed for the loan under evaluation. The objectives of the
       final evaluation are to verify achievement of the targets for each of the expected
       outcomes, as well as the outputs for each component.
3.13   The ex post cost/benefit evaluation will be conducted once the final loan
       disbursement has been made. This evaluation will use the same methodology as
       the ex ante economic analysis for this operation. Its objective is to verify the
       program’s economic viability, and its inputs will be the ATP’s administrative
       records. Additionally, once the final evaluation has been concluded and the ex post
       cost/benefits have been obtained, these reports will be used to determine whether
       the program’s general objectives were achieved.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annex I -PN-L1154
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 1




                                                                             Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                      Summary            PN-L1154
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
1. IDB Development Objectives


                                                                                                  -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                  -Gender Equality and Diversity
   Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes                                                  -Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability
                                                                                                  -Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law




                                                                                                  -Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*
                                                                                                  -Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)*
                                                                                                  -Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and
                                                                                                  managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*
   Country Development Results Indicators                                                         -Households with wastewater treatment (#)*
                                                                                                  -Tourism destinations benefited by projects aimed at increasing tourism expenditure,
                                                                                                  local and social inclusion and/or improving environmental management (#)*
                                                                                                  -Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of cultural capital (#)*



2. Country Development Objectives



   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                        GN-2838            Improving the provision of basic services to the population
                                                                                                                             living in poverty.



                                                                                                                             The intervention is included in the 2019 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                        GN-2948-2
                                                                                                                             Program.



   Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to
   country strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                                 Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                        7.7
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                     3.0
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                                   1.7
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                                3.0
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                                   8.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                            3.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                          3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                                0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                                  2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                       0.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                   8.5
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                                 2.5
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                       6.0
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                          Medium
                               Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                                 Yes
                                   Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks                                                  Yes
                      Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation                                                  Yes
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                    B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems


                                                                                                                             Financial Management: External Control.
                                                                  Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)               Yes




                                                                                  Non-Fiduciary



The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public
                                                                                                             Yes                                         PN-T1187
sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project


Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.


The objective of the program is to contribute to the urban and socio-economic development of the Small and Intermediate Cities with Tourist Vocation (CPIVT) of the country. The specific
objectives are: (i) to improve the access and quality of its services, infrastructure and urban management; (ii) increase tourism development by improving equipment and promoting
productive community development with a gender focus; and (iii) strengthen the planning, management and promotion of sustainable and resilient tourism cities, at the national and local
levels.

The project presents a complete diagnosis; with an accurate description of the challenges related to urban and tourist development of the CPIVTs in Panama. The results indicators included
in the results matrix are SMART and have means of verification.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) and focused on expected benefits related to the valuation of real estate assets. The CBA uses a
rigorous methodology (hedonic prices) and has an adequate sensitivity analysis. The analysis concludes that the project is economically viable, with an IRR of 26%, using a discount rate of
12%.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is in line with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured through an ex-post cost-benefit
analysis.
                                                                                                                                                                                     Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14


                                                                                    RESULTS MATRIX

                                     The program’s objective is to support urban and socioeconomic development of small and medium-sized cities with tourism potential (SMCTPs) in Panama.
                                     Its specific objectives are to: (i) improve access to and the quality of services, infrastructure, and urban management; (ii) boost tourism development by
          Program objective:
                                     improving infrastructure and promoting productive community development using a gender-based approach; and (iii) strengthen the planning, management,
                                     and promotion of sustainable and resilient tourism cities at the national and local levels.

                                                                                    EXPECTED IMPACT
                                                                           Midterm
                                  Unit of                 Baseline                             Targets
           Indicator                                                   measurements                              Source/Means of verification              Observations01
                                measurement
                                                 Value      Year      Value       Year      Value    Year
    Expected impact: Increased urban and socioeconomic development in the targeted small and medium-sized cities with tourism potential (SMCTPs).
                                                                                                              Survey to be conducted in the
    Property value per                                                                                        final year of execution, following a Details can be found in the
    square meter in the     Index                 100       2018                             120     2025     methodology similar to the one       monitoring and evaluation plan
    targeted cities.2                                                                                         used in the ex ante cost/benefit     (footnotes 4 and 5).
                                                                                                              analysis


                                                                                 EXPECTED OUTCOMES
                                                                                   Midterm
                                   Unit of                 Baseline                                          Targets
           Indicator                                                          measurements                                   Source/Means of verification                Observations
                                 measurement
                                                      Value       Year       Value       Year         Value       Year
    Expected outcome 1: Improved quality of life for residents in the targeted cities
    1.1. Gap in drinking water
                                                                                                                          Annual reports of the Ministry of the
         service coverage
                                                                                                                          Economy and Finance and the             Monitoring and evaluation
         between targeted      Percentage             11.42       2017                                   5        2025
                                                                                                                          National Water and Sewer Systems        plan
         districts and the
                                                                                                                          Institute (IDAAN)
         district of Panama
    1.2. Households with solid
                               Percentage of
         waste collection                                                                                                 Percentage of households surveyed
                               households with very
         service perceived to                                                                                             that consider the quality of this
                               good quality solid
         be of very good                               27%        2018                                 60%        2025    service to be very good. Survey of
                               waste collection
         quality by the                                                                                                   Urban Services Quality (Pedasí and
                               service/Total SMCTP
         residents of the                                                                                                 Boquete)
                               households
         targeted districts




1
      The monitoring and evaluation plan provides more information regarding the observations on impact and outcomes.
2     These values refer to the cities addressed in the cost/benefit analysis—i.e. Pedasí, Boquete, and Bocas del Toro.
Annex II
Page 2 of 14

                                                                               Midterm
                                        Unit of               Baseline                                 Targets
             Indicator                                                     measurements                                  Source/Means of verification                  Observations
                                      measurement
                                                    Value     Year        Value        Year        Value     Year
    Expected outcome 2: Increase in inclusive tourism development in the target cities
                                                                                                                      The baseline percentage refers to the
                                                                                                                      average annual hotel occupancy rate       The program-financed
                                                                                                                      for the five provinces where the          tourism information system
                                                                                                                      program-supported SMCTPs are              will also generate statistics
                                                                                                                      located. The Panama Tourism               by city, which are not
    2.1. Hotel occupancy rate
                                   Number of rooms                                                                    Authority (ATP) has a registry of         currently available (with the
         in the five provinces
                                   occupied/number of    41.6       2017                             50      2025     available hotel rooms by province.        exception of Panama City).
         where the target cities
                                   rooms available (%)                                                                Hotels submit their average annual        The results of the surveys
         are located3
                                                                                                                      occupancy rates at the province level.    on tourism flows to the cities
                                                                                                                      The methodology used by the ATP           targeted by the program will
                                                                                                                      compares both sets of information to      also be a source of
                                                                                                                      arrive at the hotel occupancy             supplementary information.
                                                                                                                      percentage at the province level.
                                                                                                                                                                Contributes to the
                                                                                                                      Reports of the comprehensive
    2.2.Women beneficiaries                                                                                                                                     Corporate Results
                                                                                                                      technical assistance project for
        of economic                                                                                                                                             Framework (CRF) indicator:
                                   Number of women        0         2019                            720      2025     women entrepreneurs citing startup
        empowerment                                                                                                                                             Women beneficiaries of
                                                                                                                      initiatives for which operating permits
        initiatives                                                                                                                                             economic empowerment
                                                                                                                      have been issued
                                                                                                                                                                initiatives.
    Expected outcome 3: Governance strengthened in the national and local tourism sector
    3.1 Institutional capacity Weighted average                                                                       Final program report approved by
                                                  43.4       2018                                    90      2025
        developed              capacity                                                                               the Bank
    3.2 ATP national and                                                                                              Final program report approved by
        provincial employees Employee               0        2019                                   140      2025     the Bank and course attendance
        trained                                                                                                       lists
    3.3 Municipal
        government
                               Employee             0        2019                                    90      2025     Idem
        employees trained in
        tourism management




3      Provinces of: Chiriquí (Volcán and Boquete); Los Santos (Pedasí); Veraguas (Santa Catalina); Bocas del Toro (Bocas del Toro); and Panamá (Taboga).
                                                                                                                                                                          Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                       Page 3 of 14

                                                                                OUTPUTS
                              Unit of                Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4    Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
        Output                            Baseline                                                                                                        Comments
                           measurement                2020     2021     2022     2023      2024     2025    target        verification
Component I: Infrastructure and urban management
Subcomponent I.1: Infrastructure
Comprehensive solid
                         Number of                                                                                   Works acceptance
waste management                             0         -        -        1        1         -        -        2
                         projects                                                                                    notices/ certificates
projects implemented
Milestone 1: Pedasí
                                                                                                                                             Includes refurbishment of the municipal
comprehensive waste
                          Idem               0         -        -        1        -         -        -        1      Idem                    dump, rehabilitation of access roads,
management project
                                                                                                                                             and construction of a recycling center
implemented
                                                                                                                                             Includes studies, designs, and
Milestone 2: Boquete
                                                                                                                                             construction of facilities, recycling
comprehensive waste
                           Idem              0         -        -        -        1         -        -        1      Idem                    warehouse, and leachate pond; design
management project
                                                                                                                                             of recycling program and procurement
implemented
                                                                                                                                             of trucks
Pedasí alternative modes
                                                                                                                                             Includes municipal sidewalks, bike
of mobility project        Idem              0         -        -        1        -         -        -        1      Idem
                                                                                                                                             lanes, and pedestrian crosswalks
implemented
                                                                                                                                             Includes physical adaptation,
                                                                                                                                             landscaping, urban mobility, universal
                                                                                                                                             access and connectivity, connection to
Public space integration
                           Idem              0         -        -        -        -         -        1        1      Idem                    the Internet, linear parks in the
projects implemented
                                                                                                                                             following parks: José Domingo Médica,
                                                                                                                                             El Tropezón, and Feria de las Flores y
                                                                                                                                             del Café
                                                                                                                                             Includes studies and final designs, new
Bocas del Toro water                                                                                                                         exploration wells, transmission lines,
supply system improved,                                                                                                                      access roads, drinking water plant,
                           System            0         -        -        -        1         -        -        1      Idem
expanded, and in                                                                                                                             storage tanks, supply and conveyance
operation                                                                                                                                    lines, and improvements and
                                                                                                                                             expansion of water distribution network
Preliminary studies for                                                                                                                      Includes studies and designs for the
infrastructure projects    Studies           0         -        1        -        -         -        -        1      Study documents         Bocas del Toro comprehensive solid
prepared                                                                                                                                     waste management project
Annex II
Page 4 of 14

                              Unit of                    Year 1   Year 2     Year 3    Year 4     Year 5    Year 6     Final         Means of
        Output                               Baseline                                                                                                                Comments
                            measurement                   2020     2021       2022      2023       2024      2025     target        verification
                                                                                                                                                       Projects for the three new municipios4
                                                                                                                                                       to be defined based on the needs
                                                                                                                                                       identified and in accordance with the
Other infrastructure                                                                                                                                   established selection and eligibility
                            Number of                                                                                          Works acceptance
projects that have been                          0         -         -          -         2         3          1        6                              requirements. May include basic
                            projects                                                                                           notices/ certificates
built and/or refurbished                                                                                                                               service projects: water, sanitation, solid
                                                                                                                                                       waste, mobility, and public spaces (two
                                                                                                                                                       projects per city for the three new
                                                                                                                                                       municipios.
Subcomponent I.2: Urban management
                                                                                                                                                       Land-use plan and urban management
                                                                                                                               Plan document and       strengthening plan, to include climate-
Local development plans
                            Plan                 0         -         2          2         2          -         -        6      legal directive of      change considerations. Plans should
drafted and/or updated
                                                                                                                               approval                be prepared for each of the six
                                                                                                                                                       municipios.
Milestone 1: Pedasí local
development plan            Idem                 0         -         1          -         -          -         -        1
prepared/updated
Milestone 2: Plan de
Desarrollo local de
Boquete local               Idem                 0         -         1          -         -          -         -        1
development plan
prepared/updated
Milestone 3: Bocas del
Toro development plan       Idem                 0         -                    1         -          -         -        1
prepared/updated
Milestone 4: Local
development plans for the
                            Idem                 0         -         -          1         2          -         -        3
three new municipios
prepared/updated
Output 8: Studies of
                            Number of
climate change scenarios                         0         -         2          2         2          -         -        6
                            studies
prepared
Milestone 1: Pedasí
climate change scenarios    Study                0         -         1          -         -          -         -        1
study prepared                                                                                                                 Plan document and
                                                                                                                               legal directive of
Milestone 2: Boquete                                                                                                           approval
climate change scenarios    Idem                 0         -         1          -         -          -         -        1
study prepared
Milestone 3: Bocas del
Toro climate change         Idem                 0         -         -          1         -          -         -        1
scenarios study prepared



4   The three additional SMCTPs selected with the new national authorities are: Volcán (Municipio of Tierras Altas); Santa Catalina (Municipio of Soná); and Taboga (Municipio de Taboga).
                                                                                                                                                                               Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 14

                                  Unit of                Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
         Output                               Baseline                                                                                                         Comments
                                measurement               2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target        verification
Milestone 4: Climate
change scenarios studies
                               Study             0         -        -        1        2        -        -        3
for the three new
municipios prepared
                                                                                                                                                Includes the design of 311 citizen
Activities to improve local                                                                                                                     services processes at the local level
                               Number of
urban management                                 0         -        3        3        3        3        -       12                              and technical assistance to design two
                               activities
developed                                                                                                                                       new urban projects for each of the six
                                                                                                                                                municipios
Milestone 1: Activities to
improve Pedasí urban           Idem              0         -        1        1        -        -        -        2
management developed
Milestone 2: Activities to
improve Boquete urban          Idem              0         -        1        1        -        -        -        2      Consulting documents
management developed                                                                                                    and certificates of
Milestone 3: Activities to                                                                                              delivery
improve Bocas del Toro
                               Idem              0         -        1        1        -        -        -        2
urban management
developed


Milestone 4: Activities to
improve urban
                           Idem                  0         -        -        -        3        3        -        6
management for the three
new municipios developed


                                                                                                                                                Training activities are planned for
                                                                                                                                                15 individuals from each of the six
Training activities for
                                                                                                                        Training report and     municipios; involves staff working in all
municipios in urban            Idem              0         -        1        2        1        1        1        6
                                                                                                                        course attendance lists urban management services. These
management carried out
                                                                                                                                                training include climate change
                                                                                                                                                variables.
Milestone 1: Training
activities for the Municipio
of Pedasí in urban             Idem              0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1
management issues
carried out
Milestone 2: Training
activities for the Municipio
of Boquete in urban            Idem              0         -        -        1        -        -        -        1
management issues
carried out
Annex II
Page 6 of 14

                                  Unit of                 Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
         Output                                Baseline                                                                                                       Comments
                                measurement                2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target        verification
Milestone 3: Training
activities for the Municipio
of Bocas del Toro in urban Idem              0         -       -              1        -        -        -        1
management issues
carried out
Milestone 4: Training        Idem            0         -       -              -        1        1        1        1
activities for three new
municipios in urban
management issues
carried out
Smart urban management Number of
                                             0         -       -              2        3        1        -        6      Operating reports
projects developed           projects
Component II: Tourism infrastructure and community development
Subcomponent II.1: Works and infrastructure
                                                                                                                                               Includes studies, designs, and
                                                                                                                                               construction of parking facility, bus
                                                                                                                                               stop, road works to facilitate pedestrian
Comprehensive project on
                                                                                                                         Works acceptance      mobility; design and implementation of
sustainable tourism      Number of
                                                  0         -                 -        -        -        1        1      notices/certificates  a comprehensive traffic signage plan;
mobility in Boquete in   projects
                                                                                                                         and operation reports procurement of electric buses; GPS
operation
                                                                                                                                               system and monitoring; and the design
                                                                                                                                               and implementation of a management
                                                                                                                                               model.
Milestone 1:
                                                                                                                         Works acceptance
Comprehensive project          Works project      0         -        -        -        1        -        -        1
                                                                                                                         notices/certificates
built
                                                                                                                         Operating reports and
                                                                                                                         certificate of        Noncumulative target; provides for two
Milestone 2: Project up
                               Operation          0         -        -        -        -        1        1        1      satisfactory          years of operation and maintenance
and running
                                                                                                                         compliance with       services
                                                                                                                         maintenance services
                                                                                                                                               Green construction/building; includes
                                                                                                                                               access infrastructure for persons with
Ecofriendly amphitheater
                                                                                                                         Works acceptance      disabilities, stage (venue for film-
for cultural events built in   Works project      0         -        -        1        -        -        -        1
                                                                                                                         notices/certificates  viewing and events), amphitheater,
Boquete
                                                                                                                                               bleachers, dressing rooms, restrooms,
                                                                                                                                               gardens, and parking area
                                                                                                                                               Incudes detailed designs for the project
Tourist destinations                                                                                                                           and its implementation for the rollout of
benefited by projects to                                                                                                                       each center.
increase tourist spending,     Number of                                                                                                       Contributes to the CRF indicator:
                                                                                                                         Works acceptance
promote local and social       tourist            0         2        1        -        -        2        1        6                            Tourism destinations benefited by
                                                                                                                         notices/certificates
inclusion and/or improve       destinations                                                                                                    projects aimed at increasing tourism
environmental                                                                                                                                  expenditure, local and social inclusion
management                                                                                                                                     and/or improving environmental
                                                                                                                                               management.
                                                                                                                                                                                    Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14

                                  Unit of                  Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
        Output                                  Baseline                                                                                                           Comments
                                measurement                 2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target        verification
Milestone 1: Pedasí
Centro de Facilidades
Turísticas de
                               Visitor center      0         1        -        -        -        -        -        1      Certificate of delivery
Interpretación [visitor
center] upgraded and
equipped
Milestone 2: Boquete                                                                                                      Works acceptance
                                                                                                                                                   Includes rehabilitation of scenic
visitor center upgraded        Idem                0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1      notices/certificates and
                                                                                                                                                   overlook
and equipped                                                                                                              certificate of delivery
Milestone 3: Bocas del
Toro visitor cultural center   Idem                0         1        -        -        -        -        -        1      Certificate of delivery
upgraded and equipped
Milestone 4: Visitor
                                                                                                                          Works acceptance         The program provides for one visitor
centers of the three new
                               Idem                0         -        -        -        -        2        1        3      notices/certificates and center for each of the three new
municipios upgraded and
                                                                                                                          certificate of delivery municipios.
equipped
                                                                                                                                                     Projects for the three new municipios,
Other tourism works and                                                                                                                              to be identified based on the needs
tourism infrastructure         Number of                                                                                  Works acceptance           identified and in accordance with the
                                                   0         -        -        -        -        4        2        6
projects implemented in        projects                                                                                   notices/certificates       established selection and eligibility
three municipios                                                                                                                                     criteria. May include such projects as
                                                                                                                                                     mobility and signage, among others.
Preliminary studies for                                                                                                                              Includes prefeasibility studies for the
                        Number of
infrastructure projects                            0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1      Study documents            Pedasí El Arenal beach infrastructure
                        studies
prepared                                                                                                                                             project
Subcomponent II.2: Community projects
                                                                                                                                                     Includes the designs, supervision, and
                                                                                                                                                     execution of the center’s construction
                                                                                                                          Works acceptance
                                                                                                                                                     works and furnishings. The center will
                                                                                                                          notices/certificates,
Cultural innovation centers Number of                                                                                                                have physical areas for: training
                                                   0         -        -        -        1        2        1        4      certificate of delivery,
built and equipped          centers                                                                                                                  activities, selling cultural handicrafts,
                                                                                                                          and consulting
                                                                                                                                                     and others to encourage startup
                                                                                                                          document
                                                                                                                                                     business ventures for sociocultural
                                                                                                                                                     development and tourism.
                                                                                                                                                     Includes the designs, supervision, and
                                                                                                                                                     execution of the center’s construction
                                                                                                                          Works acceptance
                                                                                                                                                     works and furnishings. The center will
Milestone 1: Pedasí                                                                                                       notices/certificates,
                                                                                                                                                     have physical areas for: training
cultural innovation center     Idem                0         -        -        -        1        -        -        1      certificate of
                                                                                                                                                     activities, selling cultural handicrafts,
built and equipped                                                                                                        acceptance, and
                                                                                                                                                     and others to encourage startup
                                                                                                                          consulting document
                                                                                                                                                     business ventures for sociocultural
                                                                                                                                                     development and tourism.
Annex II
Page 8 of 14

                               Unit of                  Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
        Output                               Baseline                                                                                                        Comments
                             measurement                 2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target        verification
                                                                                                                                               Includes the designs, supervision, and
                                                                                                                                               execution of the center’s construction
                                                                                                                       Works acceptance
Milestone 2: Cultural                                                                                                                          works and furnishings. The center will
                                                                                                                       notices/certificates,
innovation centers in the    Number of                                                                                                         have physical areas for: training
                                                0         -        -        -        -        2        1        3      certificate of
three new municipios built   centers                                                                                                           activities, selling cultural handicrafts,
                                                                                                                       acceptance, and
and equipped                                                                                                                                   and others to encourage startup
                                                                                                                       consulting document
                                                                                                                                               business ventures for sociocultural
                                                                                                                                               development and tourism.
                                                                                                                                               Includes furnishings for the centers with
                                                                                                                       Works acceptance
                                                                                                                                               physical areas for: training activities,
                                                                                                                       notices/certificates,
Cultural innovation centers                                                                                                                    selling cultural handicrafts, and others
                            Idem                0         -        -        -        1        1                 2      certificate of
refurbished and equipped                                                                                                                       to encourage startup business ventures
                                                                                                                       acceptance, and
                                                                                                                                               for sociocultural development and
                                                                                                                       consulting document
                                                                                                                                               tourism.
Milestone 1: Boquete                                                                                                   Certificate of          The program provides for the cultural
cultural innovation center   Idem               0         -        -        -        -        1        -        1      acceptance and          innovation center to be installed in the
built and equipped                                                                                                     consulting document     Boquete Convention Center.
                                                                                                                                               The program provides for the cultural
Milestone 2: Bocas del                                                                                                 Certificate of
                                                                                                                                               innovation center to be installed in the
Toro cultural innovation     Idem               0         -        -        -        1        -        -        1      acceptance and
                                                                                                                                               ATP’s provincial administration
center built and equipped                                                                                              consulting document
                                                                                                                                               building, Bocas del Toro.
                                                                                                                                               The comprehensive technical
Comprehensive technical
                                                                                                                                               assistance includes training activities,
assistance developed for
                             Comprehensive                                                                                                     diagnostic assessment studies of
women entrepreneurs to
                             technical          0         -       180      180       -       180      180      720                             market supply and demand, and seed
establish and/or
                             assistance                                                                                                        capital.
strengthen
                                                                                                                                               The program provides the participation
microenterprises
                                                                                                                                               of 60 women annually.

Milestone 1: Package of
comprehensive technical
assistance for Pedasí                                                                                                  Consulting documents,
women entrepreneurs to       Idem               0         -       60       60        -        -        -       120     training reports, and
start and/or strengthen                                                                                                attendance lists
micro business ventures
developed

Milestone 2: Package of
comprehensive technical
assistance for Boquete
women entrepreneurs to       Idem               0         -       60       60        -        -        -       120
start and/or strengthen
micro business ventures
developed
                                                                                                                                                                         Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14

                              Unit of                  Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final        Means of
        Output                              Baseline                                                                                                      Comments
                            measurement                 2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target       verification
Milestone 3: Package of
comprehensive technical
assistance for Boca del
                            Comprehensive
Toro women
                            technical          0         -       60       60        -        -        -       120
entrepreneurs to start
                            assistance
and/or strengthen micro
business ventures
developed
Milestone 4: Package of
comprehensive technical
assistance for women
entrepreneurs in three
                            Idem               0         -        -        -        -       180      180      360
new municipios to start
and/or strengthen micro
business ventures
developed
                                                                                                                                            Festivals featuring creative local
Cultural diversity
                                                                                                                                            handicrafts, and cultural diversity
awareness raising and       Number of
                                               0         3        6        9        9        6        3       36                            awareness raising campaigns events,
cultural promotion events   events
                                                                                                                                            among others. Six such events are
carried out
                                                                                                                                            planned for each of the six municipios.
Milestone 1: Awareness
raising and cultural
                            Idem               0         1        2        2        1        -        -        6
promotion events carried
out in Pedasí
Milestone 2: Awareness
                                                                                                                      Action reports
raising and cultural
                            Idem               0         1        2        2        1        -        -        6      prepared and
promotion events carried
                                                                                                                      consulting document
out in Boquete
Milestone 3: Awareness
raising and cultural
                            Idem               0         1        2        2        1        -        -        6
promotion events carried
out in Bocas del Toro
Milestone 4: Awareness
raising and cultural
                            Number of                                                                                                       Six events for each of the three new
promotion events carried                       0         -        -        3        6        6        3       18
                            events                                                                                                          municipios are planned
out in three new
municipios
Annex II
Page 10 of 14

                                 Unit of                Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
        Output                               Baseline                                                                                                          Comments
                               measurement               2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target        verification
                                                                                                                                                 Includes specialized technical
                                                                                                                                                 assistance for improving management
                                                                                                                                                 and expanding the development of
                                                                                                                                                 business ventures and community
Micro, small, and medium-
                                                                                                                                                 organizations. The program plans to
sized enterprises
                          MSME                  0         -       10       35       25       20        -       90                                provide technical assistance to
(MSMEs) that receive
                                                                                                                                                 15 enterprises in each of the six
nonfinancial support
                                                                                                                                                 municipios.
                                                                                                                                                 Contributes to the CRF indicator:
                                                                                                                                                 Number of MSMEs provided with
                                                                                                                                                 nonfinancial support
                                                                                                                       Action reports
Milestone 1: Pedasí                                                                                                    prepared, training
                              Technical
MSMEs supported with                            0         -        5       10        -        -        -       15      report, and list of
                              assistance
technical assistance                                                                                                   supported companies
Milestone 2: Boquete
MSMEs supported with          Idem              0         -        5       10        -        -        -       15
technical assistance
Milestone 3: Bocas del
Toro MSMEs supported          Idem              0         -        -       10        5        -        -       15
with technical assistance
Milestone 4: Three
MSMEs from the new
                              Idem              0         -        -        5       20       20        -       45
municipios supported with
technical assistance
                                                                                                                                                 Associated with the previous output,
                                                                                                                                                 which provides seed capital support to
                                                                                                                                                 projects of the enterprises receiving
Pilot tourism projects        Number of
                                                0         -        -       10       20       20       10       60                                technical assistance. The program
supported by seed capital     projects
                                                                                                                                                 provides for the design of rules and
                                                                                                                                                 seed capital for 10 projects in each of
                                                                                                                                                 the six beneficiary municipios
Milestone 1: Pedasí pilot                                                                                              Project rules
tourism projects supported    Idem              0         -        -        4        6                 -       10      document, reports on
with seed capital                                                                                                      actions taken, list of
Milestone 2: Boquete pilot                                                                                             enterprises that
tourism projects supported    Idem              0         -        -        3        7                 -       10      received seed capital,
with seed capital                                                                                                      and instrument for
Milestone 3: Bocas del                                                                                                 delivering seed capital
Toro pilot tourism projects
                              Idem              0         -        -        3        7                 -       10
supported with seed
capital
Milestone 4: Pilot tourism
projects in three new
                              Idem              0         -        -        -        -       20       10       30
municipios supported with
seed capital
                                                                                                                                                                             Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 11 of 14

                              Unit of                 Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
        Output                             Baseline                                                                                                         Comments
                          measurement                  2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target        verification
Component III: Modernization of tourism governance
Subcomponent III.1: Modernization of the ATP
                                                                                                                                            Involves preparing a situational
                                                                                                                                            diagnostic assessment. Based on that
                                                                                                                                            assessment, a proposal will be
                                                                                                                                            developed to optimize human talent,
                                                                                                                                            institutional restructuring, a review of
                                                                                                                                            processes, an analysis of training gaps,
                                                                                                                                            and the availability of human
Government agencies                                                                                                                         resources. It also provides for the
benefitted by projects that                                                                                                                 design of organization and function,
                              Number of                                                                              Consulting
strengthen technological                                                                                                                    and procedure manuals; updating of
                              government      0         -        -        -        -        1        -        1      documents: diagnostic
and management                                                                                                                              the job profile manual; and
                              agencies                                                                               assessment and plan
instruments for improving                                                                                                                   development of technical guidelines
public service delivery                                                                                                                     and instructions. This process should
                                                                                                                                            include adjustment of the binding
                                                                                                                                            regulatory framework.
                                                                                                                                            Contributes to the CRF indicator:
                                                                                                                                            Government agencies benefited by
                                                                                                                                            projects that strengthen technological
                                                                                                                                            and managerial tools to improve public
                                                                                                                                            service delivery.
Milestone 1: New                                                                                                     Instruments created
management model             Design           -         -        1        -        -        -        -        1      and internal directive
designed                                                                                                             approving the reforms
Milestone 2: New                                                                                                     Reform                 Involves the implementation of reforms
management model             Percentage       -         -        -       25       40       35        -       100     implementation         and the instruments included in the
implemented                                                                                                          reports                design of the new management model.
Master plan for                                                                                                      Consulting             Includes a diagnostic assessment of
technological development Plan                0         -        -        -        -        1        -        1      documents: diagnostic the characteristics of existing systems,
drafted and implemented                                                                                              assessment and plan and the needs of the institution in terms
Milestone 1: Master plan                                                                                             Internal directive     of proposing more cost-efficient
                             Idem             -         -        1        -        -        -        -        1
prepared and approved                                                                                                approving the reforms solutions for itself.
Training activities for ATP
                             Number of                                                                               Training report and list These training activities include climate
national and provincial                       0         -        2        2        2        -        -        6
                             activities                                                                              of participants          change considerations
staff carried out
Milestone 1: Training
activities in core functions
                             Idem             0         -        1        1        1        -        -        3      Idem
for ATP national and
provincial staff carried out
Milestone 2: Training
activities in support areas
                             Idem             0         -        1        1        1        -        -        3      Idem
for ATP national and
provincial staff carried out
Annex II
Page 12 of 14

                               Unit of                   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
        Output                                Baseline                                                                                                       Comments
                             measurement                  2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target        verification
                                                                                                                        Works acceptance
National and provincial
                            Number of                                                                                   notices/certificates, Includes the national office and
ATP offices equipped                             0         -        4        4        3        -        -       11
                            offices                                                                                     and certificate of    10 provincial offices
and/or refurbished
                                                                                                                        acceptance
                                                                                                                        Consulting
Tourism statistics system
                            System               0         -        -        1        -        -        -        1      documents: diagnostic
implemented
                                                                                                                        assessment and plan Includes the preparation of a situational
                                                                                                                                              diagnostic assessment and the
                                                                                                                                              identification of required improvements,
                                                                                                                                              any systems that need to be
Milestone 1: Tourism                                                                                                                          developed, the preparation of survey
                           Design                0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1      Instruments created   instruments, training of ATP staff, and a
statistics system designed
                                                                                                                                              georeferencing system.



                                                                                                                        Plan document and     Involves updating Panama’s tourism
Tourism planning
                            Instrument           0         -        -        1        5        5        -       11      Legal directive of    master plan, and the design of plans for
documents updated
                                                                                                                        approval              10 provinces
Tourism marketing plan                                                                                                  Marketing plan        Involves updating the marketing plan
                        Plan                  0       -         -          1          -        -        -        1
updated                                                                                                                 document              for domestic and international tourists
Work plan for digital                                                                                                                         Involves digital marketing actions with
                                                                                                                        Reports on actions
tourism marketing       Percentage            0       -         -          -        40%      40%      20%      100%                           emphasis on the local population to be
                                                                                                                        taken
implemented                                                                                                                                   executed by the ATP
Subcomponent III.2 Modernization of tourism management at the subnational level
                                                                                                                                              Includes a situational diagnostic
                                                                                                                                              assessment of urban profiles,
Local tourism
                                                                                                                                              management capabilities, and three
development plans
                            Number of plans      0         -        2        2        2        -        -        6                            activities in each of the six municipios,
drafted/updated and
                                                                                                                                              which may include the procurement of
implemented
                                                                                                                                              equipment, systems, licenses, and
                                                                                                                                              furnishings.
Milestone 1: Pedasí
                                                                                                                                              Involves the implementation of the
tourism development                                                                                                     Plan document and
                          Idem                   0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1                            activities identified in the design of the
plans drafted/updated and                                                                                               legal directive of    statistics system
implemented                                                                                                             approval
Milestone 2: Boquete
tourism development
                          Idem                   0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1                            Idem
plans prepared/updated
and implemented
Milestone 3: Bocas del
Toro tourism development
                          Idem                   0         -        -        1        -        -        -        1                            Idem
plans prepared/updated
and implemented
                                                                                                                                                                                Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 13 of 14

                                Unit of                   Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final         Means of
        Output                                 Baseline                                                                                                        Comments
                              measurement                  2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target        verification
Milestone 4: Tourism
plans for three new                                                                                                                             Involves the implementation of the
municipios                   Number of plans      0         -        -        1        2        -        -        3                             activities identified in the design of the
prepared/updated and                                                                                                                            statistics system
implemented
                                                                                                                                                Includes training activities for
                                                                                                                                                15 individuals in each of the six
                                                                                                                                                municipios. Involves staff of the city
                                                                                                                                                halls working in tourism service
Municipal training activities
                              Number of                                                                                                         management and other key staff of the
in tourism management                             0         -        1        2        2        1        -        6
                              activities                                                                                                        corregimientos [administrative
issues carried out
                                                                                                                                                subdivisions of districts] and municipal
                                                                                                                                                commissioners who are seen as key
                                                                                                                                                for mainstreaming tourism in municipal
                                                                                                                                                management.
Milestone 1: Pedasí                                                                                                      Training report and
training activities in                                                                                                   list of participants
                             Idem                 0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1
tourism management
issues carried out
Milestone 2: Boquete
activities in tourism
                             Idem                 0         -        -        1        -        -        -        1
management issues
carried out
Milestone 3: Bocas del
Toro activities in tourism
                             Idem                 0         -        -        1        -        -        -        1
management issues
carried out
Milestone 4: Training
activities in tourism
management issues            Idem                 0         -        -        -        2        1        -        3
carried out in three new
municipios
Tourism investment pilot                                                                                                                        Includes the preparation of two projects
projects formulated with     Number of pilot                                                                                                    in each of the six municipios, with
                                                  0         -        2        4        4        2        -       12
specialized technical        projects                                                                                                           knowledge transfer and international
assistance                                                                                                                                      good practices in project management
Milestone 1: Pedasi
tourism investment pilot
                                                                                                                         Project documents
projects formulated with     Idem                 0         -        1        1        -        -        -        2
                                                                                                                         and action report
specialized technical
                                                                                                                         prepared
assistance
Milestone 2: Boquete
tourism investment pilot
projects formulated with     Idem                 0         -        1        1        -        -        -        2
specialized technical
assistance
Annex II
Page 14 of 14

                               Unit of                    Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6    Final        Means of
        Output                                 Baseline                                                                                                         Comments
                             measurement                   2020     2021     2022     2023     2024     2025    target       verification
Milestone 3: Bocas del
Toro Tourism investment
                             Number of pilot
pilot projects formulated                         0         -        -        1        1        -        -        2
                             projects
with specialized technical
assistance
Milestone 4: Tourism
investment pilot projects in
new municipios formulated Idem                    0         -        -        1        3        2        -        6
with specialized technical
assistance
                                                                                                                                                  Comprehensive technical assistance
                                                                                                                                                  for each tourism chamber of the six
Tourism chambers            Number of
                                                                                                                                                  municipios to strengthen their
strengthened with           tourism               0         -        2        2        2        -        -        6
                                                                                                                                                  institutional framework and dialogue
technical assistance        chambers
                                                                                                                                                  capacity with public and private actors
                                                                                                                                                  of tourism governance.
Milestone 1: Pedasí
tourism chamber
                            Idem                  0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1
strengthened with
technical assistance
Milestone 2: Boquete
                                                                                                                         Action report prepared
tourism chamber
                            Idem                  0         -        1        -        -        -        -        1
strengthened with
technical assistance
Milestone 3: Bocas del
Toro tourism chamber
                            Idem                  0         -        -        1        -        -        -        1
strengthened with
technical assistance
Milestone 4: Chambers of
tourism in three new
                            Idem                  0         -        -        1        2        -        -        3
municipios strengthened
with technical assistance
                                                                                  Annex III
                                                                                Page 1 of 5




                    FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS


Country:                  Panama
Project number:           PN-L1154
Name:                     Program of Comprehensive Urban Development
                            of Cities with Tourism Potential
Executing agency:         Panama Tourism Authority
Prepared by:              Ezequiel Cambiasso and David Ochoa (FMP/CPN)



                     I.   THE COUNTRY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT

     The borrower will be the Republic of Panama and the executing agency will be the
     Panama Tourism Authority (ATP). The ATP will also form a PEU within its structure
     that will report to the ATP’s highest authority. The PEU will be responsible for
     program execution and will have a high level of autonomy in the areas of planning
     and monitoring, technical management, environmental and social management,
     procurement management, financial management, and management of program
     communications.
     The PEU will receive specialized technical support from a consulting firm for
     administration; technical, environmental, and social management; and project
     supervision. It will also closely coordinate with the Office of Planning and Tourism
     Development (DPDT) and the ATP’s Administration and Finance Division (DAF).
     During the program design process, an analysis of the executing agency’s
     institutional capacity was conducted that demonstrated an emerging capacity for
     execution and a substantial level of risk in general.

           II. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS

     With respect to fiduciary risk, the following medium-level risks were identified:
     a. Delays in program procurement and contracting. The following mitigation
        measures are proposed: training, ongoing technical assistance, and advisory
        services provided by the IDB fiduciary team to staff of the PEU and ATP
        responsible for procurement; hiring/appointing of a procurement specialist with
        the experience and capacity needed to carry out the procurement planned for
        program execution, who can also implement and interpret IDB procurement
        policies and establish procurement management procedures, including
        procurement planning that will impact the program.
     b. Delays in presenting audited financial reports. The following mitigation
        measures are proposed: training, ongoing technical assistance, and advisory
        services provided by the IDB fiduciary team to staff of the PEU and the ATP’s
        Administration and Finance Division; hiring a financial specialist with the
Annex III
Page 2 of 5


               experience and capacity to implement and interpret IDB financial management
               policies and guidelines, and who has knowledge of government budgets and
               budgetary and financial planning.

              III. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS

3.1     The agreements and requirements that will be considered in the special provisions
        are included herein. The Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed
        Projects (document OP-273-12) will be applied, and in accordance with these
        guidelines: (i) the program’s financial statements that have been audited by an
        independent auditing firm acceptable to the Bank will be requested annually, no
        later than 120 days after the close of each fiscal year or the date of the last
        disbursement; (ii) advances of funds will be requested for financial plans for up to
        180 days; and (iii) a new advance may be requested once 80% of the previously
        disbursed proceeds have been accounted for.

         IV. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

        The provisions established here will apply to execution for all procurement
        processes planned under the program.
        Procurement execution
        The Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-
        American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the
        Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American
        Development Bank (document GN-2350-9) will apply.
        Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. International
        competitive bidding (ICB) will be conducted using standard bidding documents
        issued by the Bank. National competitive bidding (NCB) and shopping will be
        conducted using the models defined by the Bank for each operation. The project
        sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical specifications for
        procurement during preparation of the selection processes.
        Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts will be executed using the
        standard bidding documents issued by the Bank. The sector specialist will be
        responsible for reviewing the terms of reference for contracting consulting services.
        Selection of individual consultants. Selections will be made based on
        candidates’ qualifications for performing the work, with a comparison of at least
        three candidates.
        Use of the country procurement system. The Bank’s Board of Executive
        Directors approved the use of framework agreement subsystems up to the
        threshold of US$250,000 established for NCB (document GN-2538-11), as well as
        a mechanism for small procurement up to US$50,000, which may vary should the
        Bank approve higher levels. The procurement plan for the operation and
        subsequent updates will indicate the procurement to be executed through the
        approved country procurement systems.
                                                                                                Annex III
                                                                                              Page 3 of 5


       Procurement plan. The Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) or an
       updated version thereof will be used as the electronic procurement monitoring
       system.

                                        Table 1. Thresholds (US$)
                 Works                                   Goods                   Consulting services
                                                                      Shopping
                              Shopping
                  NCB/                                     NCB/          for
    ICB                      for complex       ICB                             International National
                shopping                                 shopping     complex
                                works
                                                                       works
              >250,000 and                      <=    >50,000 and
>=3,000,000                    <250,000                                < 50,000    >200,000    <=200,000
               <3,000,000                     250,000  <250,000

                                    Table 2. Main procurement items
                                                                                  Type of     Estimated
                                   Activity
                                                                                  bidding       (US$)
 Hiring the construction company, preparation of preliminary studies, and           ICB       9,500,000
 construction of the water supply system for Bocas del Toro
 Hiring of the construction company, preparation of preliminary studies,           ICB        5,500,000
 design, execution of works, and equipment for the comprehensive solid
 waste management project in Pedasí
 Procurement of vehicles to cover waste collection for the city of Boquete;        ICB         850,000
 procurement of four buses for the comprehensive project on sustainable
 tourism mobility in Boquete
 Hiring the consulting firm. Design and implementation of a new management        QCBS        2,700,000
 model for the ATP
 Hiring the consulting firm; design and implementation of a technology master     QCBS        2,000,000
 plan for the ATP
 Hiring of the consulting firm; formation of the specialized technical team for   QCBS        4,000,000
 external support


       Procurement supervision
       All ICB and direct contracting of goods, works, and nonconsulting services will be
       reviewed in advance. The selection of consulting firms entailing more than
       US$200,000 and any single-source selection will be reviewed in advance. For the
       remaining contracts, the type of review to be used will be determined on a case-
       by-case basis in the procurement plan.
       Records and files
       The executing agency will keep up-to-date records and orderly files that can be
       reviewed by the Bank according to the following guidelines:
       a. Procurement documentation must be kept in a single file or folder that is
          completely separate from the processes financed from local contribution
          resources or by resources other than program resources.
       b. Documents will be kept and properly organized, labeled, and numbered, such
          that they can be clearly and quickly located and identified, and available at all
          times for the purposes of Bank review and auditing.
Annex III
Page 4 of 5


                              V. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

        Programming and budget
        The ATP will include the necessary funds for project execution in the amount of its
        draft budget and submit it to the Ministry of the Economy and Finance prior to
        30 April of each year. The Ministry drafts and oversees the budget and will submit
        a proposal by 31 July of each fiscal year to the National Assembly, which is
        responsible for approving the budget and any budget increases. The budget
        covers a period of one year and includes all public sector investment, revenues,
        and expenditures. In the budget bill for the 2020 fiscal year, the National Public
        Investment System (SINIP) codes will be created, as well as guidelines for IDB
        financing and the local contribution. The entire annual budget for the local
        contribution will first be requested, and once the loan is approved, the executing
        agency will request substitution of the source of financing.
        Accounting and information systems
        With a view to modernizing public sector management, Panama’s national
        government, through the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the National
        Accounting Bureau (DNC), has implemented the Integration and Technological
        Solutions of the Operational Management Model (ISTMO) system. The PEU will
        make the necessary arrangements with the National Accounting Bureau in terms
        of identifying relevant system users, training, and system configuration to manage
        the budget, commit expenditures, and make payments through the system. The
        ISTMO system is currently being evaluated to determine whether it can be used in
        IDB-financed projects or a parallel system will need to be used instead.
        Accounting will be governed by the standards issued by the Office of the
        Comptroller General of the Republic (CGR), which are based on the International
        Public Sector Accounting Standards.
        Disbursements and cash flow
        Panama has enacted a law establishing the use of the treasury single account
        concept, which the central government has begun implementing. In 2019, an
        evaluation of the treasury single account and its relationship to implementation
        of the ISTMO system will be evaluated to determine if it can be used in
        IDB-financed projects.
        The IDB will transfer the loan proceeds into an account at a financial entity to be
        opened by the Ministry of the Office of the Presidency and used exclusively for the
        program. In accordance with the program’s financial plan, disbursements will be
        made through advances of funds to cover liquidity needs for up to 180 days. A new
        advance can be requested once 80% of the cumulative balance pending justification
        has been accounted for. Reimbursement of payments incurred or direct payments
        to providers can also be made.
        Internal control and external auditing
        As a result of CGR preaudits, internal control and internal audit systems of
        government agencies are weak because they rely CGR controls, instead of having
        efficient processes and controls. Consequently, they are not considered
        appropriate for the control function required for projects.
                                                                             Annex III
                                                                           Page 5 of 5


External control and reports
Due to weaknesses in its audit function, the CGR has focused its efforts on preaudits
of actions involving government assets. In addition to carrying out administrative
processes through preaudits, the CGR does not have the necessary autonomy to
perform audits, which is why it is not considered to have the capacity to perform
external control of the program.
Financial supervision plan
Financial supervision will focus on reports by the aforementioned auditors.
Supporting documentation for disbursements will be reviewed ex post by the
auditors when they perform audits or as part of their financial inspection visits.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/19



                   Panama. Loan ____/OC-PN to the Republic of Panama
        Program of Comprehensive Urban Development of Cities with Tourism Potential



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, in the
name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Republic of Panama, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing
to cooperate in the execution of a “ Program of Comprehensive Urban Development of Cities
with Tourism Potential”. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$100,000,000,
from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial
Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the
Loan Proposal.



                                (Adopted on __ ____________ 2019)



LEG/SGO/CID/EZSHARE-1349406811-15189
PN-L1154
