                                                                                          PUBLIC
                                                                        SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                 DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                            ECUADOR




    HOUSING SOLUTIONS FOR POOR AND VULNERABLE HOUSEHOLDS
                          (EC-L1245)


FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR
INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP): CASA PARA TODOS SECTOR PROGRAM
                           (EC-O0004)




       SECOND PROPOSED MODIFICATION OF LOAN CONTRACT 4788/OC-EC




 This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Paloma Acevedo (CSD/HUD),
 Project Team Leader; Karina Calahorrano (CAN/CEC); Silvia Pérez (CSD/HUD); and
 Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO).




 This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors
 simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the
 document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding
 and replacing the original version.
                                                      CONTENTS



I.     DOCUMENT PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND ................................................................ 1

       A.     Document purpose .......................................................................................1
       B.     Background ..................................................................................................1

II.    SECOND MODIFICATION OF THE LOAN CONTRACT ..................................................... 5

       A.     Description ...................................................................................................6
       B.     Rationale ......................................................................................................8
       C.     Cofinancing ................................................................................................ 10
       D.     Strategic alignment ..................................................................................... 11
       E.     Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11
       F.     Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 11
       G.     Implementation arrangements .................................................................... 12
       H.     Program evaluation .................................................................................... 12

III.   RECOMMENDATION ............................................................................................... 12




                                                    APPENDICES


Proposed resolution
                                                     - ii -


                                                   ANNEXES

Annex I     Evaluability Note
Annex II    Results Matrix


                                               UPDATED LINKS

1.    Request for modification from the borrower
2.    Program Operating Regulations
3.    Report on use of loan proceeds as of September 2022
4.    Component 1 procurement list
5.    Ecuador housing sector study
6.    Request for modification from the executing agency
7.    Information technology institutional strengthening plan
8.    Component 1 sustainability analysis
9.    Aide-mémoire from the Agence Française de Développement (AFD)
10.   Modification proposal report for beneficiary selection process
11.   Modified cash flow projections
12.   Loan proposal - Original
13.   Loan proposal - First modification
14.   Contract modification
                                   - iii -


                             ABBREVIATIONS


AFD       Agence Française de Développement [French Development Agency]
CCLIP     Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects
ENEMDU    Encuesta Nacional de Empleo, Desempleo y Subempleo [National
          Survey of Employment, Unemployment, and Underemployment]
INEC      National Institute of Statistics and Census
MEF       Ministry of Economy and Finance
MIDUVI    Ministry of Urban Development and Housing
SBU       Salario Básico Unificado [Unified basic wage]
SIIDUVI   Sistema Integral de Información de Desarrollo Urbano y Vivienda
          [Integrated Urban Development and Housing Information System]
SIV       Sistema de Incentivos para Vivienda [housing incentives system]
VAT       Value added tax
                           I. DOCUMENT PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND

A.        Document purpose
1.1       The Republic of Ecuador, acting through its Ministry of Economy and Finance
          (MEF), requested—through official letter MEF-SFP-2022-0172-O (link 1) of
          2 December 2022—that the Bank approve a second modification of the program
          “Housing Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable Households” (4788/OC-EC) (the
          “program”), in order to eliminate specific objective 2 and Component 2, which
          would involve redirecting US$14 million from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital. In
          parallel, the MEF made the same request to the Agence Française de
          Développement (AFD), to transfer US$14 million to Component 1. Moreover, the
          MEF requested the partial financing, with resources from that component, of the
          strengthening of the sustainability of low-income housing construction. The
          purpose of this document is to request that the Board of Executive Directors of the
          Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) approve these modifications, and to
          present the applicable technical rationale.
B.        Background
               Approval of conditional credit line for investment projects (CCLIP) and
               first individual operation
1.2       On 22 May 2019, through Resolutions DE-36/19 and DE-37/19, the Board of
          Executive Directors approved the CCLIP: “Casa Para Todos Sector Program” for
          up to US$200 million from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, together with the
          first individual operation under the CCLIP for US$93.9 million. This amount
          increased with parallel cofinancing of US$54 million 1 from the AFD and a local
          counterpart contribution of US$700,000, for a program total of US$148.6 million. 2
          Loan contract 4788/OC-EC was signed on 12 July 2019, and declared eligible for
          disbursement on 5 September 2019. 3
1.3       Executing agency. The executing agency is the Ministry of Urban Development
          and Housing (MIDUVI), which has extensive experience implementing housing
          programs with the Bank, through a system of housing incentives (SIV) in Ecuador.
          The SIV involves paying direct cash subsidies to poor households facing a housing
          deficit, to help them gain access to adequate housing. Since its creation in 1997,
          the SIV has supported housing solutions for over 30,000 low-income households.
          Since 2012, the MIDUVI’s policies have helped reduce the housing deficit by
          approximately 11 percentage points, 4 with support from the IDB through


1     Operation with parallel IDB-AFD cofinancing. Through the Partnership Framework Agreement signed on
      11 October 2018 and the Parallel Cofinancing Agreement with Services signed on 11 November 2019,
      the parties agreed to the delivery of services for funds provided by the AFD for the shared components,
      Components 1 and 2, which are governed by the same program Operating Regulations. On 22 November
      2019, the AFD signed loan contract CEC-1031-01-U, providing resources in smaller amounts for the
      shared components, decreasing the total from US$80 million to US$54 million.
2     According to the changes made under the first modification, the counterpart contribution was eliminated,
      and clarification was made that value added tax (VAT) payments will be covered with loan proceeds.
3     The operation was declared eligible, except for Component 2, which would have remained pending until
      the MEF and the MIDUVI determined the execution arrangements for the trust to manage these
      resources. IDB communication CAN/CEC-1072/2019 of 5 September 2019.
4     IDB sector diagnostic assessment.
                                                        -2-



          two previous operations executed successfully, achieving expected outcomes
          (loans 2279/OC-EC5 and 2797/OC-EC). 6
1.4       General objectives of the CCLIP. The general objectives are to: (i) improve
          access for Ecuadorian households living in a situation of poverty or vulnerability
          and without adequate housing, to affordable, sustainable, and universally
          accessible housing; and (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Government of Ecuador
          to generate and implement long-term housing policies.
1.5       Specific objectives of the first individual operation. The specific objectives are
          to: (i) reduce the quantitative housing deficit among rural households in the
          country’s two lowest income quintiles, prioritizing those with specific vulnerability
          indicators; 7 (ii) idem, but targeted on urban households; and (iii) optimize MIDUVI
          institutional processes.
               First modification of the loan contract
1.6       Borrower’s request. On 25 September 2019, the MIDUVI 8 requested that the
          MEF process a first modification to the scope of Components 1 and 2 of the loan
          contract with the IDB, and that VAT payments be financed from loan resources.
          On 21 November 2019, by official letter MEF-MINFIN-2019-0340-O, the MEF
          submitted a formal request to the Bank. On 18 June 2020, the Board of Executive
          Directors approved the first modification of the loan contract. On 29 June 2020, the
          first contract modification was signed, authorizing the transfer of loan proceeds
          from Component 2 to Component 1, the modification of the second specific
          objective of the first individual operation, and the financing of VAT payments for
          the procurement processes of Component 3 and other costs.
1.7       General objectives of the CCLIP. Under the first modification, both general
          objectives were maintained (paragraph 1.4).
1.8       Specific objectives of the first individual operation. For the first modification,
          specific objectives (i) and (iii) were left unchanged, while objective (ii) was modified
          to be expressed as follows: “reduce the quantitative housing deficit among
          households in urban areas in the first, second, and third quintiles, with household
          incomes of up to twice the SBU” (paragraph 1.5).
1.9       Components and other costs. As a result of the first contract modification, the
          first individual operation had the following three components:




5     According to its program completion report, under the indicators “quality of life of families” and “better
      targeting.”
6     According to its program completion report, as “percentage of beneficiary households with a Social
      Registry score above the corresponding eligibility threshold” and “percentage of beneficiary households
      from vulnerable groups.”
7     For this operation, households with specific vulnerability indicators are those that include the elderly, three
      or more minors, female heads of household, persons with disabilities, victims of domestic or sexual
      violence, or persons belonging to indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian, or Montubio ethnic groups.
8     Official letter MIDUVI-MIDUVI-2019-0793-O of 25 September 2019.
                                                   -3-



        a. Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of new housing on own
           land in rural and urban areas (IDB: US$74 million; AFD: US$40 million).
           This component will finance direct subsidies 9 to family units living in conditions
           of extreme and moderate poverty, in quintiles one and two based on their social
           register score. The subsidy will be for up to 41.12 times the unified basic wage
           (SBU). The component will also finance the construction of sustainable,
           universally accessible housing on the beneficiary’s own land for up to
           41.12 times the SBU. Homes will have two or three bedrooms (depending on
           the family structure), and will meet architectural criteria adapted to the
           bioclimatic zone. The MIDUVI will organize and prioritize demand by groups,
           pursuant to the program Operating Regulations. Program beneficiaries may
           request an additional subsidy of US$1,500 to finance works or equipment for
           the provision of services (water, wastewater disposal, and electricity) when
           these are lacking; and US$600 for titling processes. With the Bank’s financing
           for this component, it is estimated that about 5,204 subsidies will be granted to
           an equal number of families.
        b. Component 2. Partial subsidies for the purchase of urban housing (IDB:
           US$14 million; AFD: US$14 million). This component will finance direct
           monetary subsidies to households living in poverty or moderate poverty, in the
           first, second, and third quintiles, with household incomes of up to twice the
           SBU, to purchase sustainable, universally accessible housing within a price
           range from 57.57 to 101.52 times the SBU. The homes will include mitigation
           measures to reduce their energy and water consumption. Individual and group
           applications will be submitted to the MIDUVI and may be completed directly by
           the eligible household. All households making up a committee will be prioritized
           according to the criteria of the program Operating Regulations. The amount of
           the subsidy will be US$6,000, which, in conjunction with credits from the
           financial or cooperative sector and/or household savings, will enable
           beneficiaries to purchase their homes. The Bank’s resources for this
           component are expected to finance 2,333 subsidies awarded to an equal
           number of family units.
        c. Component 3. MIDUVI strengthening (IDB: US$3.9 million). This
           component will finance technical and technological improvements in the
           Integrated Urban Development and Housing Information System (SIIDUVI), in:
           (i) the access module, to register, verify eligibility, and prioritize beneficiaries,
           and award subsidies; (ii) the supply module, to register, qualify, award, and
           evaluate housing developers and builders; and (iii) the optimization of the
           property database (identification and selection of available land parcels, based
           on criteria of accessibility and vulnerability to risks).
        d. Other costs (IDB: US$2 million). Program resources will be used to finance
           evaluation and monitoring costs, audits, administration, and contingencies.
1.10    After the first modification, the program still prioritizes households on the basis of
        specific vulnerability indicators: the presence of elderly persons, minors, female
        heads of household, persons with disabilities, victims of domestic or sexual


9   A nonmonetary subsidy consisting of the delivery of 100% subsidized housing to the beneficiary.
                                               -4-



         violence, or persons belonging to indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian or Montubio ethnic
         groups. Moreover, the Results Matrix maintains as targets that at least 6% of the
         total of program subsidies be awarded to households with persons with disabilities,
         and at least 22% benefit women heads of household, under criteria set out in the
         current program Operating Regulations (link 2).
1.11     Progress of components. Since signing the loan contract on 12 July 2019, the
         executing agency has met all the conditions precedent for Components 1 and 3.
         However, Component 2 has not been declared eligible. To date, a trust for the
         component’s effective execution has not been established, due to the reasons
         explained below. 10 The operation was declared eligible for disbursement, except
         for Component 2, on 5 September 2019. The first advance of funds, US$40 million,
         was provided on 9 September 2019 and the second advance of US$37,565,029.43
         on 31 May 2022. Execution of the operation has so far been satisfactory. For
         Component 1, 73% of the execution period has elapsed and 83% of resources
         have been disbursed. The MIDUVI has managed to commit US$57,417,404 to
         Component 1, representing over 78% of the total amount under this component,
         and 86% of the disbursements have been made (link 3). This amount has enabled
         the MIDUVI to serve 2,361 families: 32% are households headed by women and
         16.5% include a person with disabilities (link 4). This complies with the targeting
         objectives and eligibility guidelines set forth in link 2.
1.12     The execution of Component 2 has not begun due to a combination of factors that
         include the deterioration of the economic conditions of the population stemming
         from the COVID-19 crisis with the existence of demand and supply constraints. To
         identify these barriers and attempt to execute this component, an in-depth sector
         study was conducted, reaching the following conclusions:
         a. Demand. Private financial systems lack sufficient depth to offer mortgage
            loans to the populations living in poverty or in moderate poverty who are eligible
            for the program (in the first, second, and third quintiles, with household incomes
            of up to twice the SBU), despite them having a US$6,000 subsidy and an
            interest rate subsidy (offered under the guarantee for program 4699-OC-EC).
         b. Supply. The housing supply is limited by the low return on the eligible type of
            housing (up to US$40,000) and the great uncertainty of low demand, which
            involves a high risk for developers and builders of being unable to sell these
            homes.
1.13     Twice, 11 the MIDUVI requested that the remaining proceeds available
         (US$14 million) be transferred from Component 2 to Component 1, to address




10   This trust was not established because of the demand and supply constraints described in
     paragraph 1.12.
11   Electronic correspondence (no number) from the MIDUVI of 29 December 2020 (INPUT
     CAN/CEC-55/2021); and MIDUVI’s official letter MIDUVI-PEV-2022-0125-O of 5 July 2022 (link 6,
     requesting that the MEF process a modification with the IDB).
                                                     -5-



          growing demand under this component. 12 The Bank’s first response 13 stated that,
          while the underlying reasons were understandable, it had determined that at the
          time, there were administrative, operational, and financial considerations to be
          taken into account in justifying the fund transfer. Subsequently, during an
          administration mission from 22 February to 5 March 2021, the MIDUVI presented
          an analysis that showed potential demand. The parties agreed to expand this
          analysis and attempt to execute this component. However, it was later determined
          that the profile of the potential beneficiaries did not meet the program’s eligibility
          criteria. To expand the knowledge about the barriers and find possible solutions to
          execute the component, the IDB and the MIDUVI prepared a “Sector Study of
          Ecuador’s Housing Sector Value Chain” (link 5). This included conducting an in-
          depth analysis of the sector and interviewing more than 50 strategic stakeholders
          in the country’s housing sector, including the managers of the main commercial
          and public banks, as well as construction companies. The study concluded that
          currently, the demand and supply conditions necessary to finance housing in that
          segment for such vulnerable populations do not exist. In addition, the study
          proposed ways to improve the housing deficit, which have been part of a dialogue
          with the authorities and will be considered in defining future operations under the
          CCLIP.
1.14      For Component 3, on 27 May 2022, US$1.17 million were disbursed to execute an
          information technology institutional strengthening plan agreed upon between the
          IDB and the MIDUVI (link 7), to cover: (i) operational information technology issues
          at the ministry; and (ii) the strategic implementation of the ministry’s digital
          transformation. However, challenges of an institutional nature emerged regarding
          the plan’s implementation, including high personnel turnover. This directly
          impacted the component’s execution and progress in achieving the associated
          specific objective, to “optimize MIDUVI institutional processes.” For the moment, a
          strategic plan has been designed for the contracting of staff and information
          technology resources to strengthen MIDUVI’s information technology, which is in
          the process of execution.

                      II. SECOND MODIFICATION OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

2.1       Borrower’s       request.       The     MIDUVI,        through   official     letter
          MIDUVI-PEV-2022-0125-O (link 6) of 5 July 2022, requested that the MEF process
          a second modification of the loan contract with the IDB, in order to: (i) eliminate
          specific objective 2 and therefore, Component 2, from the program; (ii) redirect
          US$14 million (from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital) from Component 2 to
          Component 1 to continue financing new homes on own land in urban and rural
          areas, for households in the first and second quintiles; and (iii) finance the
          strengthening of sustainability considerations in low-income housing construction,

12    According to the MIDUVI, in 2021 the housing deficit impacted 57% of households (including both
      qualitative and quantitative deficits), concentrated among low-income families and vulnerable
      populations. This quantitative deficit consists of approximately 580,000 households that lack resources
      or affordable lending instruments from the private sector to gain access to housing. Moreover, to date,
      the social register includes approximately 1 million households that would possibly benefit from 100%
      subsidized housing on their own land.
13    CEC-75/2021 of 20 January 2021 and Administration mission aide-mémoire of February 2021.
                                                       -6-



          supported by a technical report (link 8) with the corresponding analysis. On 2
          December 2022, by official letter MEF-SFP-2022-1072-O (link 1), the MEF
          submitted a formal request to the Bank. Separately, by official letter
          MIDUVI-PEV-2022-0157-O of 26 August 2022, the MIDUVI requested that the
          MEF process with the AFD the transfer of proceeds between components for loan
          CEC-1031-01-U, which is partly managed by the IDB. Therefore, on 24 November
          2022, correspondence AFD QUITO/2022/456 was signed, authorizing the transfer
          of US$14 million from Component 2B to Component 1A (link 9).
A.        Description
2.2       Objectives of the CCLIP. Under the second modification, both general objectives
          are also maintained (paragraph 1.4).
2.3       Specific objectives of the first individual operation. Under the second
          modification of the loan contract, objectives (i) and (iii) were left unchanged, and
          objective (ii) was eliminated (paragraph 1.5).
2.4       Components and other costs. As a result of the second contract modification,
          the first individual operation will have the following two components:
          a. Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of new housing on own land in
             rural and urban areas (IDB: US$88 million; AFD: US$53,757,000). This
             component will finance direct subsidies to family units living in conditions of
             extreme and moderate poverty, in quintiles one and two, according to their
             social register score. To meet sustainable housing criteria, the subsidy amount
             will be modified according to the amount determined under current national
             regulations. 14,15 Financing will be provided for the construction of sustainable,
             universally accessible housing on the beneficiary’s own land for the maximum
             amount that the country establishes. Homes will have two or three bedrooms
             (depending on the family structure), and will meet architectural criteria adapted
             to the bioclimatic zone. 16 Under this component, the strengthening of
             sustainability considerations in low-income housing construction may also be
             financed. The program’s beneficiaries may request an additional subsidy to
             finance works or equipment for the provision of services (water, wastewater
             disposal, and electricity) when these are lacking, pursuant to current national
             regulations; 17 and for titling processes, pursuant to current national



14    For purposes of this program, the Bank will agree with MIDUVI on the maximum value for this purpose,
      which will be incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. Currently, Article 10 of Executive
      Decree 405 of 21 April 2022 sets forth that low-income housing that is fully subsidized by the State and
      constructed on the beneficiary’s own land will have a value of up to 44 times the SBU.
15    Eligible expenditures incurred by the borrower will be those made between the time that the MEF
      submitted the request through official letter MEF-SFP-2022-0172-O (link 1) of 2 December 2022 and the
      entry into force of the contract modification.
16    Characterized by reduced energy and water use of 20% and 20% savings in the embodied energy of
      building materials, compared to conventional construction.
17    For purposes of this program, the Bank will agree with MIDUVI on the maximum value for this purpose,
      which will be incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. Currently, Article 19(2) of Executive
      Decree 405 of 21 April 2022 sets forth that the amount of the incentives to deliver public services will be
      of up to 12 times the SBU.
                                                      -7-



               regulations. 18 With the Bank’s financing for this component, it is estimated that
               approximately 5,934 subsidies will be granted to an equal number of families.
         b. New Component 2 (formerly Component 3). MIDUVI strengthening (IDB:
            US$3.9 million). This component will finance technical and technological
            improvements in the SIIDUVI, in: (i) the access module, to register, verify
            eligibility, prioritize beneficiaries, and award subsidies; (ii) the supply module,
            to register, qualify, award, and evaluate housing developers and builders; and
            (iii) the optimization of the property database (identification and selection of
            available land parcels, based on criteria of accessibility and vulnerability to
            risks). Activities are based on an initial improvement plan that includes
            programming, systems, equipment, and human talent. An algorithm will be
            designed to improve beneficiary selection, and to enhance coordination and
            training on land management (including VAT) for the decentralized
            autonomous municipal governments.
         c. Other costs (IDB: US$2 million). This will finance costs associated with
            evaluation and monitoring activities, audits, administration, and contingencies
            (including VAT).

                       Table 1. Estimated program costs under the second modification 19
                                                (US$ million)*
                         Components                    IDB      Local     AFD      Total       %
          Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of new housing on own land in rural and urban
          areas
          Subsidies for housing construction                83       0     48.7      131.7        89
          Subsidies for water connection                   3.6       0        3        6.6       4.4
          Subsidies for administrative and legal           1.4       0        2        3.4       2.3
          expenses
          Total Component 1                                 88       0     53.7      141.7        96
          Component 2. MIDUVI strengthening
          Support for the MIDUVI                           3.9       0        0        3.9       2.9
          Total Component 2                                3.9       0        0        3.9       2.9
          Other costs
          Administration                                   1.2       0        0        1.2       0,9
          Evaluation and monitoring                        0.5       0        0        0.5       0.4
          Audits                                           0.3       0        0        0.3       0.2
          Total other expenses                               2       0        0          2       1.5
          Total                                           93.9      0**    53.7      147.6      100
          *        Sums rounded to the nearest decimal.
          **       In compliance with Executive Decree 0001 of 2 January 2020.




18   For purposes of this program, the Bank will agree with MIDUVI on the maximum value for this purpose,
     which will be incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. Currently, Article 20 of Executive
     Decree 405 of 21 April 2022 sets forth that the amount of the incentives for land titling will be of up to
     twice the SBU. For purposes of this program, the Bank and the MIDUVI will agree upon the maximum
     amount allocated for these purposes in the program Operating Regulations.
19   This modification does not affect the program’s overall budget, since it only transfers amounts between
     categories. Specifically, Component 1 will change from US$69 million (under the first modification) to
     US$83 million after the transfer of US$14 million from former Component 2, which this second
     modification eliminated.
                                                     -8-



2.5       Results Matrix. The Results Matrix will reflect the outcome and output indicators
          established in order to finance the increase in funds for Component 1 and eliminate
          specific objective 2 and Component 2, while maintaining two components, as
          follows: Component 1, Subsidies for the construction of new housing on own land
          in rural and urban areas; former Component 2 (eliminated); and Component 3,
          MIDUVI strengthening.
B.        Rationale
              Elimination of specific objective 2 and Component 2
2.6       With respect to the housing supply, low-income housing project records from the
          Office of the Deputy Secretary of Housing of the MIDUVI, with a cut-off date of
          31 May 2022, show that the recording of 4,641 housing units for Component 2
          (low-income housing partially subsidized by the State) is pending. Of these,
          82.63% correspond to urban areas and 17.37% to rural areas. With respect to
          demand, that same entity, as of June 2022, has qualified 207 beneficiaries;
          however, these beneficiaries do not meet the criteria for Component 2, because
          their household incomes are more than twice the SBU. To address the housing
          needs of this population, other strategies have been identified including addressing
          the qualitative housing deficit with improvements to existing housing (as part of the
          second operation under the CCLIP), and there has also been exploration of the
          search for new financing solutions for the lower income population and/or those
          earning informal income with strategic stakeholders in the housing sector (such as
          cooperatives and savings and loan associations), and for those families that do
          have access to mortgage credit with intermediary financial institutions and have an
          income in excess of two SBUs, the authorities could serve this demand with fiscal
          resources. 20 Financial hardships in Ecuador and the COVID-19 pandemic have
          impacted the ability of households with income of up to twice the SBU to obtain
          credit, as shown in reports submitted by the MIDUVI and the “Sector Study of
          Ecuador’s Housing Sector Value Chain” prepared by the IDB (2021). The study
          identified the following two main barriers for the execution of Component 2, which
          existed prior to program design but whose scope had not been determined:
          a. Demand. The program focuses on poor populations with household income of
             up to twice the SBU (US$850), to acquire housing priced at up to US$40,000.
             Under this component, the assumption is that eligible populations qualify for
             mortgage loans from financial system institutions. However, due to the extreme
             vulnerability of potential beneficiary families and the high incidence of informal
             sources of income among them, these households do not qualify to obtain
             mortgages through the financial system, because they face difficulties meeting
             credit terms and requirements.
          b. Supply. There is great uncertainty among housing construction companies
             and developers regarding vulnerable populations, which extremely limits the
             supply of these types of housing. This uncertainty is caused by the financial
             constraints of the demand. The regulatory framework requires construction




20    Technical report analyzing the housing deficit in Ecuador, MIDUVI, 2022.
                                                      -9-



               companies to obtain guarantees in order to draw up low-income projects, which
               prevents many of them from registering these projects.
2.7       The elimination of this component and deactivation of associated indicators are
          based on the impossibility of executing Component 2 for the program’s eligible
          populations and achieving the specific objective within the execution period for the
          first individual operation, because of the lack of necessary conditions in the sector.
          These lessons learned will be considered in future operations and will be duly
          documented in the PCR. In addition, the Ecuadorian government and the Bank are
          actively working to find alternative solutions that enable populations in this poverty
          segment to access adequate housing.
               Transfer of remaining resources from Component 2 to Component 1
2.8       The proposed modification will optimize the redirection of program resources,
          considering the high demand among beneficiaries for Component 1 and the status
          of the component’s execution (73% of the execution period has elapsed and 78%
          of component resources have been committed). As mentioned in paragraph 1.14,
          the MIDUVI reported that there is a large demand backlog for Component 1, which
          can be executed quickly, providing housing for the program’s target vulnerable
          populations.
2.9       The transfer of resources will enable the MIDUVI to address increased demand in
          rural areas stemming from rising poverty levels and the rural housing deficit. 21
          Nationwide data shows that poverty 22 in June 2017 stood at 23.1% and, in the
          same period of 2019, it reached 25.5%. 23 However, rural poverty rose from 40.9%
          to 43.8% over the period. This situation is accompanied by a significant housing
          deficit. As of June 2017, the national housing deficit was 13.8%, and in the same
          period of 2019 it had risen to 14.6%. 24 These gaps are even wider in rural areas.
          Whereas in June 2017 the quantitative housing gap in rural areas was 26.8%, in
          2019 it had increased to 29.6% (National Statistics and Census Institute (INEC),
          2019).
2.10      Significantly, the MIDUVI has the legal framework to support this modification.
          Executive Decree 405 of 21 April 2022 sets forth the regulations for low-income
          housing and public housing. Article 7(1) of this decree establishes: “Low-income
          housing is fully subsidized by the State for beneficiaries living in a situation of
          poverty or vulnerability, who meet the eligibility and prioritization criteria governed
          by the lead agency on habitat and housing, based on the selection recorded in the




21    The MIDUVI has received a total of 6,977 new applications both at its technical offices across the country
      and via its website (link 4).
22    INEC calculates poverty by determining the poverty line, the income threshold below which people are
      considered poor. As of June 2019, the poverty line stood at US$85.03. The income threshold for people
      under conditions of extreme poverty was US$47.92.
23    For more, see Indicadores de Pobreza INEC, June 2019.
24    To calculate the quantitative housing deficit between 2017 and 2019, the INEC’s National Survey of
      Employment, Unemployment, and Underemployment (ENEMDU) for June of each year analyzed was
      used.
                                                    - 10 -



         social register database. If housing is built on the beneficiary’s own land, its value
         will be of up to 44 times the SBU.” 25
2.11     It is also noteworthy that at the macroeconomic level, the country has made
         notable progress in strengthening its policy framework, transparency, and fiscal
         consolidation. In December 2022, for the first time in 20 years, it closed an
         agreement with the IMF that includes indications of its commitment to
         macroeconomic stability. Despite the favorable economic results in 2022,
         performance in 2023 will be affected by the recent increase in global interest rates
         and the decline in oil prices, putting additional pressure on fiscal accounts. In the
         political arena, on 15 October, there was a second round of voting in which the
         next president was elected. The President-elect will take office in December 2023
         for an exceptionally short term until May 2025. During the transition process, both
         the public and private sectors are operating normally. Moreover, in the elections
         held on 20 August, new authorities were selected for the National Assembly. With
         respect to the program, the IDB has been financing housing programs in the
         country for more than two decades, through a strategic approach that has made it
         the main multilateral partner in structuring and financing low-income housing
         programs. In this regard, its sustainability is expected, as demonstrated through
         several political cycles, regardless of potential changes of authorities.
              Finance    the    strengthening   of   environmental                          sustainability
              considerations in low-income housing construction
2.12     In 2022, the MIDUVI began working to design new prototypes for sustainable
         low-income housing, incorporating climate change features to address energy
         efficiency, water savings, and optimization of the embodied energy of building
         materials. Based on a “Sustainable Housing Study” that the IDB conducted (2022),
         this initiative is aimed at meeting sustainability standards and certifying housing
         according to international criteria, using the EDGE methodology as a benchmark.
         Housing prototypes to be implemented will be designed based on the climate zone
         and sociocultural context, including supporting beneficiary families to ensure the
         proper use and a sense of ownership of the sustainability measures adopted.
         Strengthening these features involves slightly increasing the maximum amount for
         construction subsidies to match current legislation, based on the new national
         maximum amount specified under Executive Decree 405 (at the time of this
         modification, it was of up to 44 times the SBU). According to the Bank’s technical
         assessment, this amount is justified to be able to strengthen sustainability
         considerations.
C.       Cofinancing
2.13     Meanwhile, the AFD, the bilateral development agency with which the IDB signed
         a parallel cofinancing agreement with services 26 to complement resources for this
         program’s Components 1 and 2, after reviewing the applicable technical,


25   While Executive Decree 405 sets a subsidy amount of up to 44 times the SBU, the request from the MEF
     did not update the amount set forth in the original contract, which therefore remains in U.S. dollars, as
     41.12 times the SBU.
26   On 22 November 2019, the AFD signed loan contract CEC-1031-01-U for US$54 million with the
     Government of Ecuador.
                                           - 11 -



       operational, and economic rationale, has expressed its agreement with the
       modifications proposed by Ecuadorian authorities. This includes to: (i) eliminate
       specific objective 2; (ii) transfer the remaining resources from Component 2 to
       Component 1; and (iii) finance the strengthening of sustainability considerations in
       low-income housing construction, to be undertaken with its own project (link 9).
D.     Strategic alignment
2.14   The proposed modification remains consistent with the second Update to the
       Institutional Strategy (document AB-3192-2) and the Corporate Results
       Framework, 2020-2023 (document GN-2727-12), responding to the challenge of
       social inclusion and equality by promoting access to quality housing for poor
       households. It is also aligned with the following crosscutting themes: (i) gender
       equality and diversity, by prioritizing households headed by women, people with
       disabilities, and other vulnerable groups; and (ii) climate change and
       environmental sustainability, by promoting sustainable housing.
2.15   The operation remains aligned with the IDB Integrated Strategy for Climate
       Change Adaptation and Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable Energy
       (document GN-2609-1), by promoting the reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2)
       emissions in the construction sector. It is also aligned with the following sector
       framework      documents:      (i) Urban       Development       and      Housing
       (document GN-2732-6), by promoting access to housing for households in the
       poorest income quintiles; (ii) Climate Change (document GN-2835-8), by
       promoting housing with bioclimatic adaptations; and (iii) Gender and Diversity
       (document GN-2800-8), by prioritizing property titling for women and universal-
       access housing. Lastly, this operation contributes to Goal 11 of the Sustainable
       Development Goals, by promoting adequate, safe, and affordable housing.
E.     Environmental and social risks
2.16   In accordance with the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy
       (Operational Policy OP-703), the first individual operation is classified as a “B.13”
       operation, meaning that neither environmental and social analyses nor public
       consultations are required. Potential environmental, social, health, and safety
       impacts associated with the program are considered to be minor. Effective
       mitigation measures already exist, mainly through compliance with applicable local
       regulations and with a list of exclusions. The operation does not involve household
       resettlement.
F.     Fiduciary risks
2.17   The operation maintains its “medium risk” classification. A medium fiduciary risk
       was identified related to delays in budgetary allocations and the issuance of
       multiyear certifications, which caused a delay in the contracting of the audit firm to
       verify the fulfillment of subsidy allocation and use requirements. As a mitigation
       measure, the MIDUVI will: (i) work with the MEF to ensure that multiyear budgetary
       appropriations are received on a timely basis; and (ii) move forward with timely
       internal measures to contract an audit firm to perform annual financial audits and
       periodic verifications of subsidies, from the start of the program and throughout
       its execution. In addition, the 2022 audited financial statements identified a
       medium-high risk in internal processes that indicated that if control, supervision,
       and monitoring processes are not established in the MIDUVI for the early detection
                                           - 12 -



       of execution exceptions and/or advanced termination of contracts, it is possible
       that the financial information will not be reconciled in a timely manner, and the
       financial report will not meet the contractual deadlines. In response, the program
       management team will design the internal controls necessary to ensure that the
       program objectives and resources are used for the purposes of the loan. In
       addition, the MIDUVI will establish supervision procedures for the activities
       performed by the public and/or private companies that execute the resources.
       Lastly, the Bank team responsible for project supervision will verify that the intern
       controls implemented work properly and at the same time will carry out
       administrative missions.
G.     Implementation arrangements
2.18   As part of this modification, after the second contract modification is signed and
       enters into force, as a condition precedent to the next disbursement, the executing
       agency will: (i) submit the updated program Operating Regulations; (ii) update the
       cash flow and multiyear execution plan for program execution; and (iii) maintain
       the management team to ensure fulfillment of the stipulations of the loan contract.
H.     Program evaluation
2.19   Evaluations originally planned are maintained without changes, including a
       midterm evaluation to verify progress in implementation and make changes if
       necessary. There will also be a quasi-experimental final evaluation to measure the
       program’s impact. The evaluation’s strategy will include a difference-in-differences
       methodology with matching, in which the variation is measured with respect to
       beneficiary households living in a new home, compared to beneficiary households
       still living in inadequate housing. This evaluation will be conducted through an
       independent consulting assignment financed by the IDB, and will be submitted
       180 days after the last disbursement. The evaluation will include lessons learned
       and specific recommendations for the design of future operations (supplementing
       those of programs 2279/OC-EC and 2797/OC-EC). It will also specify
       environmental sustainability impacts and outcomes for households headed by
       women and those including persons with disabilities.

                                 III. RECOMMENDATION

3.1    Considering the information and analysis presented in this document, the Bank’s
       Management recommends that, in accordance with the provisions of
       paragraph 3.29(c) of the Regulations of the Board of Executive Directors of the
       IDB (document DR-398-19) and of paragraph 6 of the List of matters to be
       considered by the Board via Short Procedure (document CS-3953-4), the Board
       of Executive Directors approve the modifications proposed in this document by
       short procedure. The corresponding modifications will be reflected, as applicable,
       in a modification to loan contract 4788/OC-EC, “Housing Solutions for Poor and
       Vulnerable Households,” pursuant to the terms and conditions of this document.
                                                                           Annex I – EC-L1245;4788/OC-EC
                                                                                               Page 1 of 1



                                     Evaluability Note
EC-L1245 - First Individual Operation "Housing Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable
 Households", under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP)
                "Sectoral Program House Everyone " (EC-O0004)


                                   Second Modification
The second modification to operation EC-L1245 maintains the general objectives of the
CCLIP: (i) improve access for Ecuadorian households living in a situation of poverty or
vulnerability and without adequate housing, to affordable, sustainable, and universally
accessible housing; and (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Government of Ecuador to
generate and implement long-term housing policies; and has as specific objectives: (i)
to reduce the quantitative housing deficit among households in rural and urban-marginal
areas of the two bottom quintiles of income in the country, prioritizing specific vulnerability
indicators, and (ii) optimize the institutional processes of MIDUVI.
The results matrix is consistent with the vertical logic, progress, and scope of the project,
presenting adequate indicators at the outcome level. The outcome indicators are
appropriately defined to measure the project's achievements and the fulfillment of its
specific objectives.
The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured following a difference-
in-difference analysis and matching.
                                                                                                                                                                                  Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                Page 1 of 4



                                                                                     RESULTS MATRIX


    Objective:     The specific objectives of the first individual operation (EC-L1245) are to: (i) reduce the quantitative housing deficit among rural households in the country’s two lowest
                   income quintiles, prioritizing those with specific vulnerability indicators; and (ii) optimize Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MIDUVI) institutional processes.


                                                                                     EXPECTED OUTCOMES

                                                                                          Baseline     Intermediate        Final          Means of
                    Indicators                       Unit of measure        Baseline                                                                                   Comments 2
                                                                                            year          target 1        target         verification
    Specific objective 1: Reduce the quantitative housing deficit among rural households in the country’s two lowest income quintiles, prioritizing those with specific
    vulnerability indicators
    Outcome 1.1: Reduction of the housing deficit in rural and urban periphery areas
    Number of beneficiary households with              Households                0          2019              -           5,934     Delivery-acceptance      By vulnerability status.
    new homes built according to the program                                                                                        certificates
    Operating Regulations.
    Outcome 1.2: Better access to water services
    Percentage of homes delivered that are          Number of homes             0%          2019           100%           100%      Delivery-acceptance      By vulnerability status.
    connected to domestic drinking water            delivered that are                                                              certificates
    service.                                          connected to
                                                    domestic drinking
                                                    water service/Total
                                                    number of homes
                                                         delivered
    Outcome 1.3: Increase in property titling
    Percentage of homes delivered, with full         Number of new              0%          2019           100%           100%      Municipal records        By vulnerability status.
    property titles.                                homes titled/Total
                                                     number of new
                                                        homes




1      Intermediate target measured when 50% of program funds have been disbursed.
2      Data should be reported by vulnerability status.
Annex II
Page 2 of 4


                                                                                    Baseline   Intermediate    Final        Means of
                   Indicators                     Unit of measure        Baseline                                                                     Comments 2
                                                                                      year        target 1    target       verification
 Percentage of property titles in the name of    Number of property        0%        2019          57%        57%      Municipal records     57% of households that are
 women or jointly with their partner.            titles in the name of                                                                       eligible under the social
                                                 women or jointly with                                                                       register are headed by women,
                                                   their partner/Total                                                                       or by women jointly with their
                                                  number of property                                                                         partners.
                                                     titles delivered
 Outcome 1.4: Reduction of household energy consumption
 Efficient use of electricity.                   Monthly consumption       88.9      2012          50          50      MIDUVI records        Baseline of the Environmental
                                                   in kilowatt hours                                                   (through the Energy   Information Module of the
                                                         (kWh)                                                         Ministry)             National Survey of
                                                                                                                                             Employment, Unemployment,
                                                                                                                                             and Underemployment
                                                                                                                                             (ENEMDU 2012). Monthly
                                                                                                                                             electricity consumption - Rural.
                                                                                                                                             The intermediate outcome is
                                                                                                                                             the same as the final outcome,
                                                                                                                                             because savings are expected
                                                                                                                                             for every home delivered.
 Specific objective 3: Optimize MIDUVI institutional processes
 Simplification of the beneficiary                Time taken (hours)       120       2019          80          80      MIDUVI records
 registration, eligibility, and prioritization
 process and the registration process for
 housing developers and builders
 (Integrated Urban Development and
 Housing Information System (SIIDUVI)
 module 1).
 Simplification of the procedure for technical           Ibid              120       2019          80          80      MIDUVI records
 verification of land parcels (SIIDUVI
 module 2).
 Simplification of the procedure for                     Ibid              120       2019          80          80      MIDUVI records
 monitoring and control of the delivery of
 housing and compliance with the rules of
 civic coexistence (SIIDUVI module 3).
                                                                                                                                                                   Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3 of 4


                                                                                        OUTPUTS

                                                                                                                          2024
                                                                             Baseline                                               Means of
                 Outputs                  Unit of measure         Baseline              2020      2021    2022    2023    Final                          Comments 3
                                                                               year                                                verification
                                                                                                                         target
    Component 1. Subsidies for the construction of new housing on own land in rural and urban areas
    Number of subsidies delivered.            Subsidies              0        2019      2,361     1,421   1,422   710    5,934       MIDUVI
                                                                                                                                     records
    Number of additional subsidies            Subsidies              0        2019      2,361      43      0      497    2,901
    for connection to piped water
    delivered on land parcels without
    services.
    Subindicator: Percentage of         Number of subsidies          0        2019       519      313     313     156    22%         MIDUVI       Subindicator.
    subsidies awarded to women          awarded to women                                                                             records      21.6% of households in
    heads of household.                      heads of                                                                                             poverty or extreme poverty
                                          household/Total                                                                                         are headed by women
                                        number of subsidies                                                                                       (Living Conditions Survey,
                                             awarded                                                                                              2014).
    Subindicator: Percentage of         Number of subsidies          0        2019       142       85      85      42     6%         MIDUVI       Subindicator.
    subsidies awarded to                     awarded to                                                                              records      The prevalence of disability
    households including persons             households                                                                                           in Ecuador is 5.64%, with a
    with disabilities.                   including persons                                                                                        higher incidence in
                                        with disabilities/Total                                                                                   households living in
                                        number of subsidies                                                                                       poverty (INEC 2010).
                                              awarded
    Component 2 (formerly 3). MIDUVI strengthening
    SIIDUVI module 1, access to               Systems                0        2019        0        0       0       1       1      SIIDUVI
    housing; and feasibility and                                                                                                  reports on
    viability analysis (access,                                                                                                   households
    registration, eligibility,                                                                                                    registered
    qualification, prioritization,                                                                                                and subsidies
    allocation, and award of                                                                                                      awarded
    subsidies to beneficiaries;
    registration of
    builders/developers; and
    qualification and registration of
    low-income housing projects).


3      Data should be reported by vulnerability status.
Annex II
Page 4 of 4


                                                                                                                                    2024
                                                                             Baseline                                                         Means of
                 Outputs                  Unit of measure       Baseline                  2020      2021       2022      2023       Final                            Comments 3
                                                                               year                                                          verification
                                                                                                                                   target
    Simplification of the beneficiary
    registration, eligibility, and
    prioritization process. 4
    SIIDUVI module 2, land bank:              Systems               0          2019         0                   0          1         1      MIDUVI
    construction issues and financing                                                                                                       records
    models (land bank, cartographic
    data, accessibility, and
    environmental risks. Monitoring
    of house construction and
    inspection, types of subsidies).
    Simplification of the registration
    process for housing developers
    and builders. 5
    SIIDUVI module 3, habitat                 Systems               0          2019         0         0         0          1         1      MIDUVI
    formation and monitoring and                                                                                                            records
    control.
    Simplification of the procedures
    for technical verification of land
    parcels 6 and for monitoring of the
    delivery of housing and
    compliance with the rules of civic
    coexistence.




4      The process considers the management of beneficiary records; MIDUVI analysis of eligibility by contrasting information with the social register, civil register, internal revenue
       service (SRI), etc.; and notification of priority to MIDUVI headquarters. The optimization process considers enabling interoperability between several systems and eliminating the
       current manual checks, as well as replacing notifications by the Quipux system with online reports through SIIDUVI.
5      The optimization process considers the implementation of system interoperability for the developer register.
6      The procedure considers the analysis of information on the land, a field visit, preparation of reports, and submission to MIDUVI head office. The process will be optimized by
       developing a SIIDUVI module allowing the inputting of reports, plans, files, etc., so that information can be transferred online, eliminating the need to send reports via Quipux.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/23



 Ecuador. Second Modification to Loan Contract 4788/OC-EC “Housing Solutions for Poor and
    Vulnerable Households. First Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit Line for
         Investment Projects (CCLIP) EC-O0004 Casa Para Todos Sector Program”



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

       1       To approve the second modification to Loan Contract 4788/OC-EC “Housing
Solutions for Poor and Vulnerable Households. First Individual Operation under the Conditional
Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) EC-O0004 Casa Para Todos Sector Program”, in
accordance with the terms and conditions established in document PR-____.

       2.       That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may
be necessary with the Republic of Ecuador, as borrower, to implement the modification to which
reference is made in paragraph 1.



                               (Adopted on ___ ____________ 2023)



LEG/SGO/CAN/EZIDB0000366-263631146-21198
4788/OC-EC (EC-L1245) – Modification
