                                                                                        PUBLIC
                                                                      SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                       EL SALVADOR



      COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAM FOR URBAN REGENERATION
    AND SUSTAINABLE REVITALIZATION OF MUNICIPAL MARKETS IN
                SANTA TECLA AND LA LIBERTAD



                                           (ES-L1172)



                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Luis Schloeter (CSD/HUD),
Project Team Leader; Alejandro López-Lamia (CSD/HUD), Alternate Project Team
Leader; Michelle Restrepo, Gabriel de Barros Torres, María Elena Acosta Maldonado,
Francy Dianela Ávila, and Yader Antonio Hernández (CSD/HUD); Karen Elay Munguía
Aldana, and Gabriela María Molina de Dardón (CID/CES); Esteban de Dobrzynski,
Rosario Paz Becker Seco (LEG/SGO); Lidia Marcelino Rebouças, and Aude Gabrielle Marthe
Denise Archambault, Gabriella de Angelis, Edoardo Brovero, Julia Míguez Morais (VPS/ESG);
Karla María Meléndez Aparicio (CSD/CCS); Carmen Cecilia Castro Blandón (LAB/EBA);
Miriam Patricia Toriz Monroy, and Carlos Ignacio Carpizo Riva Palacio (VPC/FMP);
José Rodrigo Rendón Rodríguez (INE/TSP); Ana Milena Avendaño Paez (INE/INE);
Denis Leduc (PPP/CPN); Miryam Banda Méndez (INE/PPP); Nidia Hidalgo (SCL/GDI);
Nelson Mauricio Estrada Regalado (INE/WSA); Ginés Suárez Vázquez (CSD/DRM); and
José Miguel Villascusa Cerezo (PTI/ARD).


In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been
approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version
will be made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                        CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY .............................................................................................................I

I.       DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................................2

         A.      Background, problem addressed, and rationale.............................................2
         B.      Objective, components, and cost .................................................................12
         C.      Key results indicators ...................................................................................17

II.      FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................20

         A.      Financing instruments ..................................................................................20
         B.      Environmental and social risks .....................................................................20
         C.      Fiduciary risks...............................................................................................21
         D.      Other key issues and risks ...........................................................................22

III.     IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN..............................................................23

         A.      Summary of implementation arrangements..................................................23
         B.      Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ........................................27
                                                     - ii -



                                                   ANNEXES
Annex I     Development Effectiveness Matrix -- Summary
Annex II    Results Matrix
Annex III   Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements


                                              REQUIRED LINKS
      1.    Multiyear execution plan/Annual work plan
      2.    Monitoring, evaluation, and learning
      3.    Environmental and social review summary
      4.    Procurement plan


                                              OPTIONAL LINKS
     1.     Climate change analysis
     2.     Hydrometeorological hazards
     3.     Geophysical hazards
     4.     Summary of hydrometeorological and geophysical hazard mitigation measures
     5.     Gender and diversity analysis
     6.     Merchant survey database (2025)
     7.     Competitiveness analysis and socioeconomic characterization of merchants and action plan for
            competitiveness and formalization
     8.     Merchant focus groups report
     9.     Impact assessment methodology
     10.    Urban regeneration plans
     11.    Urban regeneration plan geodatabase
     12.    Value-for-money qualitative analysis for structuring the PPP
     13.    Financial and institutional capacity analysis and methodology and action plan for municipal
            institution-strengthening
     14.    Review of preliminary designs for the Santa Tecla and La Libertad markets
     15.    Recommendations for equipment procurement for commercial sites
     16.    Financial model and governance plan for managing municipal markets
     17.    Tool for designing the commercial sites fee schedule
     18.    Call for proposals to develop composting and digital payment transformation pilot projects
     19.    Prioritization of municipios and municipal markets
     20.    Technical assessment of land for new market in La Libertad and due diligence for purchase
     21.    Analysis of tourism potential in Santa Tecla and La Libertad
     22.    Economic assessment (ex ante cost-benefit analysis)
     23.    Program Operating Regulations
     24.    Template for interagency agreement between the Municipal Public Works Office and the
            Libertad Sur and Libertad Costa municipios
     25.    Impact study and environmental and social management plan for Santa Tecla
     26.    Impact study and environmental and social management plan for La Libertad
     27.    Relocation plan for merchants in the Santa Tecla market
     28.    Relocation plan for merchants in the La Libertad market
     29.    Bibliography
                                  - iii -


                            ABBREVIATIONS


DNM      Dirección Nacional de Mercados (National Markets Office)
DOM      Dirección de Obras Municipales (Municipal Public Works Office)
FODES    Fondo de Desarrollo Económico y Social (Social and Economic
         Development Fund)
ILO      International Labour Organization
IMICRO   Índice de Competitividad para Micronegocios (Micro business
         competitiveness index)
IRR      Internal rate of return
OPAMSS   Oficina de Planificación del Área Metropolitana de San Salvador
         (Planning Office for the San Salvador Metropolitan Area)
PEU      Program execution unit
PPP      Public-private partnership
PROESA   Organismo Promotor de Exportaciones e Inversiones (Export and
         Investment Promotion Agency)
                                                             PROJECT SUMMARY

                                        EL SALVADOR
        COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAM FOR URBAN REGENERATION AND SUSTAINABLE REVITALIZATION OF
                       MUNICIPAL MARKETS IN SANTA TECLA AND LA LIBERTAD
                                          (ES-L1172)
                                                         Financial Terms and Conditions
 Borrower:                                                                                  Flexible Financing Facility(a)
 Republic of El Salvador                                              Amortization period:                        25 years
 Executing agency:                                                    Disbursement period:                        5 years
 Dirección de Obras Municipales (Municipal Public                     Grace period:                               5.5 years(b)
 Works Office)
                                                                      Interest rate:                              SOFR + funding margin +
           Source                  Amount (US$)              %
                                                                                                                  OC variable lending spread(c)
 IDB (Ordinary Capital):                 170 million          100     Credit fee:                                 (d)

 Local:                                              0            0   Inspection and supervision fee:             (d)

 Total:                                  170 million          100     Weighted average life:                      15.25 years
                                                                      Approval currency:                          U.S. dollars
                                                                 Project at a Glance
 Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to strengthen the local economies in the Santa Tecla and
 La Libertad districts. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve access to quality public services and local urban infrastructure in
 the downtown areas of the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts, including the municipal markets; (ii) boost competitiveness and
 promote formalization of the businesses in the municipal markets of both districts; and (iii) build the institutional and financial
 capacities of the Libertad Sur and Libertad Costa municipios (paragraph 1.56).
 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the program Operating Regulations have
 been approved under the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; (ii) key staff of the program execution unit has been
 designated, including: (a) general program coordinator, (b) financial coordinator, (c) procurement coordinator, (d) planning and
 monitoring coordinator, and (e) environmental and social coordinator; and (iii) evidence has been provided that a framework
 agreement has been signed between the executing agency and each of the municipios detailing the responsibilities of each party
 during program execution (paragraph 3.12).
 Special contractual conditions of execution: The borrower, through the executing agency, will present evidence to the Bank
 that the following conditions have been met: before signing the contract to perform the works for each of the markets and the
 basic services infrastructure under Component 1 of the program, it will have submitted evidence of the following: (i) legal
 ownership of the land and/or real property, establishment of easements or other rights and permits required to build and use the
 respective works; and (ii) it has contracted supervision of the works. This condition is necessary to ensure smooth construction.
 See the social and environmental contractual conditions in Annex B of the environmental and social review summary
 (paragraph 3.13).
 Exceptions to Bank policies: None.
                                                               Strategic Alignment
 Objectives:(e)                               O1 ☒                                     O2 ☒                                      O3 ☒
 Operational focus               OF1 ☒           OF2-G ☒              OF3 ☒            OF4 ☒            OF5 ☒            OF6 ☒             OF7 ☐
 areas:(f)                                       OF2-D ☒
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, as
    well as currency, interest rate, commodity, and catastrophe protection conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management
    considerations into account when reviewing such requests.
(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail

    any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c) Daily compounded SOFR in arrears. The IDB funding margin is determined on a quarterly basis. The IDB OC variable lending spread is determined

    by the Board of Executive Directors on an annual basis.
(d) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the

    Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies.
(e) O1 (Reduce poverty and inequality); O2 (Address climate change); and O3 (Promote sustainable regional growth).

(f) OF1 (Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action); OF2-G (Gender equality); OF2-D (Inclusion of diverse groups); OF3 (Institutional capacity,

    rule of law, and citizen security); OF4 (Social protection and human capital development); OF5 (Productive development and innovation through the
    private sector); OF6 (Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure); OF7 (Regional integration).
                                                        -2-




                             I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       With 765,879 inhabitants (13% of El Salvador’s population), La Libertad
          department is known for its biodiversity, cultural heritage, and importance for the
          country’s economic development. Nevertheless, it faces challenges such as the
          urban decay typified by failing urban infrastructure and inadequate access to public
          services, a high rate of informal businesses, and low municipal institutional and
          financial capacity. This affects the local economy [2] [3].1
1.2       This situation is particularly noticeable in the department’s main districts of
          Santa Tecla and La Libertad (Illustration 1), and even more markedly in the areas
          surrounding their municipal markets [4]. The estimated per capita income in the
          districts that make up the San Salvador metropolitan area is 25% lower for the
          Santa Tecla municipal market area of influence than that in adjacent districts like
          San Salvador and Antiguo Cuscatlán. Meanwhile, the estimated per capita income
          for the La Libertad municipal market area of influence is 30% lower than that in the
          district of San Salvador [5].

                    Illustration 1. Political and administrative division of La Libertad department




            Source: Own illustration based on data from the Centro Nacional de Registro (National Registry Center)
            and the Dirección General de Estadística y Censos (Statistics and Census Bureau), 2025.


          1. Description of urban decay and informal businesses in Santa Tecla,
             Libertad Sur municipio
1.3       With approximately 138,000 inhabitants, Santa Tecla is the most populous district
          in La Libertad and a major regional economic center. According to the Planning
          Office for the San Salvador Metropolitan Area (OPAMSS) [6], it has the


1    See complete list of bibliographic references (optional link 29) identified by a number in square brackets [#].
                                                -3-



      third largest number of registered businesses in the country and is a driver of
      commercial and entrepreneurial activity in El Salvador.
1.4   In addition to being an economic center, Santa Tecla is known for its tourism
      infrastructure, such as the Paseo El Carmen, the Museo Tecleño, and the Parque
      Nacional El Boquerón (optional link 21). However, its urban environment is
      eroding, with shortfalls in infrastructure and public services, and a high number of
      informal businesses.

                                    Illustration 2. Santa Tecla city center




      Source: IDB (2025). Urban Regeneration Plan – Santa Tecla District.


      2. Condition of urban infrastructure
1.5   The Santa Tecla municipal market, which originally held 1,500 businesses, now
      operates at a reduced rate with 700 active merchants due to the deterioration of
      its infrastructure and electrical hazards (optional link 14). The authorities have
      relocated some vendors, but the original market continues to run under precarious
      conditions, with deficient sanitation, accessibility, ventilation, and structural safety.
      This is clear by the findings of a merchant survey: 87% of respondents in
      Santa Tecla say the sanitary facilities are inadequate, and 86% feel that the market
      spaces are neither safe nor suitable for children. In addition, 28% of Santa Tecla
      residents are unsatisfied with the condition of the municipal markets [7].
                                                   -4-



                             Illustration 3. Interior and exterior of Santa Tecla Market




       Source: IDB (2025).


1.6    The market area shows significant urban decay, according to the IDB’s technical
       walkability index (optional link 10), which evaluates the quality of the pedestrian
       space, rating it 16.3 out of 23 or “fair.” The main causes are noncontinuous
       sidewalks, deteriorated pavement, inadequate signage, and unsafe conditions for
       women and persons with reduced mobility.
1.7    The streets in the city center are in poor condition, affecting commercial activity.
       According to the merchants survey (optional link 7), half of the vendors in the
       municipal markets see the deteriorating road infrastructure as an obstacle.
       Santa Tecla also has only 4.7 km of functional bike paths, well below the target of
       43 km projected by OPAMSS for 2025 (optional link 10). This limits sustainable
       mobility and safe access to the commercial area.
1.8    The public space has various deficiencies: tree coverage is inadequate (23%) to
       mitigate the urban heat island effect (optional link 10), lighting is insufficient, and
       the street furniture has deteriorated. In addition, there is a lack of public space,
       with only 5.75 m² per inhabitant, below the target of 10 m². In all, 14% of residents
       are unsatisfied with the quality of parks and plazas [8], and 25% of merchants
       report lack of access to quality public spaces near the markets (optional link 7).
       3. Status of basic services
1.9    Santa Tecla faces serious limitations in its basic services (optional link 10). While
       the urban area has a sanitary sewerage system, it has no system for treating
       wastewater, which is discharged into rivers and gulleys, especially the
       Acelhuate River. Deterioration of the trunk lines causes frequent overflows and the
       existing infrastructure does not have the capacity to manage urban growth. The
       result is a river contaminated with fecal coliform bacteria and low oxygenation,
       which affects water quality and fish stocks.
1.10   It also faces serious problems with the storm drainage system, especially around
       the municipal market. The drainage network cannot handle the runoff from rain
       storms, with return periods of 10, 25, and 50 years (optional link 10). Hydrological
       modeling shows that pipes near the market do not have the capacity to handle flow
       rates. It is not feasible to divert those flows to another sub-basin due to inadequate
       capacity downstream.
1.11   The Libertad Sur municipality has implemented a solid waste collection system
       that covers 100% of the urban area, including the municipal market and the
       Historic Center (optional link 10), with daily collection in the commercial areas and
                                                      -5-



         markets. However, 35% of merchants report problems with solid waste
         management, which reflects operating and coordination deficiencies in certain
         areas (optional link 7). The lack of separation at source limits recycling and
         composting, hindering the system’s efficiency and sustainability.
1.12     In light of the above, the index of merchants’ average perception of the local
         environment in the Santa Tecla district, which assesses aspects such as safety,
         waste management, access to basic services, paving conditions, etc., is low, at
         3.07 out of 5 (optional link 7).
         4. Informal economy and business capacity
1.13     Commercial activity in the Santa Tecla municipal market is quite informal (optional
         link 7). While 79% of businesses are registered with city hall, fewer than 10% are
         registered with other appropriate institutions. For example, only 5% are registered
         with the Ministry of Finance’s Internal Revenue Service, and fewer than 3% with
         the National Registry Center’s Commercial Registry, Social Security, Pension
         Fund Administrators, and the Ministry of Labor, reflecting limited tax, employment,
         and social security formalization. Based on the International Labour Organization’s
         (ILO) definition,2 only 4.64% of vendors in the municipal market are formal
         (required link 2).
1.14     The micro business competitiveness index (IMICRO) evaluates the competitiveness
         of businesses in areas such as financial strength, technology use, formalization,
         human capital, and investment capacity. The results (index of 0.18 out of 1) indicate
         that the majority of micro businesses in the Santa Tecla municipal market have high
         levels of privation, which limits their growth, access to finance, and long-term
         sustainability [9].
         5. Description of urban decay and informal economy in La Libertad,
            Libertad Costa municipio
1.15     With approximately 40,000 inhabitants, the district of La Libertad has had
         considerable tourism momentum thanks to the Surf City Program, which has
         attracted strategic investment and sustained visitor growth (optional link 21). The
         country has invested US$400 million in key projects such as a highway,
         renovation of the Puerto de La Libertad Tourism Complex, the first lifeguard unit in
         the country, the Gastro-Lab, and the first permanent amusement park by the sea.
1.16     But, like Santa Tecla, the downtown area of the district (Illustration 4) is clearly
         decayed, as seen in the poor condition of infrastructure, limited access to basic
         public services, and the widespread presence of an informal economy, particularly
         around the main municipal market. These conditions contrast with the dynamic
         tourist scene in the area and limit its development.




2   An informal business is one that is not registered with the Ministry of Finance. Informality is thus defined
    based on the percentage of establishments that report they are not registered there.
                                                  -6-



                                      Illustration 4. La Libertad city center




       Source: IDB (2025). Urban Regeneration Plan – La Libertad District.


       6. Condition of urban infrastructure
1.17   La Libertad municipal market, near the coastline, has inadequate infrastructure
       and limited space (Illustration 5). Approximately 500 merchants operate in its
       rudimentary facilities (optional link 14). The informal expansion into a public street
       and vendors’ occupation of public spaces compound the situation. The market has
       sanitation, accessibility, ventilation, and structural safety issues, which has an
       adverse impact on users’ experience and work conditions. As a reference, 92% of
       merchants in La Libertad municipal market say the market is not a safe place for
       children, and 94% report that the sanitary facilities are inadequate (optional link 7).

                                Illustration 5. Interior of La Libertad market




       Source: IDB (2025).


1.18   The La Libertad district downtown area is highly deteriorated, especially its
       pedestrian infrastructure. The IDB’s technical walkability index yielded a score of
       12.9 out of 23, considered “poor” (optional link 10). This is due to the poor overall
       condition of the sidewalks, with no universal accessibility and permanent
       obstructions, which limits safe and functional pedestrian mobility.
                                             -7-



1.19   The streets also show significant deterioration, impacting commercial activity. In
       all, 70% of merchants think that the poor road infrastructure limits their operations
       (optional link 7). According to the urban regeneration plan (optional link 10),
       secondary and tertiary roads are in poor condition and do not have signage. Lack
       of parking causes people to use public spaces haphazardly. There are no
       functioning bike paths.
1.20   The public space also has significant deficiencies in quantity, quality, and
       functionality. In Libertad Costa, 36% of inhabitants have no access to public
       spaces and, in the downtown area, there is only 0.23 m² of available space per
       inhabitant (optional link 10).
1.21   The quality of the urban environment is compromised by tree coverage of less than
       10%—not enough to mitigate the heat island effect and improve habitability
       (optional link 10). The street furniture is decayed, and the public space is crowded
       with the installation of 378 utility poles, which affects pedestrian mobility, urban
       environment functionality, and user experience.
       7. Condition of basic services
1.22   La Libertad district faces serious deficiencies in its basic services, particularly its
       sanitation system. The sewerage system, built with asbestos cement pipes, is in
       poor condition and frequently leaks. The system relies on two pumping wells
       located facing the beaches, producing bad odors and health risks, especially
       during power outages (optional link 10).
1.23   Wastewater is channeled toward the Chilama Wastewater Treatment Plant (1981),
       but the plant has regular operating failures and is running at the limit of its capacity.
       As a result, the Chilama River has critical levels of fecal coliform bacteria from the
       untreated discharge and severe fecal contamination (optional link 10).
1.24   The storm drainage system does not have sufficient capacity to manage heavy
       rainfall, which causes water to accumulate and increases the risk of flooding
       (optional links 10 and 2). The coastal topography and the soil’s impermeability
       increase surface runoff and reduce natural infiltration. There are no temporary
       water storage systems to regulate flows before they are discharged into natural
       basins. The municipal market area is among the hardest hit, due to the lack of
       collector mains and its proximity to the Chilama River.
1.25   The municipality manages the solid waste collection system with support from
       private companies in some zones (optional link 10). The waste is collected daily
       downtown and in the municipal market, three times a week in residential areas,
       and more frequently in tourist areas during the high season. However, service is
       irregular in peripheral neighborhoods. The lack of vehicles limits operational
       capacity and there are no sorting and classification centers, making the system
       less efficient. Communication with the population is lacking, particularly in special
       waste management. Thirty-five percent of municipal market merchants report
       problems with waste management (optional link 7).
1.26   In light of the above, similar to Santa Tecla, the merchants’ perception index of the
       local environment in La Libertad is low, at 3.13 out of 5 (optional link 7).
       8. Informal economy and business capacity
1.27   Commercial activity in La Libertad municipal market is predominantly informal.
       While 100% of businesses have municipal registration, their registration with other
                                                         -8-



          State agencies is quite low (optional link 7), with a formalization rate just below
          3% (required link 2), according to ILO methodology. This figure reflects a fragile
          economic structure, with no social protections and limited compliance with tax and
          labor obligations.
1.28      The micro business competitiveness index was also applied to La Libertad central
          market (optional link 7). The results (index of 0.16 out of 1) indicate that a
          significant proportion of the market’s micro businesses faces high levels of
          vulnerability, with structural constraints that reduce their growth potential, hinder
          access to finance, and compromise their medium- and long-term
          sustainability [10].
          9. Context for the hydrometeorological and geophysical hazards
1.29      Both districts are facing recurring hydrometeorological and geophysical
          hazards that exacerbate their vulnerabilities and deepen impacts on infrastructure,
          economic activity, and the population’s living conditions (optional links 2 and 3).
1.30      The Santa Tecla district faces high exposure to pluvial flooding due to the limited
          urban drainage capacity and its flat topography. There is also a growing risk of
          hydrological drought from the stress on water sources. Higher temperatures
          produce urban heat island conditions, especially for vulnerable populations.
1.31      Seismic risk is also significant. The area is exposed to pyroclastic flows from the
          San Salvador Volcano. While the eruption cycle exceeds the project’s useful life,
          monitoring and early warning systems should be maintained. The risk of landslides
          is low.
1.32      In La Libertad district, low-lying areas have limited drainage capacity, making
          them more vulnerable to storm flooding. The proximity to the Chilama River and
          La Presa stream creates additional risk due to river flooding and sedimentation.
          The coast shows signs of active erosion and growing exposure to rising sea levels,
          threatening the infrastructure near the coast. In addition, meteorological and
          hydrological droughts and heat waves are considerable, aggravated by the scarce
          vegetation and predominant construction features.
1.33      The district is also in a high seismic hazard zone. While the threat of landslides is
          low, its location on an alluvial fan of the Chilama River means exposure to runoff.
          Maps classify the district as having a “medium-high” threat of tsunamis, although
          historical records show swells of less than one meter over the past century.

                       Box 1. Why prioritize the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts?

       These districts were chosen based on a multidimensional prioritization process using objective
       indicators: poverty levels, population concentration, degree of urbanization, existing infrastructure
       conditions, and potential for territorial impact. This makes it possible to target territories where it is
       possible to produce significant outcomes nationally with a demonstration effect.
       For the process, we used Small Area Estimates in the country’s 262 districts [11] and automatic
       learning algorithms to identify high-priority districts in terms of income and multidimensional poverty,
       based on the 2007 census and the 2023 Multipurpose Housing Survey. We also looked at the local
       economic structure, especially the business, restaurant, and hotel sector, for its ability to drive urban
       renewal and economic activity. We calculated the percentage and absolute number of workers in
       this sector by municipio, using sample expansion factors from the 2023 housing survey.
       The results were decisive: Regarding the local economic structure—one factor considered for
       prioritization—La Libertad tops the national ranking with 47% of its workforce employed in this sector,
       which positions it as a tourist and economic engine nationally. Santa Tecla is in fourth place in
                                                        -9-



       absolute terms, with over 13,000 workers in these categories, consolidating its place as a
       metropolitan trading hub, with a high concentration of businesses and job creation potential [12].
       Both districts have three strategic attributes: (i) high concentration of employment in sectors related
       to the interventions; (ii) lack of basic services, limiting their productivity; and (iii) ongoing public
       investments that boost synergies for development. This duality between urgent needs and high
       impact potential justifies their selection as priority areas (optional link 19).


          10. Main causes of the problem
1.34      Below are the main causes of the significant decay in the downtown areas of the
          Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts contributing to the loss of a vital local
          economy.
1.35      Limited access to urban infrastructure and high-quality public services. The
          urban decay in the downtown areas of both districts is largely due to the lack of
          access to urban infrastructure and basic services. This stems from a prolonged
          streak of low public investment in these categories. It also reflects various market
          failures that justify government intervention, such as insufficient delivery of public
          goods and negative externalities linked with urban decay.
1.36      Although public investment in infrastructure rose between 2021 and 2023, from
          2003 to 2013 the State allocated on average only 1.1 % of annual GDP to this
          category, well below the 3% recommended by the IDB for the countries of
          Latin America and the Caribbean to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
          by 2030. Moreover, from 2008 to 2020, investment in economic infrastructure in
          four key sectors—water, energy, telecommunications, and transportation—
          represented just 0.16% of GDP in El Salvador, far short of the 3.28% recorded in
          Panama and 2.88% in Costa Rica over the same period [13] [14] [15].
1.37      Informality and low commercial sector competitiveness, including in
          municipal markets. Merchants say the main barrier to formalization is the
          perception that the process is costly and complex (65% and 66%) due to taxes
          and red tape (66% and 71%) (optional link 7). While many recognize the need to
          become formalized to grow, the idea persists that informality is not a problem
          (50%) and that a business can operate without paying taxes (44%). This reflects a
          market failure due to information asymmetry, where merchants make suboptimal
          decisions due to distorted views or lack of information on the real benefits of
          formalization. Moreover, the persistence of informality creates negative
          externalities on the economy as a whole, such as unfair competition and low tax
          revenue, which justifies State intervention to correct these imbalances.
1.38      Informality creates barriers to accessing formal financing: many informal
          merchants depend on unregulated lenders, paying interest rates as high as 33%,
          above the rates offered by the formal financial system (optional link 7). However,
          other merchants recognize that formalization is important for their business’s
          growth and consolidation (79%) [21].
1.39      According to the IMICRO, the businesses have a low level of competitiveness due
          to the merchants’ level of education. Most lack formal education or completed only
          basic primary school (index of 0.08 out of 1) or training in entrepreneurship or
          business administration (index of 0.21 out of 1) (optional link 7). According to the
          survey of merchants, eight out of ten have never received training related to
          enhancing their business skills in critical areas such as business management,
          finance, marketing, or digitization. Similarly, the merchants interviewed in both
                                                 - 10 -



       markets report that the few trainings they have received were not tailored to their
       needs. This represents an underinvestment in human capital, a market failure
       when individual stakeholders do not internalize the social benefits of education and
       do not have adequate access to relevant training services. Government
       intervention is necessary in this case to boost productivity.

             Box 2. What is the relationship between business informality and urban decay?

        Business informality contributes to urban decay. Intensive use of urban infrastructure by informal
        merchants, including sidewalks, plazas, and streets, accelerates the physical wear on these
        spaces without providing adequate resources to maintain them. The fact that informal businesses
        operate outside the fiscal framework prevents governments from receiving tax revenue. The
        constant presence of points of sale overloads these spaces, compromising their functionality and
        structural integrity [22].
        Municipal markets tend to become disorganized due to lack of planning and regulation.
        Overcrowding is a result of excessive density of stands that block traffic and the distribution of
        products. This affects their ability to operate, increases the risk of accidents, and worsens
        work conditions.
        The accumulation of solid waste increases in areas with a high density of informal commerce,
        contributing to health problems. Studies show that the proliferation of informal vendors is
        correlated with an increase in trash and damage to public spaces. This affects the city’s
        infrastructure and cleanliness [23].


1.40   It should be noted that, while there are programs to promote formalization and
       training for micro and small business owners, such as the ones led by the National
       Micro and Small Business Committee, they have not targeted municipal markets.
       Also, there are no rigorous assessments that can measure their effectiveness or
       impact on the sustainability and formalization of the businesses.
1.41   Limits on the institutional and financial capacity of the municipios are a
       leading cause of urban decay. Although both municipios have an institutional
       structure for managing their markets, their performance is lacking; they do not have
       the operating regulations and technical criteria for commercial presentation of
       products in the municipal markets (optional link 13). They also face constraints in
       planning, budget implementation, regulatory coordination, and availability of fiscal
       instruments (optional link 13). This mainly reflects a lack of coordination in public
       management, where urban planning is not sufficiently linked to financial
       instruments or implementation mechanisms. There is also a lack of technical and
       operational information, which limits local governments’ ability to make informed
       decisions and provide urban public goods efficiently and sustainably.
1.42   Libertad Sur has a consolidated administrative structure with over 120 technicians
       in specialized areas such as land use planning, land registries, public services,
       infrastructure, and mobility (optional link 13). This institutional framework has
       enabled synergies with OPAMSS, application of urban development ordinances,
       and strengthening of interagency coordination. It has geographic information
       systems, interoperable digital land registers, and inspection mechanisms in the
       field [24]. However, this is insufficient to face complex challenges such as urban
       expansion, consolidation of intermediate urban areas, and execution of
       comprehensive projects. The main weaknesses include little regulatory updating,
       lack of partial plans, and lack of repeatable models that tie land use planning to the
                                                    - 11 -



         local budget and financing instruments. This gives the municipio a comprehensive
         land management capacity index of 0.85 out of 1.
1.43     Libertad Costa faces significant institutional limitations. While it has a land use
         ordinance, it lacks stable technical teams and standardized planning procedures
         (optional link 13). Its institutional structure is multipurpose, without differentiated
         technical departments, and decisions are concentrated in administrative offices
         without specialized technical support. The land register is manual and piecemeal,
         with no geographic information systems or updated territorial databases [25].
         Public investment responds to immediate demands, with no multiyear planning or
         clear prioritization mechanisms, which limits its ability to structure technical projects,
         take part in calls for cofinancing, or establish public-private partnerships with
         sustainability and equity criteria. As a result, its land management capacity index is
         lower than that of Libertad Sur, at 0.44 points.
1.44     From a financial standpoint, municipios in El Salvador, in general, face significant
         revenue constraints (optional link 13). Before the reform of the Social and
         Economic Development Fund (FODES),3 municipal expenditure in El Salvador
         represented approximately 3.2% of GDP, with 43% of municipal revenue coming
         from FODES (2016). The 2021 reform cut the FODES allocation to 1.5% of the net
         current income of the general State budget. The limited revenue generation
         restricts public investment capacity. Only 21% of municipal expenditure goes to
         investment, compared to a regional average of 45% (2016) [16]. This can be seen
         in municipal investment in Santa Tecla and La Libertad.
1.45     Investment in urban infrastructure and public services in Santa Tecla has not been
         sustained nor sufficient to contend with the growth and complexity of its urban
         environment (optional link 13). Although per capita investment expenditure was
         US$55 in 2023—a relatively high amount for a municipio in El Salvador—it remains
         low compared with other countries in the region. In Honduras, for example, the
         figure is US$91; in Guatemala, US$122; and in Costa Rica, US$117. The figure
         has remained constant since 2020. In addition, capital expenditure has been
         irregular, varying from US$600,000 in 2018 to US$5.2 million in 2022, with an
         annual average of US$2 million (optional link 13).
1.46     In La Libertad, the lag in infrastructure is even more critical. Per capita investment
         spending was only US$10.6 and the investment component accounted for 13% of
         the total budget, concentrated in minimum road maintenance and small community
         works, with no long-term structural programs or territorial projects. From 2018 to
         2023, capital expenditure fell from US$2.9 million to US$2.2 million, reflecting a
         downward trend (optional link 13).
1.47     Regarding revenue, Libertad Sur has consolidated an income structure based on
         rates for public services and special assessments, but it does not apply a modern
         property tax or have mechanisms to capture land appreciation [26]. Its savings
         capacity is limited, and it has no systems that systematically coordinate the
         territorial planning cycle with the budget cycle.




3   FODES is a mechanism used by the Salvadoran government to transfer resources to the municipios to
    support local development projects, infrastructure, and basic services. It was created in 1988 to enhance
    local government autonomy and management capacity.
                                            - 12 -



1.48   Libertad Costa relies on transitory revenue like operating permits, tourism fees,
       and national transfers. The cut to FODES in 2021 critically affected its fiscal
       autonomy and ability to sustain essential services like road maintenance, waste
       management, and market operation. This is compounded by the lack of long-term
       strategies (optional link 13). It does not have results-oriented budget control tools
       or investment tracking and assessment mechanisms, which affects the
       effectiveness of resource allocation and municipal management transparency [27].
1.49   These conditions have direct implications for land management. In Libertad Sur,
       the absence of a land use monitoring system makes it difficult to effectively apply
       the current urban ordinance. In Libertad Costa, there are no technical tools for
       delimiting zones according to their territorial objectives, be they for urban, rural, or
       environmental protection use [28].
1.50   Gaps between men and women and inclusion of persons with disabilities.
       Gaps in labor participation and wages persist in El Salvador: The labor
       participation rate for men is 81.5% and 50.5% for women, while the average
       monthly salary is US$448.04 for men, and US$358.39 for women [29]—i.e., 20%
       lower for women. And while informal work is distributed relatively equally at the
       national level, in the commercial sector, women account for 65% of informal
       employment, compared to 35% for men. Based on the 2022 El Salvador Time Use
       Survey, women report that 22% of their time is spent daily on domestic chores
       and nonremunerated care, while men report 13%, creating a gap of 9 percentage
       points. This unequal distribution of responsibilities limits economic opportunities
       for women and contributes to their low labor participation, occupational
       segregation, and wage gaps.
1.51   In both municipal markets, women run 75% of the businesses, but their trade
       generates 27% less in monthly sales than businesses run by men, even when
       considering education level, category, and seniority. They also face greater
       barriers to accessing formal suppliers and long-term credit (optional link 7). Thus,
       we see a statistically significant gap in the competitiveness of businesses
       operating in markets, differentiated by gender.
1.52   Educational barriers are significant: 14% of women merchants have no education,
       compared to 5% of men. These gaps widen when we look at the excess burden of
       nonremunerated work, especially in domestic chores and caregiving. Women
       devote on average 3.4 hours a day to these tasks, compared to 2.6 hours for men,
       which limits their time for training and participating in productive networks.
       Eight percent of women identify family responsibilities as an obstacle to training,
       compared to 3.3% of men (optional link 7).
1.53   Violence against women is prevalent in public spaces. Among women ages 15 or
       older, 52% have suffered some type of assault throughout their lives, and 24%
       have in the past 12 months [30]. In La Libertad, these figures are 56% and 22%,
       respectively. The majority of assault cases in the past 12 months occurred in
       community spaces.
1.54   According to the 2024 population and housing census, 4.9% of the national
       population reports some type of disability. Other studies estimate that 20% of the
       national population has some type of disability, and 8% have critical
       conditions [33]. Among female vendors in the two markets, this percentage climbs
       to 5.3%, with motor disability being the most prevalent. Nevertheless, 69% of sites
       are not adapted for persons with motor disabilities. The figure rises to 85% in
                                            - 13 -



       La Libertad. El Salvador lacks accessible public spaces for persons with
       disabilities [31]. The disabled population in La Libertad is 8% [32]. The situation is
       compounded because most public spaces, such as parks and municipal markets,
       are not designed to ensure adequate access for persons with disabilities [33] [34].
1.55   Rationale. Based on the identified problems and their main causes, the program
       will seek to reverse urban decay, boost business competitiveness and
       formalization, and build the municipios’ financial and institutional capacities, with a
       view to revitalizing the local economy.
B.     Objective, components, and cost
1.56   General objective. The general objective of the program is to strengthen the local
       economies in the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts. The specific objectives
       are to: (i) improve access to quality public services and local urban infrastructure
       in the downtown areas of the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts, including the
       municipal markets; (ii) boost competitiveness and promote formalization of the
       businesses in the municipal markets of both districts; and (iii) build the institutional
       and financial capacities of the Libertad Sur and Libertad Costa municipios.
1.57   Component 1. Developing urban infrastructure and basic services
       (US$152 million). This component contributes to the specific objective to “improve
       access to quality public services and the local urban infrastructure in the downtown
       areas of the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts, including the municipal
       markets.” Actions will be financed in the city centers of the Santa Tecla and
       La Libertad districts, including construction and renovation of two municipal
       markets, one in each district, and their respective areas of direct influence.
1.58   Part of the investment will go toward comprehensive development of these
       markets, based on criteria of universal accessibility, social inclusion, climate
       resilience, and financial sustainability. Each market will have measures to mitigate
       geophysical and hydrometeorological hazards, as well as complementary
       services, including childcare centers and lactation rooms, to facilitate the labor
       participation of female merchants, infirmaries, and spaces for recreational and
       religious activities. The markets will have the furniture and infrastructure to ensure
       proper operation of the commercial spaces and will adopt the EDGE Advance
       standard, to promote energy efficiency and rational water use [35]. Estimated
       investment for the construction work at the Santa Tecla municipal market is
       approximately US$78 million, while the investment for the La Libertad municipal
       market is estimated at US$28 million. The remaining amount will go toward urban
       development works and consulting and nonconsulting services related to the
       activities under the component.
                                                    - 14 -



                              Illustration 6. Provisional municipal market project designs




       To the left, Santa Tecla municipal market; to the right, La Libertad municipal market. Source: IDB (2025).
       Note: These images are for reference. The plans for both market projects are still in the design phase.


1.59   Public spaces around the markets will be renovated, including streets, parks,
       plazas, and green spaces, integrating climate adaptation and mitigation, social
       inclusion, and universal accessibility criteria (optional link 10) [36]. Lighting will
       also be improved to enhance the personal safety of passersby, particularly women.
1.60   Resources will be earmarked to improve basic services infrastructure inside the
       markets and in the immediate surrounding areas. Investments will include
       upgrades to the storm drainage system and solid waste management, including
       implementation of a pilot project for composting and biogas to take advantage of
       organic waste and alternative energy sources for the markets (optional link 18).
       Installation of wastewater treatment plants is envisaged at both municipal markets.
       The investment for infrastructure construction is estimated at US$23 million for
       Santa Tecla and US$16 million for La Libertad.
1.61   Component 2. Comprehensive support for micro and small merchants
       (US$7.7 million). This component contributes to the specific objective to “boost
       competitiveness and promote formalization of the businesses in the municipal
       markets of both districts.” Activities to be financed will be geared toward
       strengthening the productive and commercial capacity of all merchants in both
       municipal markets with a focus on economic sustainability, inclusion and equity in
       forms accessible to persons with disabilities (sign language, accessibility guidelines
       for web content for digital solutions, etc.), flexible schedules, and childcare support
       to help women attend activities. Planned actions include technical and business
       training, covering topics such as planning, financial management, accounting,
       purchasing, marketing, negotiation, and financial literacy. Businesses will be
       encouraged to formalize using personalized consulting.
1.62   Adoption of digital pay solutions will also be promoted with a pilot project to improve
       businesses’ operational efficiency (optional link 18), and microfinance fairs will be
                                                  - 15 -



         held.4 The creation of a buying cooperative for vendors will also be promoted with
         a governance model that optimizes the procurement of supplies and generates
         economies of scale (optional link 7).
1.63     Commercial equipment (refrigerators, stoves, refrigerated display cases) will be
         procured, via accessible microfinance arrangements. Repayment for these assets
         will be structured by a leasing system for commercial premises, providing a
         gradual, sustainable mechanism for recovering costs. A strategic marketing plan
         will also be prepared and implemented to reposition the municipal markets.
1.64     Component 3. Building municipal institutional and financial capacities
         (US$5.3 million). This component contributes to the specific objective to “build the
         institutional and financial capacities of the Libertad Sur and Libertad Costa
         municipios.” Four groups of key activities geared toward strengthening local public
         management will be financed: (i) development of regulatory instruments, operating
         manuals, and management protocols to optimize the operating and running of the
         municipal markets [37]; (ii) creation of partial land use plans and special plans for
         comprehensive management of urban mobility, along with strengthening of
         territorial information systems; (iii) design and implementation of programs to
         consolidate the technical capacity of municipal urban planning, tax management,
         and market and land development management offices; and (iv) creation of
         regulatory instruments to charge for use of the public space and other nontaxed
         services, and development of regulations for implementing instruments to capture
         land appreciation tied to local financial sustainability.
1.65     Support for program administration and contingent expenses (US$5 million).
         Financing will be provided for program execution, including hiring of PEU technical
         staff and operating and administrative expenses, midterm and final evaluations, and
         financial and management audits. It will also finance an impact assessment to gauge
         the effectiveness of the interventions for the merchants and generate evidence for
         decision-making, together with an institutional communication strategy.

                                        Box 3. Statement of theory of change

          Improving access to urban infrastructure and basic services, promoting formalization and
          competitiveness of the merchants in both municipal markets, and building the institutional and
          financial capacities of the Libertad Sur and Libertad Costa municipios will renew the downtown
          areas of Santa Tecla and La Libertad, strengthening the local economies.




4   A microfinance fair is an event where financial products and services designed for micro and small
    business owners are presented. The main goal is to inform them about how to access these services and
    the requirements and benefits.
             - 16 -



Illustration 7. Theory of change
                                           - 17 -



C.     Key results indicators
1.66   The indicator (Annex II) for measuring the general objective will assess the income
       level in the area of influence of the municipal markets and gross revenue of the
       merchants. The indicators for measuring the specific objectives are: (i) merchant
       perception of problems in the local environment; (ii) number of people who enter
       the market; (iii) walkability index; (iv) robustness of micro businesses; (v) gender
       gap in robustness of micro businesses; (vi) proportion of merchants who meet the
       formalization criteria; (vii) operating cost coverage index in municipal markets; and
       (viii) comprehensive land management capacity index.
1.67   Economic assessment. The economic assessment for the Santa Tecla and
       La Libertad municipal markets remodeling project was drawn up using a
       cost-benefit analysis, with a discount rate of 12% and an assessment horizon of
       20 years. This methodology quantified ex ante the program’s economic return,
       considering both execution and operating costs and aggregate future benefits.
1.68   The assessment found an internal rate of return (IRR) that ranged from 12.18% to
       22.66%, depending on the scenario being assessed. A sensitivity analysis with
       pessimistic and optimistic scenarios showed how robust the outcomes were, with
       positive IRRs in both cases.
1.69   Impact assessment. The assessment measures the changes in the micro
       businesses’ monthly gross incomes in the municipal markets, merchants’ perception
       of problems in the area, competitiveness among businesses, and economic activity
       in the areas surrounding the markets, using the intensity of night lighting captured
       by satellite imagery. The methodology uses the quasi-experimental designs of
       difference-in-differences and synthetic control, comparing pre- and post-intervention
       changes in treatment and control areas. The choice of control municipios is
       enhanced with the Propensity Score Matching methodology, and a granular spatial
       analysis will be performed using satellite imagery.
1.70   Direct and indirect benefits. The interventions will directly benefit an estimated
       2,000 merchants: 1,500 in Santa Tecla and 500 in La Libertad. They will also have
       a positive impact on approximately 1,800 residents of Santa Tecla and 2,500 of
       La Libertad, improving the urban environment, public services, and economic
       dynamism. The improvements in infrastructure and equipment will also benefit
       domestic and foreign tourists, especially in areas such as Paseo El Carmen and
       the Malecón at Puerto de La Libertad. An estimated 3.8 million visitors to
       La Libertad annually will enjoy safer, better organized, and more attractive spaces.
       The program will create local jobs in construction and operation of markets and in
       other economic activities. Risk mitigation measures will reduce damage from
       hydrometeorological and geophysical events, improving urban resilience and
       generating future economic savings. El Salvador and the municipios will benefit
       from stronger public management and higher tax collection, thanks to business
       formalization and application of tax and nontax instruments. An indirect positive
       impact on the population in both districts is expected, affecting an estimated
       138,000 inhabitants in Santa Tecla and 40,000 in La Libertad.
1.71   IDB strategic and institutional alignment. The program is aligned with the
       IDB Group Institutional Strategy: Transforming for Scale and Impact (CA-631) and
       contributes to these objectives: (i) reduce poverty and inequality; (ii) promote
       sustainable regional growth, by building the capacity of merchants in the markets
       and promoting their formalization; and (iii) tackle climate change, by building
                                              - 18 -



         markets that use resources efficiently (EDGE). The program is consistent with the
         following operational focus areas: (i) biodiversity, natural capital, and climate
         action, integrating adaptation and mitigation measures in Component 1; (ii) gender
         equality and inclusion of diverse groups, according to the environmental and social
         policy framework and the IDB Group Gender and Diversity Action Plan 2022-2025
         in Components 1 and 2; (iii) institutional capacity, rule of law, and citizen security,
         enhancing municipal capacities in Component 3; (iv) social protection and human
         capital development, in Component 2; (v) productive development and innovation
         through the private sector, in Component 2; and (vi) sustainable, resilient, and
         inclusive infrastructure, through the comprehensive urban interventions in
         Component 1. The program is also aligned with the IDB Group Country Strategy
         with El Salvador 2021-2024 (GN-3046-1),5 with the strategic objectives of
         developing inclusive, sustainable infrastructure services and facilitating access to
         finance for micro and small enterprises. This alignment takes the form of building
         municipal markets and infrastructure that include sustainability- and
         inclusion-focused technologies and designs, and boosting small and medium
         merchants’ competitiveness.
1.72     Regarding climate change, the operation includes renovating and building
         two municipal markets that will earn EDGE Advance certification, including energy
         efficiency, climate resilience, and water treatment measures, a solid waste
         management and diagnostic assessment pilot with innovative solutions for
         potential outputs such as composting and biogas (so that it will eventually replace
         the use of gas currently planned for cooking in the market). Since the price of
         electricity in El Salvador is considerably higher than the price of liquefied petroleum
         gas, and this gas is government-subsidized, it becomes financially unfeasible to
         choose alternatives to electric cooking. The IDB will incorporate this topic in the
         dialog with the government to find gradual solutions that support redirecting these
         subsidies and possibly electrifying cooking equipment. This operation also
         includes urban renewal plans to renovate public spaces with bioclimatic
         improvements; tree planting; bike path and pedestrian area extensions; switching
         to 100% LED lighting; drainage, wastewater treatment, and waste management
         improvements, measures to reduce the risk of climate hazards such as flooding
         and temperature increases. There have been various design consulting sessions
         producing key information inputs in the areas of climate and geophysical risk and
         vulnerability, which has led to proposals for specific adaptation solutions for each
         targeted area. Output indicators have been established that include EDGE
         certification and the composting pilot. Consequently, the operation is aligned with
         the Paris Agreement and has 76.02% climate finance.
1.73     Alignment with the Government of El Salvador’s priorities. The program is
         aligned with the 2019-2024 Cuscatlán Plan, which promotes economic growth,
         attracting private investment, and inclusive urban development through municipal
         development, tourism promotion, and formalizing economic activities; the
         2020-2030 National Tourism Development Plan, which aims to take action in
         75 historic centers, expand potable water service coverage to 90% and electricity
         to 100%, increase sanitation by 15% in tourist communities, and formalize
         employment in the sector; and the Surf City 2019 Program, which promotes
         investment in urban and tourism infrastructure in areas like La Libertad


5   In a transition period.
                                                    - 19 -



         department. The program contributes to economic growth in the Libertad Sur and
         Libertad Costa municipios through urban renewal and revitalization of two markets
         in their historic centers, promoting tourism development, business formalization,
         and private sector participation.
1.74     The Bank’s experience in the sector and lessons learned. The Bank has
         gained vast experience in urban renewal (3879/OC-DR), notably for financing the
         construction of municipal markets 1761/OC-EC, developing climate change-
         resilient urban infrastructure ATN/JF-20910-DR, and access to geographic
         information systems for land management ATN/OC-19731-ES. It has also
         supported micro and small business owners in El Salvador via training and
         business plans under the Opportunities for the Majority initiative, which provided
         US$10 million in 2010 to modernize municipal markets, strengthen local capacity,
         and promote economic and environmental sustainability 2478A/OC-ES. The main
         lessons learned are summarized in the table below.

                              Table 1. Application to current program design

                 Lesson learned                              Lessons incorporated into the program
3879/OC-DR. The strategic orientation of public     Based on experience from program 3879/OC-DR, which
resources toward catalytic interventions that can   underscored the value of earmarking public resources
incentivize or complement private investment        for catalytic interventions capable of encouraging
made it possible to maximize impact on public       private investment and strengthening long-term financial
spending, the effects on local development, and     sustainability, this new program takes a similar
the long-term financial sustainability of the       approach by developing comprehensive investments in
interventions.                                      infrastructure and public goods, as well as exploring
                                                    synergies with the private sector to drive real estate
                                                    development projects, particularly in downtown areas, to
                                                    support urban regeneration and leverage investment
                                                    opportunities aligned with government objectives.
1761/OC-DR. Interventions in decayed areas          The program will operate in areas with advanced
demonstrated that comprehensive renovation,         physical, economic, and social decay, with the support
with political and community backing, makes it      of city halls and local communities.
possible to reverse urban decay and facilitates
sustainable relocation of informal merchants.
ATN/JF-20910-DR. Integrating digital tools          Districts were prioritized and the works and activities to
strengthened data-driven decision-making,           finance were defined based on an analysis of data
improving the efficiency and resilience of the      collected during the program design phase, using digital
investments.                                        tools. These tools included a survey taken in real time
                                                    and uploaded to a website, satellite imagery to estimate
                                                    per capita family income, and digital modeling of
                                                    hydrometeorological events. This approach made it
                                                    possible to quantify the project’s potential impact and
                                                    gear the interventions toward areas of greatest
                                                    vulnerability and need.
ATN/OC-19731-ES. Development of the urban           Component 3 of the project includes the formulation of
land information system demonstrated the value      land-use planning instruments and strengthening land
of having an integrated technology platform to      information systems, since effective, evidence-based
manage geographic, statistical, and documentary     planning is key for guiding urban development.
data on land-use planning and urban
development.
                                                            - 20 -



                      Lesson learned                                 Lessons incorporated into the program
2478A/OC-ES. Ensuring environmental and social              The program included a consulting process headed by
transparency throughout the project’s life cycle            DOM with the stakeholders, supported by a customer
enhances sustainability and citizen buy-in. The             service desk to receive and answer questions and
requirement to disclose information on the market           comments. This strategy seeks to enhance
renovation and construction proved to be an                 transparency, citizen participation, and timely conflict
effective practice for promoting participation and          management during program execution.
accountability.



                            II.        FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       Method, cost, and financing. The operation is structured as a specific investment
          loan, due to the comprehensive nature of the urban renewal program. The program
          has a five-year execution period (as per the schedule in Table 3), with a total
          cost up to US$170 million (Table 2), completely financed with resources from the
          Bank’s Ordinary Capital.

                                      Table 2. Estimated program cost (in US$)

                                      Components                                              IDB             %
      Component 1. Developing urban infrastructure and basic services                       152 million           89
      Component 2. Comprehensive support for micro and small merchants                      7.7 million            5
      Component 3. Building municipal institutional and financial capacities                5.3 million            3
      Support for program administration, including midterm evaluation and
                                                                                              5 million            3
      impact assessment, and contingent expenses
      Total                                                                               170 million         100

                                      Table 3. Disbursement schedule (in US$)

         Year 1              Year 2            Year 3                 Year 4         Year 5               Total
        2.8 million        42.3 million      52.4 million            50 million    22.5 million      170 million
              2%              25%               31%                    29%            13%                 100%


B.        Environmental and social risks
2.2       According to the Inter-American Development Bank’s environmental and social
          policy framework, the environmental and social impact classification is Category A,
          due mainly to the temporary economic displacement of the 1,573 commercial units
          (some 2,342 vendors) working in the Santa Tecla market who will be temporarily
          relocated during the demolition and reconstruction work; and of the
          570 commercial units (736 vendors) operating in the current La Libertad market
          who will be moved to the new market once it is built. During the construction phase,
          the typical negative impacts of civil works, including demolition of the two markets,
          and of operating commercial activities in temporary relocation sites (organic and
          hazardous waste management, wastewater management, pests and vectors,
          disturbing the people in the area) are anticipated.
2.3       The environmental and social risk rating is high, due to the aforementioned direct
          environmental and social impacts and the risk of conflicts with the population at
                                          - 21 -



      the temporary relocation sites for Santa Tecla market merchants. The Municipal
      Public Works Office has no experience implementing an environmental and social
      policy framework, so its capacity to manage the program’s socio-environmental
      aspects must be strengthened.
2.4   The Disaster and Climate Change Risk (DCCR) classification is high. The
      moderate and high-intensity hazards at the intervention sites are: street, river, and
      coastal flooding; meteorological and hydrological drought; temperature increases,
      coastal erosion, earthquakes, landslides, volcanic threats, and tsunamis.
      Hydrometeorological hazards will be exacerbated under future conditions with
      climate change. The critical nature and vulnerability of both projects is high, due to
      their physical characteristics, their impact on essential services, and the
      unfavorable geology. The risk of works exacerbating conditions is minimal and will
      be controlled through specific measures.
2.5   An environmental and social management system was developed for the program
      during preparation. It includes an environmental and social impact study and an
      environmental and social management plan for the planned works in Santa Tecla;
      an environmental and social impact study and management plan for La Libertad;
      a relocation plan for merchants in the Santa Tecla market; a relocation plan for
      merchants in the La Libertad market; the Climate Change and Disaster Risk
      Narrative and Disaster Risk Management Plan for the works in Santa Tecla and
      La Libertad; and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan for the program, including a
      complaint mechanism. A preliminary version of these socio-environmental
      documents was posted on the Bank’s website prior to the analysis mission.
2.6   In June 2025, DOM carried out a consultation process with the stakeholders which
      consisted of the following: (i) specific consultation with Santa Tecla market
      merchants on the relocation plan; (ii) consultation with the people in the areas
      where the Santa Tecla merchants will be temporarily relocated, people in the area
      of influence for the urban development works in this city and other project
      stakeholders; (iii) specific consultation with La Libertad market merchants; and
      (iv) consultations with people in the area of influence of the La Libertad urban
      development works and other stakeholders. In Santa Tecla, the market vendors’
      main concerns involve a possible decrease in sales and the impact on customer
      relations during the relocation period, vehicle and pedestrian access to the
      temporary stands, the quality of the provisional spaces, delivery of basic services
      like drinking water, electricity, and sewage, and the security of goods and
      equipment. The business owners who are already on the temporary relocation
      streets are concerned about the impact on the visibility of their businesses, the
      potential impact on their sales, and vehicle and pedestrian access for neighbors,
      customers, and suppliers. Those in La Libertad had questions about the suitability
      of locating the new market in a tourism development zone; concerns about its
      potential impact on mobility, solid waste management and public health; and
      possible economic effects on the businesses located on the streets where the work
      will occur. DOM answered participants’ questions and assured them that all
      concerns and suggestions would be taken into account to fine-tune the design of
      the interventions. The report from the consultations and the updated
      socio-environmental documents are available on the Bank’s website.
                                             - 22 -



C.     Fiduciary risks
2.7    Fiduciary considerations. DOM is executing operation 5080/OC-ES satisfactorily
       as per the Progress Monitoring Report. However, the institutional capacity analysis
       identified the following risks: (i) medium-high, because the procurement
       management system does not fulfill the functionalities and openness needed to
       advertise bidding, progress in contracting processes, or award information, so that
       participation is limited exclusively to registered domestic and foreign potential
       bidders. To mitigate this, the processes will be posted on the Bank’s website and
       on the executing agency’s institutional page, as well as on the COMPRASAL
       portal. Other mechanisms will also be explored for announcing bidding processes.
       And (ii) medium-low, because bottlenecks were identified during the contracting
       process in these areas: (i) bid evaluation due to bidders’ noncompliance with
       requirements, and (ii) after a process is relaunched when few or no bids were
       submitted; therefore, the participation criteria and requirements had to be relaxed.
       To mitigate this, a study of the public works, by sector, will be performed, including
       a market study aimed at identifying the country’s potential works, exploring other
       contracting methods, and identifying strategies to increase bidder participation.
       The funding source for this study will be transactional budget resources. Additional
       actions will be proposed during program execution for technical, administrative,
       and operational institution-strengthening, to address the challenges inherent in
       simultaneous execution of several IDB loans.
2.8    Specifically, in keeping with the institutional capacity assessment, the program will
       ensure that program execution unit (PEU) members have appropriate profiles and
       work full time on the program. However, considering the PEU’s accumulated
       experience and knowledge of program 5080/OC-ES—especially in preparing
       bidding information—the PEU of this new program may consult with this unit on
       technical matters and request advice when pertinent. The PEU team will also
       receive training on topics related to risk monitoring, evaluation, and analysis,
       pursuant to IDB policies.
D.     Other key issues and risks
2.9    Additional risks. Potential “medium-high” risks related to the following have been
       identified: (i) delays in program execution due to merchant complaints against
       poorly managed resettlement plans; (ii) lack of program sustainability due to low
       merchant participation and interest in its design and management; (iii) program
       outcomes affected by weak coordination between DOM and the municipios;
       (iv) delays in execution for lack of contractors interested in or available for the civil
       works; (v) commitment to program development if the necessary land for the
       La Libertad municipal market cannot be procured; (vi) lack of implementation of
       land-use plans due to local opposition, affecting the long-term development vision;
       and (vii) execution delays due to adverse climate conditions.
2.10   The mitigation measures include: (i) involve merchants in the plan design, ensure
       adequate conditions during the move, and establish effective mechanisms to
       address complaints; (ii) from the earliest stages, publicize the project’s benefits
       to elicit interest and commitment; (iii) create technical roundtables, appoint
       coordination managers, and formalize cooperation agreements between
       institutions; (iv) identify available businesses in advance, adjust tenders to attract
       bidders and encourage local participation; (v) initiate the procurement process in
       advance to ensure availability of the planned land area; (vi) promote local
                                           - 23 -



       participation in planning and include their priorities to facilitate their adoption;
       (vii) include climate and geological risk management measures in works planning;
       and (viii) establish rapid response protocols for climate and seismic events.
2.11   Synergies with the private sector and other Bank programs
       a. Project development with IDB Lab. Two pilot projects are anticipated in
          collaboration with IDB Lab, focused on: (i) organic solid waste management
          via circular economy solutions applied to municipal markets (with a direct
          contract up to US$115,000), and (ii) digitized payments as a strategy to
          promote formalization and competitiveness among merchants (with a direct
          contract up to US$100,000). Both projects will use open innovation methods
          developed by IDB Lab as part of its GovTech initiatives, facilitating the
          identification and proof of behavioral and technology solutions in urban
          contexts. Note that, as part of the commitment assumed with the business
          selected via a competitive process, as per IDB Lab arrangements and policies,
          it will have to be contracted directly against the loan proceeds, according to the
          Bank’s procurement policies (GN-2349-15, paragraph e). To comply with the
          integrity guidelines, businesses will be selected based on OP-474-1 and will
          be engaged by the Bank as direct contracts as per paragraph 3.7(e) of
          document GN-2349-15, in exceptional cases where innovations are contracted
          via competitive procedures executed by IDB Lab.
       b. Public-private partnership (PPP) study. In coordination with the Bank’s PPP
          unit, a qualitative value-for-money study was done to assess the viability of
          developing and managing the municipal markets through PPPs, compared to
          the traditional competitive bidding model. The study recommended that a PPP
          should not be implemented, given the limited development of the PPP system
          in the country, as seen by its low position on the 2023/2024 Infrascope index,
          and the recent dissolution of the Export and Investment Promotion Agency
          (PROESA), indicating weak institutional capacity for structuring and
          implementing this type of initiative. The creation of INVEST, while intended to
          enhance investment promotion, has caused legal uncertainty regarding its
          jurisdiction in the area of PPPs since it is not explicitly given functions related
          to this model, despite being the successor to PROESA (optional link 12).
       c. Promoting access to microfinance. The program will promote synergies with
          national microfinance institutions to facilitate access to credit for the municipal
          market vendors. The plan is to organize 12 fairs in order to identify and connect
          the main financial institutions that offer products to micro and small business
          owners. The financial intermediaries of operation 5733/OC-ES, Access to
          Credit Program for Micro, Small, and Medium-sized Enterprises, will be invited
          to these fairs. The objective of that program is to offer financing to micro
          businesses to all sectors of the local economy [40]. IDB Invest will also support
          coordination with financial institutions in its portfolio, to facilitate their
          participation in the microfinance fairs. These activities will take advantage of
          the synergies with Component 2 of the program.
       d. Real property development. During program execution, and in coordination
          with IDB Invest, it will explore opportunities to promote real property
          development projects with private sector participation, geared toward
          furthering urban renewal in the downtown areas of both districts. These
          initiatives may include installation of restaurants, as well as other commercial
                                           - 24 -



         and services developments that invigorate the local economy and complement
         the project’s infrastructure investments.
      e. Municipal market administration and governance. As stated previously,
         options were analyzed for boosting private sector participation in their
         operation, including concession arrangements or other public-private
         management models.

                  III.    IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.    Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1   Borrower and executing agency. The borrower will be the Republic of El Salvador,
      and the executing agency will be the Municipal Public Works Office (DOM), through
      its project execution unit (PEU). DOM is a decentralized entity under public law, with
      autonomy in the administration of its assets and its own legal personality under the
      aegis of the Presidency of the Republic. It will interact with the municipios via the
      operating units established by DOM’s board of directors. The executing agency’s
      main function will be technical, administrative, and operational management of the
      program. Its PEU will be composed of the following: (a) general program
      coordinator; (b) financial coordinator; (c) procurement coordinator; (d) planning and
      monitoring coordinator; and (e) environmental and social coordinator.
3.2   The PEU is expected to be headquartered in San Salvador and will coordinate all
      program activities from there. To ensure equitable and efficient implementation,
      the PEU will have contacts with the point people in Santa Tecla and La Libertad in
      charge of coordinating actions at the local level.
3.3   Staff and resources will be distributed between the two locations based on the
      specific needs and phases of each component. Each component will have a
      coordinator in charge of planning, executing, and monitoring the relevant activities.
3.4   The social and merchant assistance teams will work with the municipios to be
      present at all times in both districts, with defined roles coordinated from the central
      office. The Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts are approximately 25 km apart,
      which facilitates travel and regular supervision between them.
3.5   Sustainability and maintenance of investments. DOM will manage the
      infrastructure works and, once completed, will transfer them to the corresponding
      municipios to administer and operate.
3.6   Therefore, the works will be inspected jointly by representatives of DOM and the
      municipio to ensure compliance with the established technical, regulatory, and
      contractual standards. Subsequently, a formal acceptance certificate will be drawn
      up and signed by both parties. It will include a description of the work’s condition,
      updated drawings, and the associated guarantees. DOM will deliver to the
      municipality all of the project’s administrative paperwork, including contracts,
      progress reports, acceptance certificates, final drawings, and any other documents
      necessary for the future management of the infrastructure. Lastly, the municipios
      will formally incorporate the works and land into their asset inventories according
      to local and national regulations.
3.7   To ensure long-term sustainability, the markets will operate under a
      comprehensive management model that focuses on financial sustainability. This
      model includes efficient collection of rental fees, preventive and corrective
                                           - 25 -



        maintenance mechanisms, and professionalized administration systems. We
        recommend and expect that these markets can be managed by the private sector,
        based on a model wherein a specialized municipal office or public entity acts as
        the governing body. This body will maintain direct control over the market’s
        essential functions, such as regulation, planning, and supervision, while it
        delegates operational management to the private sector, resulting in efficient,
        transparent administration focused on public service. This management model
        using private operators is already being implemented in the country’s municipal
        markets, including the Hula Hula municipal market in San Salvador. The main
        lessons learned from this management model using private operators include:
        a. Professionalization of the operation. Private operators have shown that
           implementing professional administrative practices, such as having back-office
           teams and property and personnel management on the floor, helps consolidate
           efficient operations, maintain service quality standards, and project a polished
           image of the market.
        b. Allocation and regulation of spaces. Experience shows that a usage
           agreement with a defined term (for example, three years) and transparent
           criteria for allocating spaces (such as avoiding concentrating them in the same
           family group) contribute to order and equity. However, challenges remain, such
           as the informal resale of spaces, which underlines the need to have more solid
           regulatory mechanisms and effective government supervision.
        c. Complementary services and structured revenue. The models operated by
           the private sector generally include well managed complementary services,
           such as common areas, food courts, and parking. Diversifying revenue
           sources—rents, service costs, fees for parking and using recreational
           spaces—improves financial sustainability and make it possible to offer
           competitive rates to the merchants.
        d. Commercial culture and image. The operators have invested in
           strengthening the lessees’ commercial culture and improving the overall
           market experience. They are actively working on the space’s appearance and
           customer service. These actions have helped increase the flow of visitors and
           position the market as an attractive space for local consumption.
        e. Key institutional lesson. The experience of private operators suggests that
           the combination of a public authority that sets out clear rules (standards,
           allocation criteria, base rates, control mechanisms) with professionalized
           operational management delegated to specialized players can significantly
           improve the quality, sustainability, and legitimacy of the markets. This hybrid
           model is a viable alternative for modernizing and organizing the network of
           municipal markets.
3.8     The municipios will also be strengthened by consulting firms, hired by DOM via the
        activities in Component 3 and focused on building technical, administrative, and
        regulatory capacity to supervise municipal market management. It is notable that,
        in June 2025, the national Legislative Assembly passed the Law to Establish the
        Office of National and Local Commercial Markets in Public Spaces, which created
        National Markets Office (DNM),6 which could assume the administration and direct


6   Decree 323/2025.
                                                   - 26 -



         management of these spaces, in coordination with municipal governments. If so,
         as indicated above, the DNM, not the municipios, would be the beneficiary of the
         capacity-building activities in that component, which ensures that the planned
         measures to strengthen the management of markets would remain in effect,
         regardless of which entity administers them.
3.9      Assuming that DNM takes on the administration and management of the markets,
         pursuant to the Law, once the DOM (the project executing agency) has built the
         markets and the municipios have transferred them to the DNM, the latter will be
         responsible for ensuring the financial sustainability and proper implementation of the
         work and maintenance plans for those assets, prepared in coordination with the
         corresponding municipios, pursuant to: (i) the Model Interagency Agreement
         between the Municipal Public Works Office and the Municipios of Libertad Sur and
         Libertad Costa (optional link 24, Clauses 5(8) and 6); and (ii) the loan contract
         between the Republic of El Salvador and the IDB. In this context, financial
         sustainability is understood as the municipal markets’ capacity to generate operating
         income equal to or greater than operating costs, ensuring fulfillment of the work and
         maintenance plans, and eliminating dependence on external subsidies.
3.10     A financial sustainability model has been developed for both markets to supplement
         the revenue from renting premises to micro and small merchants with additional
         sources, such as the sale of advertising space and leasing of premises at market
         prices (for example, to banking institutions). In both markets, analysis shows
         financial viability with a surplus in operations and maintenance (optional link 16).
3.11     Program Operating Regulations. The program will be governed by the program
         Operating Regulations stipulating: (i) the program organizational chart; (ii) the
         technical and operational arrangements for its execution; (iii) the arrangements for
         programming, monitoring, and assessing outcomes; (iv) guidelines for financial,
         auditing, and procurement processes; (v) the details of executing agency functions
         and the responsibilities of the other project participants; (vi) details of the activities
         included in the various program components; and (vii) description of the PEU
         team’s responsibilities, whose terms of reference must be agreed on with the Bank.
3.12     Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan:
         (i) the program Operating Regulations have been approved under the terms
         previously agreed upon with the Bank; (ii) key staff of the program execution
         unit has been designated,7 including: (a) general program coordinator,
         (b) financial coordinator, (c) procurement coordinator, (d) planning and
         monitoring coordinator, and (e) environmental and social coordinator; and
         (iii) evidence has been provided that a framework agreement has been signed
         between the executing agency and each of the municipios detailing the
         responsibilities of each party during program execution.
3.13     Special contractual conditions of execution. The borrower, through the
         executing agency, will present evidence to the Bank that the following conditions
         have been met: before signing the contract to perform the works for each of the
         markets and the basic services infrastructure under Component 1 of the program,
         it will have submitted evidence of the following: (i) legal ownership of the land
         and/or real property, establishment of easements or other rights and permits


7   “Designate” here refers to the appointment of staff, which can include DOM employees and/or consultants.
                                            - 27 -



       required to build and use the respective works; and (ii) it has contracted
       supervision of the works. This condition is necessary to ensure smooth
       construction. See the social and environmental contractual conditions in Annex B
       of the environmental and social review summary.
3.14   Procurement of works, goods, and services. The program will follow the
       Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American
       Development Bank (GN-2349-15) and the Policies for the Selection and
       Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank
       (GN-2350-15), or those in effect during execution pursuant to the procurement plan
       (required link 4). The annex on fiduciary agreements and requirements herein and
       the standards in the program Operating Regulations will also be considered.
       Annex III contains the details of the program’s main procurements.
3.15   Audits. The external audit will be performed by a firm of external auditors
       acceptable to the Bank. The independent external audit will be commissioned and
       financed with program resources, as per the procedures, terms of reference, and
       request for proposals that received a no-objection from the Bank. During program
       execution, the audited financial statements will be submitted: (i) annually to the
       Bank, within 120 days after the close of each fiscal period; and (ii) at project close
       within 120 days after the last disbursement date.
3.16   Retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively finance (charged against the
       loan proceeds) eligible expenses incurred by the borrower prior to the loan
       approval date if these are related to public space renovations, implementation of
       the environmental and social management plan, and construction of the temporary
       municipal markets in Component 1, up to US$20 million (11.76% of the loan
       amount), provided that requirements substantially similar to those in the loan
       contract have been met, and the contracting procedures comply with the Core
       Procurement Principles. Eligible expenses must have been incurred on or after
       21 February 2025 (Project Profile approval date), but in no case will they include
       expenses made more than 18 months before the loan approval date.
B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.17   Monitoring and evaluation. The monitoring and evaluation plan (required link 2)
       will support operation execution in keeping with the progress targets and indicators
       defined in the results matrix (Annex II). The following instruments will be used
       for this: (i) multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, procurement plan, financial
       plan, risk matrix, and annual external audits; (ii) six-monthly progress reports
       including impact monitoring indicators, outcomes, execution of each component
       and compliance with the operating requirements set out in the program Operating
       Regulations (optional link 23); the environmental, social, health, and occupational
       safety reports described in the environmental and social review summary (required
       link 3); and (iii) audited financial statements. The executing agency will compile,
       store, and process the information, indicators, and parameters, including annual
       plans and the final evaluation required to write the project completion report.
3.18   Evaluation. A midterm and ex post final evaluation will quantify the outcomes of
       program interventions based on the indicators in the results matrix. The evaluation
       methodology will include a minimum of the following: (i) ex post cost-benefit
       analysis, using the same ex ante analysis methodology, as described in (optional
       link 2); (ii) results of financial execution; (iii) fulfillment of established targets,
                                          - 28 -



       according to agreed outcome indicators; and (iv) fulfillment of contractual
       commitments.
3.19   An impact assessment will also be performed based on the
       difference-in-differences and synthetic control methods. The main question to be
       answered is: What is the program’s impact on the municipal markets of
       Santa Tecla and La Libertad in terms of accessibility to infrastructure and public
       services, creation of economic opportunity, and building municipal institutional and
       financial capacities? The baseline is in place for the treatment and control groups.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Annex I - ES-L1172
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 1




                                                                           Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                    Summary             ES-L1172
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
Section 1. IDB Group Institutional Strategy Alignment


                                                                                                 -Biodiversity, natural capital, and climate action
                                                                                                 -Gender equality and inclusion of diverse population groups
                                                                                                 -Institutional capacity, rule of law, citizen security
 Operational Focus Areas                                                                         -Social protection and human capital development
                                                                                                 -Sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructure
                                                                                                 -Productive development and innovation through the private sector




 [Space-Holder: Impact framework indicators]

2. Country Development Objectives


                                                                                                                          2.1 Facilitate access to financing for micro and small
   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                     GN-3046-1          enterprises 2.2 Develop inclusive and sustainable
                                                                                                                          infrastructure services



                                                                                                                          The intervention is included in the 2025 Operational
   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                      GN-3270-3
                                                                                                                          Program.



Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                             Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                   9.8
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                2.5
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                              3.5
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                           3.8
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                              6.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                       1.5
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                     0.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                           2.5
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                             2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                  0.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                              8.4
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                            2.8
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                  5.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                        High
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                 A
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems


                                                                                                                          Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting.
                                                                  Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)




                                                                                 Non-Fiduciary


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project




Evaluability Assessment Note:
This project's general objective is to strengthen the local economies in the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts. The project's specific objectives are (i) improving access to
quality public services, as well as local urban infrastructure, in the central areas of the districts of Santa Tecla and La Libertad, including their municipal markets (ii) increase
the competitiveness and promote the formalization of businesses in the municipal markets of both districts and (iii) strengthen the institutional and financial capacites of the
Libertad Sur and Libertad Costa municipalities.

The diagnosis finds that urban decay in the districts of Santa Tecla and La Libertad limits local economic activity. Such decay is characterized by infrastructure in poor
condition, limited access to public services, high labor informality, and low institutional capacity. To address this problem, the project aims to revamp the municipal markets
and its surrounding infrastructure, provide support for small businesses and promote their formalization, and build institutional capacity in municipal governments. The
project's vertical logic is consistent with the diagnosis and it is reflected in the Results Matrix. While most of the proposed indicators in the Results Matrix are SMART, there are
concerns about the feasibility of measuring the indicators associated with financial sustainability due to data unavailability at baseline.

The economic analysis finds an ERR of 15.89% and a VPN of US$ 72.88 million under a 12% discount rate. The cost-benefit analysis compares project investment and
maintenance costs with benefits stemming from, among others, higher business formalization, increased market share of businesses located in the market, and increased
property values. While the analysis is clear to follow, it quantifies many benefits that are not reflected in the Results Matrix and in some cases, does not specify how the
evidence used to quantify benefits is translated into the parameters of the analysis.

Project monitoring will be done using technical reports from the executing agency. Project evaluation will be done using two impact evaluations (to measure the impact on
business revenue and on income in the intervention area), which will be complemented by a before-and-after analysis. These methods are appropriate to answer the evaluation
questions.
                                                                                                                                                                                      Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                    Page 1 of 7


                                                                                      RESULTS MATRIX

                                                                      STATEMENT OF PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

    General development objective:           To strengthen the local economies in the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts.
    Specific development objectives:         The specific development objectives are to: (i) improve access to quality public services and local urban infrastructure in the downtown areas
                                             of the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts, including the municipal markets; (ii) boost competitiveness and promote formalization of the
                                             businesses in the municipal markets of both districts; and (iii) build the institutional and financial capacities of the Libertad Sur and
                                             Libertad Costa municipios.


                                                                                A. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

                                                                Baseline             Assessment scenario
                                              Unit of      (pre-intervention)         (post-intervention)         Related strategic
    No.              Indicator                                                                                                               Means of verification               Comments
                                             measure                                              Expected year   alignment themes
                                                          Value         Year        Target
                                                                                                    measured
    I.1   Income level in municipal market     US$        766.91        2025        776.881           2030        Sustainable         Technical report based on the         See required link 2.
          (Santa Tecla) area of influence                                                                         economic growth     methodology described in the
                                                                                                                                      monitoring, evaluation and learning
                                                                                                                                      (MEL) document.
                                                                                                                                      Responsible party: DOM
    I.2   Income level in municipal market     US$        589.65        2025        601.44            2030        Sustainable         Technical report based on the         See required link 2.
          (La Libertad) area of influence                                                                         economic growth     methodology described in the MEL.
                                                                                                                                      Responsible party: DOM
    I.3   Merchants’ gross revenue             US$       2,588.30       2025       2,976.30   2       2030        Sustainable         Technical report based on the         See required link 2.
          (Santa Tecla)                                                                                           economic growth     methodology described in the MEL.
                                                                                                                                      Responsible party: DOM
    I.4   Merchants’ gross revenue             US$       2,585.90       2025         3,146            2030        Sustainable         Technical report based on the         See required link 2.
          (La Libertad)                                                                                           economic growth     methodology described in the MEL.
                                                                                                                                      Responsible party: DOM




1     The targets for both districts were calculated based on the minimum observable effect with statistical significance at 95% confidence according to power calculations based on the
      estimates reported in the Impact Assessment Annex at constant 2025 prices.
2     The targets for both districts were calculated based on the minimum observable effect with statistical significance at 95% confidence according to power calculations based on the
      estimates reported in the technical report based on the Santa Tecla and La Libertad market vendor survey at constant 2025 prices.
Annex II
Page 2 of 7


                                                                                   B. SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

                                                                   Baseline            Assessment scenario
                                                              (pre-intervention)        (post-intervention)
                                                Unit of                                                            Related strategic
     No.               Indicator                                                                   Expected                                  Means of verification               Comments
                                               measure                                                            alignment themes1
                                                              Value        Year        Target        year
                                                                                                   measured
    OE1. Improve access to quality public services and local urban infrastructure in the downtown areas of the Santa Tecla and La Libertad districts, including the municipal markets
    R1.1    Merchants’ perceptions of          Number          3.07        2025         3.043        2030      Sustainable economic       Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            problems in local environment                                                                      growth. Climate change     the methodology described
            (Santa Tecla)                                                                                      adaptation                 in the MEL.
                                                                                                                                          Responsible party: DOM
    R1.2    Merchants’ perceptions of          Number          3.13        2025         3.06         2030      Sustainable economic       Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            problems in local environment                                                                      growth. Climate change     the methodology described
            (La Libertad)                                                                                      adaptation                 in the MEL.
                                                                                                                                          Responsible party: DOM
    R1.3    Number of people entering the      Number         2,462        2025        3,089   4     2030      Sustainable economic       Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            market (La Libertad)                                                                               growth                     the methodology described     Data will be disaggregated in
                                                                                                                                          in the MEL.                   the final survey by gender
                                                                                                                                          Responsible party: DOM        and by disability type.
    R1.4    Number of people entering the      Number         8,377        2025        11,104        2030      Sustainable economic       Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            market (Santa Tecla)                                                                               growth                     the methodology described     Data will be disaggregated in
                                                                                                                                          in the MEL.                   the final survey by gender
                                                                                                                                          Responsible party: DOM        and by disability type.
    R1.5    Walkability index (Santa Tecla)     Index          16.3        2025         19.35        2030      Sustainable economic       Optional link 10, Urban       See required link 2.
                                                                                                               growth                     regeneration plans for
                                                                                                                                          Santa Tecla and La Libertad
                                                                                                                                          Responsible party: DOM




3     The targets for both districts were calculated based on the minimum observable effect with statistical significance at 95% confidence according to power calculations based on the
      estimates reported in the technical report based on the Santa Tecla and La Libertad market vendor survey.
4     Expected changes are the minimum possible change to capture with 95% statistical confidence, based on power calculations of the data in the annex: observational sample with
      temporal and spatial variation for measurement of affluence of clients at the Santa Tecla and La Libertad markets.
5     The calculations and targets for both districts were calculated based on the minimum observable effect with statistical significance at 95% confidence according to power calculations
      based on the estimates in optional link 10, Urban renewal plans for Santa Tecla and La Libertad.
                                                                                                                                                                                     Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 7


                                                                   Baseline         Assessment scenario
                                                              (pre-intervention)     (post-intervention)
                                                Unit of                                                          Related strategic
     No.               Indicator                                                                 Expected                               Means of verification               Comments
                                               measure                                                          alignment themes1
                                                              Value       Year      Target         year
                                                                                                 measured
    R1.6    Walkability index (La Libertad)      Index         12.9       2025        15.9         2030      Sustainable economic    Optional link 10, Urban       See required link 2.
                                                                                                             growth                  regeneration plans for
                                                                                                                                     Santa Tecla and La Libertad
                                                                                                                                     Responsible party: DOM
    OE2. Boost competitiveness and promote formalization of the businesses in the municipal markets of both districts
    R2.1    Micro business robustness           Number         0.18       2025       0.196         2030      Sustainable economic    Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            index (Santa Tecla)                between 0                                                     growth                  vendor survey
                                                 and 1                                                                               Responsible party: DOM
    R2.2    Micro business robustness           Number         0.16       2025        0.18         2030      Sustainable economic    Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            index (La Libertad)                between 0                                                     growth                  vendor survey
                                                 and 1                                                                               Responsible party: DOM
    R2.3    Gap between men and women         Points on the   0.0287      2025      0.00637        2030      Diversity and gender    Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            in micro business robustness         index                                                       equality                vendor survey
            (Santa Tecla)                                                                                                            Responsible party: DOM
    R2.4    Gap between men and women         Points on the   0.0323      2025      0.0040         2030      Diversity and gender    Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            in micro business robustness         index                                                       equality                vendor survey
            (La Libertad)                                                                                                            Responsible party: DOM
    R2.5    Proportion of merchants who       Percentage      4.64%       2025      50.4%    8     2030      Sustainable economic    Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            meet formalization criteria                                                                      growth                  vendor survey
            (Santa Tecla)                                                                                                            Responsible party: DOM
    R2.6    Proportion of merchants who       Percentage      2.81%       2025       49.5%         2030      Sustainable economic    Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            meet formalization criteria                                                                      growth                  vendor survey
            (La Libertad)                                                                                                            Responsible party: DOM




6     The expected target for micro business robustness is the minimum possible change to capture with 95% statistical confidence, according to power calculations of the data reported
      in the technical report based on the Santa Tecla and La Libertad market vendor survey, and the methodology proposed in the Competitiveness Analysis Annex.
7     The expected target for the gender gap in micro business robustness is the minimum possible change to capture with 95% statistical confidence, according to power calculations
      of the data reported in the technical report based on the Santa Tecla and La Libertad market vendor survey, and the methodology proposed in the Competitiveness Analysis Annex.
8     Consistent with expected formalization rates as established in the Cost-Benefit Analysis.
Annex II
Page 4 of 7


                                                                    Baseline           Assessment scenario
                                                               (pre-intervention)       (post-intervention)
                                                Unit of                                                          Related strategic
     No.               Indicator                                                                   Expected                                   Means of verification               Comments
                                               measure                                                          alignment themes1
                                                               Value        Year       Target        year
                                                                                                   measured
    OE3. Build the institutional and financial capacities of the Libertad Sur and Libertad Costa municipios
    R3.1    Percentage coverage of            Percentage         0          2025       100%10         2030    Institutional capacity and   Six-monthly progress report   See required link 2.
            municipal market operating                                                                        rule of law                  Responsible party: DOM
            costs, including costs
            associated with maintenance
            plans (Santa Tecla)9
    R3.2    Percentage coverage of            Percentage         0          2025        100%          2030    Institutional capacity and   Six-monthly progress report   See required link 2.
            municipal market operating                                                                        rule of law
            costs, including costs
            associated with maintenance
            plans (La Libertad)
    R3.3    Comprehensive land                   Index          0.85        2025        0.8811        2030    Institutional capacity and   Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            management capacity index                                                                         rule of law                  comprehensive municipal
            (Santa Tecla)                                                                                                                  financial and institutional
                                                                                                                                           capacity methodology
                                                                                                                                           Responsible party: DOM
    R3.4    Comprehensive land                   Index          0.44        2025         0.54         2030    Institutional capacity and   Technical report based on     See required link 2.
            management capacity index                                                                         rule of law                  comprehensive municipal
            (La Libertad)                                                                                                                  financial and institutional
                                                                                                                                           capacity methodology
                                                                                                                                           Responsible party: DOM




9     The baseline is 0 since currently the municipal markets have no established maintenance plans.
10    The target is set pursuant to the optional link 16 technical annex - financial model and governance plan for managing municipal markets.
11    Calculations based on comprehensive municipal institutional capacity diagnostic assessment. Target given as minimum improvement in 40% of index indicators.
                                                                                                                                                                                       Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 7


                                                                                             C. OUTPUTS

                                                                                                                        End of    Related strategic
                                          Unit of   Baseline   Baseline                                                                                 Means of                       Cost of
 No.            Benchmark                                                 Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5    project      alignment                         Comments
                                         measure     value       year                                                                                  verification                  output (US$)
                                                                                                                         value        themes
1. Component 1: Developing urban infrastructure and basic services
P1.1    Design, construction, and        Number        0        2025        0        0        0        2        0         2       Sustainable         Monitoring      See required    112,708,000
        outfitting of two municipal                                                                                               economic growth.    report          link 2.
        markets equipped with                                                                                                     Climate change      Responsible
        childcare infrastructure and                                                                                              adaptation          party: DOM
        universal accessibility
        criteria
P1.2    Surface area of priority           m2          0        2025        0        0      5,000    25,000   15,000   45,000 m2 Sustainable          Monitoring      See required     39,142,000
        public spaces renovated                                                                                                  economic growth.     report          link 2.
        with universal accessibility                                                                                             Climate change       Responsible
        criteria or reasonable                                                                                                   adaptation           party: DOM
        accommodations for
        persons with disabilities
P1.3    Design and implementation        Number        0        2025        0        0        0        0        1         1       Sustainable         Monitoring      See required       150,000
        of composting and biogas                                                                                                  economic growth.    report          link 2.
        pilot project                                                                                                             Climate change      Responsible
                                                                                                                                  adaptation          party: DOM
P1.4    EDGE Advance certification       Number        0        2025        0        0        0        2        0         2       Climate change      EDGE            See required         40,000
                                                                                                                                  mitigation          certification   link 2.
                                                                                                                                                      Manager: DOM
2. Component 2: Comprehensive support for micro and small merchants
P2.1    Business training program        Number        0        2025        0        0        1        0        0         1       Sustainable         Monitoring      See required      2,000,000
        for the merchants at both                                                                                                 economic growth     report          link 2.
        municipal markets designed                                                                                                                    Responsible
        and implemented, with                                                                                                                         party: DOM
        accessibility for persons
        with disabilities and specific
        supports to encourage the
        participation of female
        merchants
P2.2    Program to support the           Number        0        2025        0        0        1        0        0         1       Sustainable         Monitoring      See required      3,200,000
        formalization of merchants                                                                                                economic growth     report          link 2.
        at both municipal markets                                                                                                                     Responsible
        designed and implemented,                                                                                                                     party: DOM
        with accessibility for
        persons with disabilities and
        specific supports to
        encourage the participation
        of female merchants
Annex II
Page 6 of 7


                                                                                                                       End of    Related strategic
                                          Unit of   Baseline   Baseline                                                                                Means of                       Cost of
     No.           Benchmark                                              Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   project      alignment                         Comments
                                         measure     value       year                                                                                 verification                  output (US$)
                                                                                                                        value        themes
P2.3       Digital payments pilot        Number        0        2025        0        1        0        0        0        1       Sustainable         Monitoring      See required       100,000
           project with Digital WCAG12                                                                                           economic growth     report          link 2.
           accessibility guidelines,                                                                                                                 Responsible
           designed and implemented                                                                                                                  party: DOM
P2.4       Program to support            Number        0        2025        0        0        0        1        0        1       Sustainable         Monitoring      See required       650,000
           merchant financing for                                                                                                economic growth     report          link 2.
           equipment procurement,                                                                                                                    Responsible
           designed and implemented                                                                                                                  party: DOM
P2.5       Buying cooperative for        Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Sustainable         Monitoring      See required      2,000,000
           supplies created                                                                                                      economic growth     report          link 2.
                                                                                                                                                     Responsible
                                                                                                                                                     party: DOM
P2.6       Municipal markets             Number        0        2025        0        0        0        0        2        2       Sustainable         Monitoring      See required       450,000
           marketing plan, designed                                                                                              economic growth     report          link 2.
           and implemented                                                                                                                           Responsible
                                                                                                                                                     party: DOM
3. Component 3: Building municipal institutional and financial capacities
P3.1       Municipal markets manual      Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       150,000
           and maintenance plan,                                                                                                 capacity and rule   report          link 2.
           including the wastewater                                                                                              of law              Responsible
           treatment plant, designed                                                                                                                 party: DOM
P3.2       Operating regulations and     Number        0        2025        0        0        0        2        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       600,000
           window display manuals for                                                                                            capacity and rule   report          link 2.
           the Santa Tecla and                                                                                                   of law              Responsible
           La Libertad municipal                                                                                                                     party: DOM
           markets, designed
P3.3       Partial land management       Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required      1,550,000
           plans for the districts of                                                                                            capacity and rule   report          link 2.
           Santa Tecla and                                                                                                       of law              Responsible
           La Libertad designed                                                                                                                      party: DOM
P3.4       Action plans for              Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       600,000
           comprehensive urban                                                                                                   capacity and rule   report          link 2.
           mobility management in                                                                                                of law              Responsible
           Santa Tecla and                                                                                                                           party: DOM
           La Libertad formulated
P3.5       Municipal land information    Number        0        2025        0        0        0        2        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       600,000
           systems developed                                                                                                     capacity and rule   report          link 2.
                                                                                                                                 of law              Responsible
                                                                                                                                                     party: DOM




12    This refers to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines international standard to make web content more accessible to people with disabilities.
                                                                                                                                                                                    Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 7


                                                                                                                     End of    Related strategic
                                        Unit of   Baseline   Baseline                                                                                Means of                       Cost of
 No.            Benchmark                                               Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   project      alignment                         Comments
                                       measure     value       year                                                                                 verification                  output (US$)
                                                                                                                      value        themes
P3.6    Programs to strengthen         Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       375,000
        municipal urban planning                                                                                               capacity and rule   report          link 2.
        offices, designed and                                                                                                  of law              Responsible
        implemented                                                                                                                                party: DOM
P3.7    Programs to strengthen         Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       375,000
        municipal tax management                                                                                               capacity and rule   report          link 2.
        offices, designed and                                                                                                  of law              Responsible
        implemented                                                                                                                                party: DOM
P3.8    Programs to strengthen         Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       375,000
        municipal market                                                                                                       capacity and rule   report          link 2.
        management offices,                                                                                                    of law              Responsible
        designed and implemented                                                                                                                   party: DOM
P3.9    Programs to strengthen         Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       375,000
        municipal land development                                                                                             capacity and rule   report          link 2.
        offices, designed and                                                                                                  of law              Responsible
        implemented                                                                                                                                party: DOM
P3.10   Payment rules for use of       Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       150,000
        public space and other                                                                                                 capacity and rule   report          link 2.
        nontax services developed                                                                                              of law              Responsible
                                                                                                                                                   party: DOM
P3.11   Regulations on instruments     Number        0        2025        0        0        2        0        0        2       Institutional       Monitoring      See required       150,000
        to capture land appreciation                                                                                           capacity and rule   report          link 2.
        prepared                                                                                                               of law              Responsible
                                                                                                                                                   party: DOM
                                                                                              Annex III
                                                                                            Page 1 of 6



Country: El Salvador             Division: HUD          Operation No.: ES-L1172            Year: 2025


                          FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS

Executing agency:             Municipal Public Works Office (DOM)
Operation name:               Comprehensive Program for Urban Regeneration and Sustainable
                              Revitalization of Municipal Markets in Santa Tecla and La Libertad

                         I.    FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY

1. Use of country systems in the operation (Any system or subsystem that is subsequently
   approved may be applicable to this operation, in accordance with the terms of the Bank’s
   validation).

  Budget                Reports                 Information systems        National Competitive
                                                                               Bidding (NCB)
  Treasury              Internal control        Shopping                   Other
  Accounting            External audit          Individual consultants     Other


2. Fiduciary execution mechanism

    Special features         The executing agency will be the Municipal Public Works Office (DOM),
     of fiduciary             through its project execution unit. The executing agency’s main function
     execution                will be the technical, administrative, and operational management of the
                              program. It will be comprised of: (i) a general coordinator; (ii) (a) a
                              general program coordinator; (b) a financial coordinator; (c) a
                              procurement coordinator; (d) a planning and monitoring coordinator;
                              and (e) an environmental and social coordinator.


3. Fiduciary capacity

 Fiduciary capacity of        The executing agency’s fiduciary capacity was assessed and found to
 the executing agency         be adequate, since DOM is currently executing program 5080/OC-ES
                              satisfactorily and notably has experience and strong technical
                              management and fiduciary capacity.
Annex III
Page 2 of 6


4. Fiduciary risks and risk response

    Risk                                                  Risk
                                Risk                                        Risk response
  category                                                level

 Systems        The procurement management               Medium-    The processes will be
                system lacks the functions and            high      published on COMPRASAL, as
                openness necessary to advertise                     well as on the Bank’s website
                bidding, progress of the contracting                and that of the executing
                processes, or the award information;                agency. Other mechanisms for
                therefore, participation is limited                 publishing the bidding
                exclusively to registered domestic and              processes will also be
                foreign potential bidders.                          explored.

 Internal       Bottlenecks were identified during the   Medium-    A study of works will be
 processes      contracting process (i) in bid             low      performed by sector, to identify
                evaluation as a result of bidder                    the potential market for the
                noncompliance, and (ii) after a                     country’s public works, explore
                process is relaunched when few or no                other contracting methods, and
                bids were submitted; for this reason,               identify strategies to increase
                the participation criteria and                      bidder participation.
                requirements have had to be relaxed.


5. Policies and guidelines applicable to the operation: Procurements will be laid out in the
   procurement plan approved by the Bank. They will be carried out under the Policies for
   Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the IDB (GN-2349-15) and the Policies for the
   Selection and Contracting of Consultants financed by the IDB (GN-2350-15) or the current
   versions. For financial management, the Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-Financed
   Projects (OP-273-12 or a current version) will apply.
6. Exceptions to policies and guidelines: Not applicable.

              II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE LOAN CONTRACT

 Special conditions precedent to the first disbursement: N/A.

 Exchange rate: For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties agree that
 the exchange rate to be used will be the rate stipulated in Article 4.10(b)(ii). For these purposes,
 the agreed exchange rate will be the exchange rate in effect on the effective date of the loan on
 which the borrower, the executing agency, or any other person or corporation with delegated
 authority to incur expenditures makes the respective payments to the contractor, vendor, or
 beneficiary.

 Type of audit: During program execution, audited financial statements will be submitted annually,
 no later than 120 days after the close of each fiscal period. The external audit of the program will
 be done by an external firm acceptable to the Bank. The program final audited financial
 statements will be submitted no later than 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.
                                                                                           Annex III
                                                                                         Page 3 of 6


             III. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

   Bidding           For the procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services, the
    documents         procurement policies (GN-2349-15) will apply, and for the selection and
                      contracting of consulting services, the Policies for the Selection and
                      Contracting of Consultants (GN-2350-15 or a current version) will apply.
                      For procedures over the threshold that have to be advertised internationally,
                      the standard bidding documents available on the Bank’s website will be
                      used. For procedures under the threshold, documents harmonized by the
                      Bank for the country and available on the Teams channel will be used. In
                      the case of national competitive bidding for works, a model document that
                      meets basic procurement principles and contains the clauses required by
                      the Bank will be agreed upon with the executing agency.
                      The project sector specialist is responsible for reviewing the technical
                      specifications or terms of reference during preparation of the contracting
                      processes. This technical review may be performed ex ante and is
                      independent of the procurement review method.
   Recurrent         The eligibility of recurrent costs required to launch the project will be
    costs             approved by the Project Team Leader for each fiscal year financed and
                      executed in accordance with the requirements and procedures
                      established in the project operating manual. The costs include utilities and
                      communications, office supplies, advertising or outreach, photocopies,
                      fuel, lodging, per diems, event logistics, and courier, secretarial, driving,
                      surveillance, cleaning, and Internet services, among others agreed on
                      with the Bank. These procedures will be reviewed and accepted by the
                      Bank, provided they do not violate the principles of economy, efficiency,
                      and competition, in accordance with the guidelines for the handling of
                      recurrent costs and the Policy on Eligibility of Expenditures (GN-2331-5)
                      and any updated versions.
   Advance           The Bank may retroactively finance from the loan proceeds eligible
    procurement       expenditures incurred by the borrower before the loan approval date,
    and retroactive   related to the renovation of public spaces, implementation of the
    financing         environmental and social management plan, and construction of the
                      temporary municipal markets mentioned in Component 1, for up to
                      US$20 million (11.76% of the loan amount), provided they have met
                      requirements substantially similar to those established in the loan contract
                      and that the contracting procedures comply with the Bank’s Core
                      Procurement Principles and Environmental and Social Framework. Eligible
                      expenditures are to have been incurred on or after 21 February 2025
                      (Project Profile approval date) but must in no case include expenses
                      incurred more than 18 months before the loan approval date. Advance
                      procurement will be done by and at the risk of the executing agency,
                      provided it follows substantially similar procedures.
Annex III
Page 4 of 6



      Procurement     The ex-ante supervision model will apply to all international direct
       supervision     contracting or direct selection processes and other complex procurement
                       methods or those that are critical for executing the project, regardless of
                       the thresholds established for the country.
                       The ex post supervision method may be applied to procedures under the
                       thresholds in place for the country, considering the type of goods,
                       services, or works, and their nature. The ex post review of the processes
                       will preferably be electronic and randomly selected during a budget year.
                       The supervision modality will be established in the procurement plan in
                       accordance with project execution, the context, and the risk level of the
                       project or process.

                           Executing                                               Consulting
                                                 Works        Goods/services
                            agency                                                  services

                             DOM               US$5 million     US$250,000         US$200,000


      Records and     The executing unit will be responsible for maintaining adequate controls
       archives        to safeguard and ensure the integrity of the original records and archives
                       of procurement processes and financial information in its possession as
                       part of program execution. The Bank may check the organization’s
                       archive control and security standards at any time.


Main procurements
                                                          New                   Estimated
                                    Selection                      Estimated
     Procurement description                          procedures /               amount
                                     method                          date
                                                         tools               (US$ thousands)
Goods
Equipment and appliances           International                   April 2029                   350
                                    competitive
                                   bidding (ICB)
Works
Rehabilitation of public spaces          ICB                         March                 34,340
                                                                     2027
Construction of temporary and            ICB                         March                107,486
permanent municipal markets                                          2027
Nonconsulting services
Microfinance fairs                       ICB                       April 2029                   300
Firms
Economic assessment and                 Direct                       August                     150
impact assessment                      selection                      2030
                                                                                          Annex III
                                                                                        Page 5 of 6


                                                        New                   Estimated
                                    Selection                    Estimated
    Procurement description                         procedures /               amount
                                     method                        date
                                                       tools               (US$ thousands)
Various plans, pilot programs,       Selection                      2026 to                   870
manuals, rules, regulations, and   based on the                      2030
minor certifications (not          consultants’
including external audits)         qualifications
                                      (SCC)
Action plans for the               Quality- and                    May 2027                   600
comprehensive management of        cost-based
urban mobility                      selection
                                    (QCBS)
Design and implementation of          QCBS                           2027,                 11,800
various programs                                                   2028, and
                                                                     2029
Works supervision                     QCBS                           March                  5,774
                                                                     2027
Market and renovation designs         QCBS                         April 2026               3,930
Individuals
Consultants in the program         Selection of                    December                 1,776
executing unit                      individual                       2025
                                   consultant
                                      (3CV)
Various analyses, diagnostic          Direct                        2026 to                   270
assessments, training, midterm     selection of                      2030
and economic evaluations            individual
                                   consultants

To access the procurement plan, see required link 4.


               IV. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

     Programming       Based on the current performance of program 5080/OC-ES, co-executed
      and budget        by DOM, and the rest of the investment programs in the Bank’s loan
                        portfolio, no challenges are foreseen in the allocation of the program
                        budget.
     Treasury and      To receive program resources, a specific account will be opened within the
      disbursement      Treasury Single Account (CUT) system of the Ministry of Finance. As this
      management        is an autonomous entity, DOM will also open an account in a commercial
                        bank and will ask the Ministry of Finance to transfer there the resources
                        disbursed by the IDB to the CUT. This account will be used exclusively for
                        program execution.
Annex III
Page 6 of 6



     Accounting,        For payment processing and accounting records, DOM uses the
      information        information system of the former FISDL (El Salvador’s social investment
      systems, and       fund for local development), an institution that closed in 2021 and whose
      reporting          functions were assumed by DOM that year.
     Internal control   DOM has an Internal Auditing Unit that acts in accordance with the Ley de
      and internal       la Corte de Cuentas de la República (Salvadoran general accounting office
      auditing           law) and the internal control technical standards issued by this office.
     External control   External control of the program will be carried out by an independent
      and financial      external auditing firm acceptable to the IDB. The terms of reference and
      reports            request for proposals must have the prior no objection of the IDB. During
                         program execution, audited financial statements will be submitted each
                         year, no later than 120 days after the close of each fiscal period. The
                         program’s final audited financial statements will be submitted no later than
                         120 days after the date of the last disbursement.
     Financial          The operation requires ex post financial supervision of disbursements,
      supervision of     whose inputs will come mainly from audited financial reports. In addition,
      the operation      financial supervision inspections will be done at least once a year.
                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                               PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/25



                 El Salvador. Loan _____/OC-ES to the Republic of El Salvador.
                      Comprehensive Program for Urban Regeneration and
                        Sustainable Revitalization of Municipal Markets in
                                  Santa Tecla and La Libertad



        The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized,
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be
necessary with the Republic of El Salvador, as borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing
aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Comprehensive Program for Urban Regeneration
and Sustainable Revitalization of Municipal Markets in Santa Tecla and La Libertad. Such
financing will be for the amount of up to US$170,000,000, from the resources of the Bank’s
Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special
Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                               (Adopted on _______________ 2025)



LEG/SGO/CID/EZIDB0000366-275433124-9889
ES-L1172
