                                                                                       PUBLIC
                                                                     SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE

                DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                                         ARGENTINA



CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) FOR THE
   SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION PROGRAM IN THE PROVINCE OF
                          BUENOS AIRES
                                        (AR-O0012)


          FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CCLIP,
SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION PROGRAM IN GREATER BUENOS AIRES
                                        (AR-L1288)



                                       LOAN PROPOSAL




This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Martín Soulier Faure
(CSD/HUD), Project Team Leader; Verónica Adler (CSD/HUD), Alternate Team Leader;
Francisca Rojas, Catarina Mastellaro, Beatriz González, Mariana Poskus, Dianela Avila,
Paloma Acevedo, and Jessica Guzman (CSD/HUD); Gustavo Gonnelli and Jorge Oyamada
(INE/WSA); Julieta Abad and Lynn Scholl (INE/TSP); Jennifer Doherty (CSD/CCS); Javier
Reyes (IFD/ICS); Mariel Sabra (MIF/CAR); Claudia Vázquez (SCL/LMK); Andrea Monje
(GDI/CAR); Maria Castro-Muñoz and Milagros Aimé (VPS/ESG); Analía La Rosa and
Roberto Laguado (VPC/FMP); Viviana Maya (LEG/SGO); Cecilia Ares (CSC/CAR); Ana
Maria Cuesta (SPD/SDV); and Andres Juan, Guadalupe Rojo, Fabian Schvartzer, Carolina
Conde, Francisco Garcia Faure, Ramiro De Marco, and Horacio Seillant (consultants).


This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus
superseding and replacing the original version.
                                                    CONTENTS



PROJECT SUMMARY

I.     DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1

       A.    Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1
       B.    Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 9
       C.    Key results indicators ................................................................................. 10

II.    FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11

       A.    Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11
       B.    Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 14
       C.    Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 16
       D.    Other project risks ...................................................................................... 16

III.   IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 17

       A.    Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 17
       B.    Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 19
                                                  - ii -



                                               ANNEXES
Annex I     Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix
Annex II    Results Matrix
Annex III   Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements



                                          REQUIRED LINKS
     1.     Multiyear Execution Plan / Annual Work Plan
     2.     Monitoring and Evaluation Plan
     3.     Environmental and Social Management Report
     4.     Procurement Plan


                                          OPTIONAL LINKS
     1.     Economic analysis
     2.     Assessment of compliance with the Public Utilities Policy
     3.     Technical analysis of the sample
     4.     Debt capacity analysis
     5.     Bibliographic references
     6.     Assessment of compliance with the CCLIP policy
     7.     Draft program Operating Regulations
     8.     Climate change accounting annex
     9.     Safeguard Policy Filter
                                    - iii -



                             ABBREVIATIONS


CABA      Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires [Autonomous City of Buenos Aires]
CCLIP     Conditional credit line for investment projects
DPOMyFB   Dirección Provincial de Organismos Multilaterales y Financiamiento
          Bilateral del Ministerio de Economía [Provincial Directorate of
          Multilateral Agencies and Bilateral Financing]
ESMR      Environmental and Social Management Report
GBA       Greater Buenos Aires
IBRD      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICAS      Institutional Capacity Assessment System
IDB       Inter-American Development Bank
MIySP     Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Services
MJGM      Ministerio de Jefatura de Gabinete de Ministros [Cabinet Office]
OPISU     Organismo Provincial de Integración Social y Urbana [Provincial
          Agency for Social and Urban Integration]
PBA       Province of Buenos Aires
PROMEBA   Programa de Mejoramiento de Barrios [Neighborhood Improvement
          Program]
RENABAP   Relevamiento Nacional de Barrios Populares [National Survey of
          Working-Class Neighborhoods]
RPPVAP    Registro Público Provincial de Villas y Asentamientos Precarios [Public
          Provincial Register of Shantytowns and Informal Neighborhoods]
                                                                    PROJECT SUMMARY
                                                        ARGENTINA
                            CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP) FOR THE
                         SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION PROGRAM IN THE PROVINCE OF BUENOS AIRES
                                                       (AR-O0012)
                                      FIRST INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CCLIP,
                            SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION PROGRAM IN GREATER BUENOS AIRES
                                                       (AR-L1288)

                                                              Financial Terms and Conditions
                                                                                                               Flexible Financing Facility(a)
 Borrower: Province of Buenos Aires (PBA)
                                                                                                  Amortization period:          25 years
 Guarantor: Argentine Republic                                                                    Disbursement period:          4 years
 Executing agency: Cabinet Office (MJGM) through the Provincial Agency for                        Grace period:                 5.5 years(b)
 Social and Urban Integration (OPISU)                                                             Interest rate:                LIBOR-based
                            CCLIP amount     First operation                                                                          (c)
         Source                                                     %                             Credit fee:
                                (US$)        amount (US$ )
                                                                                                  Inspection and                      (c)
 IDB (Ordinary Capital)                 400 million                100 million           90
                                                                                                  supervision fee:
 Local                                44.5 million          11.15 million       10                Original WAL:        15.25 years
 Total                               444.5 million         111.15 million      100                Approval currency:   U.S. dollars
                                                                 Project at a Glance
 Project objective/description: The general objective of the CCLIP and its first operation is to improve living conditions in shantytowns,
 informal neighborhoods, and housing complexes in the Province of Buenos Aires through social and urban integration interventions. The
 specific objectives of the first operation are to: (i) strengthen and support local and provincial governments in the planning, management,
 and execution of comprehensive informal neighborhood intervention and regularization projects; (ii) improve access to and facilitate the
 use of basic utilities, resilient urban infrastructure, public spaces, community facilities, and government services for the residents of these
 neighborhoods, thereby integrating them into the municipal urban fabric; and (iii) strengthen social capital, increase opportunities for
 social, labor, and productive community development, and improve habitability and tenure conditions.
 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: Provide evidence of the entry into effect of the
 program Operating Regulations and respective annexes, in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank
 (paragraph 3.3). In addition, the borrower will fulfill the special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement set forth in
 the Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) – Annex B.
 Special contractual conditions of execution: Provide evidence, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of the following: (i) for the execution of
 Component II, the entry into effect of an agreement between the Provincial Agency for Social and Urban Integration (OPISU) and the
 Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Services (MIySP); and (ii) for the execution of the works required to provide the services specified
 in Component II, the entry into effect of agreements signed by OPISU and the provider(s) of these services (paragraph 1.20)
 (paragraph 3.3). In addition, the borrower will comply with the special contractual conditions of execution set out in the Environmental
 and Social Management Report (ESMR) – Annex B.
 Exceptions to Bank policies: A waiver to the provisions of paragraph 1.19(i), (ii), and (iii) of the CCLIP policy (document
 GN-2246-9) is requested with respect to OPISU, which does not have previous experience executing programs with international
 organizations since it was only recently created to head the urban development of low-income neighborhoods in the PBA
 (paragraph 2.1).
                                                                 Strategic Alignment
  Challenges:(d)                                                  SI                              PI                                EI
  Crosscutting themes:(e)                                       GD                               CC                                 IC
(a)
      Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes in the amortization schedule as
      well as currency, interest rate, and commodity conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when
      reviewing such requests.
(b)
      Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail an
      extension of the original weighted average life (WAL) of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract.
(c)
      The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s
      lending charges, in accordance with relevant policies.
(d)
      SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).
(e)
      GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law).
                            I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING

A.        Background, problem addressed, and rationale
1.1       The Province of Buenos Aires (PBA) is Argentina’s largest and most populated
          province. According to census data,1 one third of the country’s population
          (15.6 million) lives in this province, with two thirds of these concentrated in the
          24 municipios of Greater Buenos Aires (GBA), which is part of the nation’s main
          urban agglomeration.2 There is some type of housing deficit for 26% of the
          4.7 million households in the PBA, most of which (72%) are in GBA, where
          392,000 families (13.4%) are affected by a quantitative deficit and 960,000 (32.7%)
          by a qualitative deficit.3 [2] The GBA figures are higher than the national
          quantitative and qualitative housing deficit averages (10.3% and 28.6%,
          respectively).
1.2       According to data from the 2015 Registro Público Provincial de Villas y
          Asentamientos Precarios [Public Provincial Register of Shantytowns and Informal
          Neighborhoods] (RPPVAP),4 households in the PBA with a housing deficit are
          concentrated in 1,579 informal or vulnerable neighborhoods where approximately
          418,000 families have no land tenure security and poor access to public utilities.
          Under Provincial Law 14,449, the Fair Housing Act, informal or vulnerable
          neighborhoods in the PBA are primarily classified as: (i) shantytowns, which
          refers to the high-density occupation of public or private lands with an irregular
          urban layout, housing built with makeshift materials, high population density, little
          or no green spaces, and self-provided infrastructure; and (ii) informal
          neighborhoods, which refers to the occupation of areas with more regular layouts
          and lower density, typically in periurban areas.5 In the GBA, 328,000 of these
          households are clustered in 965 informal neighborhoods (317 shantytowns,
          470 informal neighborhoods, 178 housing complexes, and other types of
          housing).
1.3       The Provincial Agency for Social and Urban Integration (OPISU) has established
          the following typologies for the purpose of defining criteria for informal
          neighborhood regularization interventions:




1    2010 census.
2    The Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA) is comprised of the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (CABA)
     and the surrounding 24 municipios, referred to as Greater Buenos Aires or the Buenos Aires Conurbation.
     (See optional link 5, Bibliographic References [1]).
3    A quantitative deficit is the unmet demand for housing from the formation of new households, households
     that live in the same dwelling, and households in dwellings that need to be replaced. A qualitative deficit
     refers to dwellings that are either made of poor materials or lack basic utilities [3].
4    Created in connection with Provincial Law 14,449, the Fair Housing Act.
5    The Government of the PBA has also identified more complex variants, including large low-income housing
     complexes constructed by the State up to the 1980s, which now have obsolete infrastructure.
                                                   -2-



                    Table 1. Types of vulnerable neighborhoods in Greater Buenos Aires

      Neighborhood         Scale                                                         Examples
                                        Location              Morphology
          type           (families)                                                   (name, municipio)
      Mega              >3,000                           Shantytown and/or          La Cava, San Isidro (*)
                                                         settlement in the urban    Costa Esperanza/ Costa
                                                         area (200 to 400           del Lago/8 de mayo,
                                                         residents per hectare)     San Martín (*)
                                                                                    Itatí, Quilmes
      Medium/           <750          First and          Shantytown                 Porá, Lanús (*)
      small                           second rings                                  El Garrote, Tigre
                                      of GBA                                        Puerta de Hierro/
                                                                                    San Petersburgo,
                                                                                    La Matanza
      Outlying          ~1,000        Third ring of      Settlement in periurban    Libertad/Don Orione,
                                      GBA                area                       Almirante Brown (*)
      Housing           ~3,000                           Large collective housing   Carlos Gardel, Morón
      complex                                            complexes with
      (80 in GBA)                                        degraded infrastructure
                                                         networks
      (*) Neighborhoods prioritized for this operation. Source: OPISU.


1.4   Map 1 shows the location of GBA’s 24 municipios (the geographic scope of this
      first individual operation) and the vulnerable neighborhoods prioritized by OPISU
      as examples of the different types of neighborhoods mentioned above.

                             Map 1. Geographic scope of operation AR-L1288




      Source: Prepared by the authors based on the Metropolitan Observatory.
                                                       -3-



1.5      Thirty-two percent (32%) of low-income neighborhoods6 in GBA have formal
         access to electricity, 11% have formal access to drinking water, and 3% have
         sewerage service. The vulnerable neighborhoods in GBA surveyed by the
         RPPVAP have problems with garbage collection (49% have no regular service),
         public lighting (55% with no lighting), paved roads (44% unpaved), and storm
         drainage (48% without coverage). For example, conditions in neighborhoods
         without adequate lighting or good sidewalks are less safe for women, children, and
         the elderly, limiting their mobility and access [4]. Only 7% and 9% of these
         neighborhoods have childcare facilities and health clinics, respectively; only 30% of
         them have a bus stop within their boundaries, and 76% are more than one
         kilometer from a train station, which makes it difficult to get to jobs, health care
         services, and schools. In the Costa Esperanza neighborhood (one of this
         operation’s samples) in the district of San Martin, 30.6% of households were
         affected by respiratory diseases in the past year, 15.4% had skin or eye problems,
         and 14.4% suffered from diarrhea and/or parasitosis.7
1.6      Environmental conditions are also critical: a sample of 274 informal neighborhoods
         surveyed by Techo in 2016 expands the assessment, since it shows that 42% of
         the neighborhoods experience flooding at least once a year due to the lack of basic
         infrastructure or their location below the levels considered appropriate for
         residential use, 64% do not have public wooded areas, and 21% are located less
         than 100 meters from a dump [5]. In the social area, RENABAP found that only
         18% of adults in neighborhoods in the PBA had a formal job (called “en blanco”
         employment in Argentina8) and 23% are unemployed. Although there are
         community development organizations in 65% of the neighborhoods, only 17% of
         the neighborhoods have community facilities (such as sports facilities, schools, or
         daycare centers) and only 13.8% have a public square or park, which makes it
         more difficult for neighbors to associate and connect with each other, leading to
         poor social cohesion. According to Techo, the biggest problem for people living in
         GBA settlements is: (i) the lack of access to services (30.2%); (ii) lack of safety
         (18%); (iii) lack of paved roads (14.4%); (iv) the consumption of drugs, alcohol,
         and/or tobacco (9.9%); and (v) inadequate public lighting (5.2%). In the same
         survey, two thirds of the population said that the police “always” come into the
         neighborhood, 23.4% said they “sometimes” do, and 10.2% said they “never” do.
         Only 1.3% of the neighborhoods has a functioning police station.
1.7      Informal urban development processes are the result of the formal market’s
         insufficient response to the increased demand for housing, especially in low-
         income segments. Argentine households in the two lowest quintiles of the
         population face financial and income-related constraints if they want to purchase,
         remodel, and/or rent quality housing. Credit access is impeded by: (i) poor
         development of the mortgage loan market; (ii) income volatility of workers living in
         uncertain or informal conditions; and (iii) limited availability of collateral for low-
         income families. Therefore, building their own homes [self-construction] is the
6   The 2018 National Survey of Low-Income Neighborhoods (RENABAP) defines a low-income neighborhood
    as one with at least eight clustered or contiguous households, where more than half of the population does
    not have a property title or regular access to at least two of the three basic utilities (running water, metered
    electricity, and/or sewerage).
7   Universidad Nacional de Avellaneda (UNDAV), 2012.
8   In other words, they work in accordance with labor laws in a registered job.
                                                       -4-



          generally how people who are not served by the formal market gain access to
          housing. In addition, the municipios do not have the budget or land-use planning
          and management tools required to anticipate or meet the demand for basic
          infrastructure created by self-construction,9 or to guide the development of their
          land, which leads to uncontrolled growth and high rates of informality [19].
          Furthermore, many municipios do not have trained human resources, the required
          information, or the technological tools needed to analyze and monitor territorial
          dynamics [20].
1.8       Gender considerations. Argentina has relatively high levels of informal land
          tenure,10 a situation that disproportionately affects women. The low percentage of
          women with paid work is related to the high burden of household chores, which
          translates into less financial independence and difficulty accessing the formal
          housing market.11 According to data from the 2013 Annual Urban Household
          Survey, the percentage of women doing unpaid domestic work in the PBA is 88%
          versus 59% for men. According to the RENABAP, 61% of women in GBA are
          heads of household (i.e., they financially support the household). However,
          worldwide women account for only 20% of property owners [6]. Insecure land
          tenure increases dependence on men, which can discourage women from
          leaving violent relationships for fear of having nowhere to live [7]. In terms of
          gender violence, the eight municipios in the GBA prioritized by OPISU have high
          rates of calls to the “144” line.12
1.9       Climate change considerations. Due to their geographic location, socioeconomic
          conditions, and infrastructure shortage, the residents of informal neighborhoods
          are more highly exposed and vulnerable to the effects of climate change [8]. In
          Argentina, during the period from 1960 to 2010, the average temperature
          increased by about 0.5°C, and precipitation increased in most of the country
          (especially the eastern part), and there were twice the typical number of days with
          heat waves [21]. The heat wave that occurred in GBA from December 2013 to
          January 2014 caused 500 deaths [22]. Seven percent of the population (1.1 million
          inhabitants in 19% of the country) are at risk of flooding in the PBA, and nearly
          50% of the population has a high rate of social vulnerability [23]. To increase
          resilience, Argentina is implementing local climate change adaptation plans as part
          of its Nationally Determined Contribution, which is a key planning tool for
          identifying threats and proposing resilient design and construction solutions in the
          areas most likely to be affected.
1.10      Legislation. In 2012, the PBA enacted Law 14,449, the Fair Housing Act to
          promote decent, sustainable housing, thereby addressing the needs of the most
          vulnerable population. This law aims to facilitate the management of housing

9    Municipios in Argentina only execute 13.2% of the total consolidated public expenditure, which is insufficient
     to cover 86% of the costs of providing basic services [7].
10   Of households in the two lowest income quintiles, 9.3% have informal tenure, which is more than Brazil
     (4.3%), Chile (1.7%), and Paraguay (2.3%) [8].
11   Of couples in the lowest income quintiles in Argentina, 38% of spouses do not have their own income, and
     only 27% of women are in the labor market, compared to 46% of men [9].
12   “144” is a free line to call to receive support and counseling in gender violence situations. The number of
     calls per 10,000 women was categorized as high in five of the eight neighborhoods prioritized by OPISU and
     average in the other three (OPISU, 2017 data).
                                                    -5-



          projects, urban development, and regularization processes in informal
          neighborhoods, and specifies that the law’s enforcement is the joint responsibility
          of the PBA and the municipios. On 1 January 2018, the Provincial Law on
          Ministries, No. 14,989 created OPISU as an autonomous public agency under
          the Cabinet Office, making it responsible for implementing the provisions of
          Article 27 of Law 14,449 to pursue comprehensive regularization processes in
          informal neighborhoods, i.e. “the set of actions that progressively,
          comprehensively, and in a participatory manner include the construction,
          improvement, and expansion of dwellings, social facilities and infrastructure,
          access to services, the treatment of public open spaces, the elimination of any
          urban obstacles that may exist, improvements in accessibility and connectivity,
          environmental sanitation and mitigation, lot resizing, and property regularization.”
1.11      Rationale and methodology. A CCLIP is the most appropriate instrument for
          supporting the PBA government’s medium-term strategic objectives of improving
          the quality of life in shantytowns, informal neighborhoods, and housing complexes
          in the PBA, since it facilitates the implementation of current legislation and
          provides a technical framework for ongoing work over time, which makes it
          possible to support the entire process from the initial launch in the neighborhood to
          the timely granting of title and financial resources. The proposed CCLIP will
          support the formulation of regularization and social and urban integration strategies
          in informal neighborhoods, so that quality basic and social services can be
          provided. The strategy specifies that the CCLIP and any operations under it will
          gradually and comprehensively address the needs of the different types of
          neighborhoods that represent the surveyed demand, leading to comprehensive
          public policies related to the urban and social management of vulnerable
          neighborhoods, which could be expanded throughout the province.
1.12      The first program under the CCLIP, which has been proposed as a multiple works
          operation with physically similar but independent projects, will make it possible to
          survey and systematize good practices for addressing the identified problems,
          incorporate the lessons learned from past experiences, and recommend
          adjustments to the way subsequent operations work. This first operation will
          finance the design (master plan) of at least four comprehensive projects to
          regularize informal neighborhoods and resulting interventions in at least two of
          them, in order to support the development of intervention strategies that are
          appropriate for each type of neighborhood identified in Table 1.13 In this way, the
          program will build the PBA’s capacity to: (i) implement a management model that
          coordinates all relevant actors, including ministries, municipios, metropolitan
          agencies, civil society, and the private sector;14 (ii) identify and crosscheck social
          inclusion and productive development policies, taking into account the specific
          needs of women; and (iii) implement climate-resilient urban design strategies that
          also promote gender equality. Based on the intervention criteria to be developed
          through this program for each type of neighborhood, OPISU will scale its activities

13   To this end, these lessons learned will be complemented by other lessons from the interventions carried
     out by OPISU in the other priority vulnerable neighborhoods.
14   OPISU will work with civil society and the private sector in order to strengthen the activities under
     Component III “Social Management and Community Development,” including community management
     boards and productive development projects.
                                                  -6-



          to address the regularization of informal neighborhoods throughout the PBA.
          Figure 1 reflects the theory of change that supports the program’s logic.

                                          Figure 1. Theory of Change




1.13      The comprehensive nature of the intervention is also supported by the international
          evidence reflected in the Urban Development and Housing Sector Framework
          Document,15 based on principles for the development of the sector’s policies and
          programs: (i) multisectoral interventions with territorial integrity, designed as a
          function of the specific characteristics of a territory; (ii) sustainable and effective
          interventions, considering their short- and long-term impact on the society,
          environment, public finances, and urban governance; and (iii) interventions
          focused on the citizenry, improving quality of life and inclusion in the productive
          activities of urban households, particularly the most vulnerable households. It also
          maintains that assessments with no causal attribution of neighborhood
          improvement programs are positive in terms of access to and coverage of basic
          services, health, education, satisfaction with living conditions and safety, and
          property valuation.
1.14      There is little rigorous evidence on the effectiveness of neighborhood improvement
          programs; however, evidence does exist showing the effectiveness of certain
          partial aspects of neighborhood improvement interventions on residents’ quality of
          life. For example, an impact assessment in Argentina found that water supply

15   Some surveys are mentioned in the Urban Development and Housing Sector Framework.
                                                         -7-



          improvements led to an 8% reduction of infant mortality [10]; studies in Mexico [11]
          and Brazil [12] showed that street paving improves home investments and
          employment outcomes and improves residents’ quality of life; well-designed and
          maintained public green spaces have environmental benefits [12], improve
          physical and mental health [13], increase municipal tax revenues [14], and reduce
          the likelihood of young people becoming involved in risky activities [15]. In terms of
          the effects of property titling, evidence in Argentina [16] and Peru [17] shows that it
          increases investment in housing, the education of children, and access to credit
          markets, which is especially important when the title is in a woman’s name, since it
          is a key factor in promoting gender equality.16
1.15      One of the main challenges of this comprehensive methodology has to do with the
          possibility that the programs will encourage informal urban development, since
          they increase the expected benefits of encroaching on government-owned lands
          (Abramo, 2003). In general, comprehensive urban infrastructure projects are
          remedial programs that do not directly affect the causes of the problem, but rather
          seek to alleviate existing conditions and should be combined with other policies
          aimed at preventing the development of settlements.17
1.16      Lessons learned. The design of the CCLIP and its first operation incorporates the
          lessons learned from executing Bank-supported operations in Argentina and other
          countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. The program makes headway on
          the strategies for on-site reurbanization of informal settlements that have been
          implemented in Argentina since 1997 through the Neighborhood Improvement
          Programs (PROMEBA: AR-X1004; AR-0262; 1307/OC-AR; 1842/OC-AR) which
          include: (i) the provision of urban infrastructure, community facilities, and
          environmental sanitation; (ii) the regularization of land tenure; and (iii) community
          development [3.13]. The current program specifically incorporates the lessons
          learned during the execution of the PROMEBA operations in terms of: (i) proposing
          phased interventions in large areas, in order to effectively use the available annual
          budget, work with the community to implement the required cultural changes and
          approaches, and make use of medium-term lending instruments like the CCLIP to
          develop the projects required for future stages or new interventions; (ii) the need to
          reduce title processing times, through ongoing social approaches and support
          provided in conjunction with the municipios, and reaching agreements with the
          provincial organizations involved in the process; and (iii) increase resident
          confidence and participation in neighborhood integration processes, through high-
          impact physical launch strategies in the area, including the execution of reliable
          projects prior to the final designing of the master plans. The lessons learned from
          the PROMEBA programs also include ensuring the sustainability of interventions
          that encourage participatory processes and involve the municipios in project
          development and management.
1.17      In 2017 the Urban Integration and Social and Educational Inclusion Program in the
          Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (AR-L1260; 4303/OC-AR) added the following to

16   Female property owners feel more empowered to leave abusive relationships and domestic violence
     situations and facilitates their access to credit [18].
17   Although not included in this first operation, the possibility remains open to include in future operations under
     this CCLIP activities aimed at addressing what leads to the creation of settlements, such as pilot projects to
     improve low-income housing supply and demand.
                                                      -8-



          the PROMEBA strategies: housing improvement activities to more effectively
          address the housing deficit and the development of labor productivity strategies to
          give residents of informal neighborhoods access to the benefits of urban
          economies. This program incorporates the following lessons learned from that
          experience: (i) the need to conduct a thorough and detailed assessment of the
          conditions of each dwelling in the neighborhood; (ii) the possibility of capitalizing on
          the population’s self-construction abilities (especially foreigners) through strategies
          to supply materials and give them payment options in exchange for providing
          services; and (iii) job placement strategies with urban environment activities and
          training and the introduction of new technologies to formalize activities.
1.18      This first operation will also build knowledge regarding the development of
          strategic urban design projects that will be resilient to climate change and
          adapted to each type of neighborhood and its respective environmental and
          habitability problems and will also use multilevel partnership strategies
          (community-municipio-province) to establish participatory planning processes
          and strengthen the gender perspective. OPISU is also incorporating the lessons
          learned from the execution of the Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban
          Transformation Project (an operation of the International Bank for Reconstruction
          and Development–IBRD-8707-AR18) which targets the social and urban
          integration of the first neighborhood prioritized by the PBA (Carlos Gardel, in
          Morón). The organization in charge of executing this operation, the participating
          parties, and management tools all benefitted from this earlier experience.
1.19      Strategic alignment. This program is consistent with the Update to the
          Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and the Corporate Results
          Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the challenge of Social
          Inclusion and Equality, by reducing the housing deficit and increasing access to
          urban services for all segments of the population. It is also aligned with the
          crosscutting issues of: (i) Gender Equality and Diversity, by developing safe
          public spaces and land titling processes; (ii) Climate Change: 40.9% of this
          operation’s resources are invested in climate change mitigation and adaptation
          activities, based on the Joint MDB methodology for tracking climate finance,
          contributing to the IDB Group’s target of increasing the financing of climate
          change-related projects to 30% of all approvals by the end of 2020; and
          (iii) Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law, through the strengthening activities
          included in Component I. It is also aligned with the Integrated Strategy for
          Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation, and Sustainable and Renewable
          Energy (document GN-2609-1) and the Sector Strategy on Institutions for Growth
          and Social Welfare (document GN-2587-2). In addition, it is consistent with the
          Urban Development and Housing Sector Framework Document (document
          GN-2732-6) in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1.13, the Climate
          Change Sector Framework Document (document GN-2835-8; optional link 8), the
          Gender and Diversity Sector Framework Document (document GN-2800-8) by
          supporting actions specifically aimed at empowering women, and the Country
          Strategy with Argentina 2016-2019 (document GN-2870-1) by contributing to the
          priority of reducing poverty and inequality, as well as the strategic objective of
          improving housing and access to basic services, especially for lower-income

18   Approved by the Board of Executive Directors in February 2017 and in effect since March 2018.
                                                     -9-



          regions such as the Buenos Aires Conurbation. The first operation is included in
          the 2019 Operational Program Report (document GN-2948).
1.20      Compliance with the Public Utilities Policy (document GN-2716-6). Based on
          the analysis that was conducted (optional link 2), the program meets the policy’s
          financial sustainability and economic evaluation conditions and is consistent with
          its principles. To ensure the sustainability of the investment, a special contractual
          condition for execution of the service delivery works described in Component II is
          that the PBA will sign agreements with the provider(s) of such services19 to:
          (i) ensure that the provider will be responsible for their maintenance;
          (ii) guarantee the quality of the service based on existing regulatory standards;
          and (iii) agree on the rate charged to cover operating and maintenance costs and
          the depreciation of the infrastructure constructed under this program. The
          providers will participate as of the initial design phase and will indicate their
          approval of the works to be carried out through feasibility reports. It should be
          noted that the providers have a rate system that includes different rates for the
          services, to ensure that they are affordable for the socioeconomically vulnerable
          population. Payment of reduced rates for low-income customers for electricity,
          water and sewerage and the municipal rate for lighting, sweeping, and cleaning
          services should be less than 5% of the incomes of those in the poorest quintile
          (2.3%).
B.        Objectives, components, and cost
1.21      The general objective of the CCLIP and its first operation is to help improve living
          conditions in shantytowns, informal neighborhoods, and housing complexes in the
          Province of Buenos Aires (PBA) through social and urban integration interventions.
          The specific objectives of the first operation are to: (i) strengthen and support local
          and provincial governments in the planning, management, and execution of
          comprehensive informal neighborhood intervention and regularization projects;
          (ii) improve access to and facilitate the use of basic utilities, resilient urban
          infrastructure, public spaces, community facilities, and government services for the
          residents of these neighborhoods, integrating them into the municipal urban fabric;
          and (iii) strengthen social capital, increase opportunities for social, labor, and
          productive community development, and improve habitability and tenure
          conditions.
1.22      Beneficiaries. The beneficiaries of this first operation will be approximately 23,600
          people living in the eligible neighborhoods according to the stipulated criteria.20
1.23      Component I. Comprehensive planning and institutional strengthening
          (IDB US$1,858,500; Local US$1,141,500). This component will support the
          planning and formulation of comprehensive projects to regularize informal
          neighborhoods and strengthen the institutions involved in implementing them. To
          this end, it will finance: (i) studies to survey and assess social housing and
          environmental conditions in the program’s eligible neighborhoods, including
          cadastral analysis for property regularization and potential relocation purposes;


19   AySA provides water and sanitation service in the CABA and 26 districts in the Buenos Aires Conurbation.
     Electricity service in GBA is provided by EDESUR (south) and EDENOR (northwest).
20   This first operation is expected to focus on at least four neighborhoods in GBA.
                                                       - 10 -



          (ii) comprehensive urban assessments and formulation of master plans; and
          (iii) information tools for project analysis and management.
1.24      Component II. Urban infrastructure and habitat (IDB US$57,220,000;
          Local US$5,780,000). This component will support processes to improve living
          conditions in the neighborhoods through the development of sustainable urban
          infrastructure, environmental sanitation, community facilities, and new housing
          constructed as a result of relocation processes. To this end, it will finance: (i) the
          development of urban infrastructure that is resilient to climate change, including
          public water and sanitation services, storm drainage, and access to electricity;
          (ii) the construction of public spaces and safe green areas for all; the paving of
          roads and pedestrian walkways and public lighting; (iii) environmental sanitation
          and mitigation activities, including solid waste management; (iv) the construction
          of community facilities such as educational, healthcare, sports and child care
          facilities; (v) the construction of new housing projects, including energy efficient
          technologies; and (vi) detailed designs and bidding processes in accordance with
          the contents of optional link 8.
1.25      Component III. Social management and community development
          (IDB US$35,671,500; Local US$3,978,500). This component will support the
          participatory processes related to the planning and management of comprehensive
          neighborhood regularization projects and community and productive development
          activities based on the different needs of women and men in the neighborhoods.
          To this end, it will finance: (i) the social management of relocated households,
          including housing solution management,21 and the overall improvement of
          dwellings with in-house service connections;22 (ii) the participatory activities that
          support the planning and execution of comprehensive interventions; (iii) community
          social development plans and social and productive development plans;23 and
          community initiative projects; (iv) property regularization support, prioritizing
          property titled in a woman’s name; and (v) training that includes gender and
          climate change considerations.
1.26      Project management and monitoring (IDB US$5,250,000; Local US$250,000).
          The program will finance the operating, equipment, and management expenses of
          the executing agency, including its environmental and social management team,
          as well as consulting services for the administration, monitoring, and evaluation of
          the project and program audit services.
C.        Key results indicators
1.27      Expected outcomes. The main outcomes will be: (i) increased installed capacity
          in comprehensive assessment and planning, which will be reflected by the number
          of comprehensive plans formulated by OPISU in neighborhoods that are not

21   The possibility of using existing functional units in the neighborhood and areas adjacent to the households to
     be resettled has been considered.
22   These will include energy efficiency measures in accordance with optional link 8.
23   Some of the productive strategies being developed are: (i) strengthening of economic units with the
     promotion of new enterprises, productive units and their ecosystem based on gender considerations,
     including trainings and improved access to markets; (ii) development of collaborative environments for
     working with the private sector, including specific training activities and partnering with companies,
     chambers, and organizations that improve job placement; and (iii) better consumption conditions, including
     innovative financial inclusion (blockchain) activities.
                                                 - 11 -



          included in this operation; (ii) the formal, continuous use of the urban infrastructure
          constructed (water, sanitation, drainage), satisfaction with public spaces and
          community facilities, and improvement of environmental conditions; (iii) enhanced
          social capital in the targeted neighborhoods, as reflected by better relationships
          with neighbors, greater community participation, more productive development;
          and (iv) land tenure security, as reflected by more investment in housing
          improvements. The operation’s impact on living conditions will be measured
          through: (i) fewer health problems as a result of the improvements made by the
          program; and (ii) the residents’ improved perception of safety from a gender
          perspective. The indicators and their projected values can be found in Annex II.
1.28      Economic viability. A cost-benefit analysis of the projects was conducted on a
          representative sample (optional link 1), based on a comparison of incremental
          costs and benefits, at economic prices, in situations with and without the project.
          The quantification of benefits relied on the hedonistic pricing model24 to estimate
          the increase in property values stemming from the increased value of the
          property’s attributes due to program interventions [24]. The estimation of benefits
          relied on the theory that an improvement in a neighborhood’s urban infrastructure
          conditions will result in an increase in the price of land, a change reflected by an
          improved quality of life of the beneficiary families. The analysis resulted in a
          positive net present value equivalent to US$4.7 million for the entire sample, using
          an annual discount rate of 12%, an evaluation horizon of 20 years, and an
          economic internal rate of return of 26.3%. The sensitivity analysis showed that the
          program reasonably resists potential variations in the term, as well as in cost and
          benefit projections.

                          II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS

A.        Financing instruments
2.1       Analysis of the CCLIP and compliance with the policy (optional link 6). As
          stated in paragraphs 1.11 and 1.12 above, a CCLIP is the most appropriate
          instrument to support the PBA government’s ongoing efforts, by contributing to the
          enforcement of the Argentine Fair Housing Act. A sector CCLIP for up to
          US$400 million with a 10-year execution period has been proposed. The proposed
          amount and term are justified by the PBA’s estimated available budget, the
          quantification of the targeted universe, the technical nature of the interventions,
          from the beginning of the process to the awarding of property titles, and the
          expected gradual increase in OPISU’s execution capacity. However, because the
          agency was only recently created, it does not fulfill some of the requirements
          stipulated in paragraph 1.19 of the document “Proposal for Changes to the
          Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP): Strengthening the
          Multisector Approach” (document GN-2246-9; CCLIP policy) because: (i) it has not
          completed a similar project within the last five years; (ii) there is no previous project
          with overall execution performance or compliance with the conditions of the loan
          contract; and (iii) it does not have a solid track record of satisfactory performance
          in the execution of a previous project. Therefore, in order to act as executing
24   The analysis used a hedonistic equation based on field work that included 267 surveys conducted in
     14 settlements in three districts of Greater Buenos Aires, which was prepared for the project
     "Comprehensive Management Plan for the Reconquista River Basin," IDB, Halcrow, March 2013.
                                                     - 12 -



          agency, a waiver of the provisions of paragraph 1.19(i), (ii), and (iii) of the CCLIP
          policy will be requested. Examples of other waivers include those granted for the
          Agua Negra Pass International Construction Program (RG-L1116; 4338/OC-RG)
          and the Bogotá Metro Line 1 Program (CO-L1234; 4572/OC-CO).
2.2       It is important to note that: (i) the enforcement of the Fair Housing Act requires
          technical and operational coordination between the different areas of government,
          which supports the decision embodied in Provincial Law 14,989 creating OPISU
          under the authority of the Cabinet Office, as the entity responsible for achieving the
          law’s objectives; (ii) the executing agency is currently implementing a similar
          project and expects to capitalize on this experience and its execution capacity
          before this program begins;25 (iii) the executing agency will be supported by the
          Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Services and the Ministry of Economy, which
          have extensive previous experience executing projects with multilateral financing;26
          and (iv) the overall performance in the execution of these projects has been
          satisfactory and has complied with all contractual and fiduciary conditions.
2.3       In addition, the CCLIP and its first operation fulfill other criteria in the CCLIP policy,
          as follows: (i) the urban development sector is included in the Country Strategy
          with Argentina (document GN-2870-1), and the CCLIP is consistent with the
          strategic objective of habitat improvement and access to basic services, especially
          in low-income regions such as GBA; (ii) it is included in the 2019 Operational
          Program Report (document GN-2948); (iii) the executing agency is an integral and
          sustainable part of the institution that manages the sector and was specifically
          charged with implementing the Fair Housing Act; and (iv) the institutional
          assessment of the executing agency was satisfactory. Regarding this last point,
          the institutional capacity assessment evaluated the executing agency’s capacities
          in programming and organization, the execution of programmed and organized
          activities, and oversight, based on the Institutional Capacity Assessment System
          (ICAS) methodology, which identifies the strengths and weaknesses of
          administrative and technical systems, as well as complementary systems such as
          internal and external control. After agreeing on certain arrangements regarding the
          organization of execution activities, OPISU’s institutional capacity was found to
          have a medium level of development and medium risk.27 The main proposed
          mitigation measures included: (i) the availability of the program Operating
          Regulations prior to beginning execution activities; (ii) preparation of a multiyear
          execution plan, an annual work plan, and a procurement plan; (iii) finalizing the
          appointment of the executing agency’s key personnel (OPISU already has around
          150 employees); and (iv) improving the internal control system and reflecting these
          improvements in OPISU’s operations manual and the Operating Regulations.



25   In 2018, OPISU began execution of the Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (IBRD
     8707-AR); Component II of that project aims to improve the housing situation of households in the
     Presidente Sarmiento Housing Complex in the Municipio of Morón.
26   The Ministry of Economy and MIySP both have significant experience executing loans with multilateral
     organizations. In the last 20 years, the Ministry of Economy has executed more than US$1.2 billion in loans
     with multilateral lending institutions, and MIySP has been responsible for the technical execution of
     infrastructure works in programs totaling more than US$800 million (optional link 6).
27   On a scale of 1 (low risk) to 4 (high risk), OPISU was rated 2.
                                                        - 13 -



2.4       First operation under the CCLIP. The first proposed operation under the CCLIP
          will be structured as a multiple works program funded by the Bank’s Ordinary
          Capital in the amount of US$100 million, with a disbursement period of four years.
          The execution modality is warranted given that the operation will finance several
          physically similar but independent projects, based on the eligibility criteria specified
          in paragraph 2.6. During the preparation of this operation, a sample of 15 projects
          representative of the type of investments that will be executed was identified. The
          total cost of these projects is US$34.7 million or 31.2% of the total amount of the
          first operation (optional link 3).
2.5       Cost and financing. The total cost of the first individual operation under the
          CCLIP will be US$111.15 million, with US$100 million contributed by the Bank and
          US$11.15 million by the local counterpart.

                                            Table 2. Cost and financing (US$)

                            Components                             Bank            Local           Total       %
         Component I. Comprehensive planning and                   1,858,500       1,141,500       3,000,000   2.7
         institutional strengthening
         Surveys, cadastral analysis, diagnostic                     688,500       1,011,500       1,700,000   1.5
         assessments, and information tools
         Master plans                                              1,170,000         130,000       1,300,000   1.2
         Component II. Urban infrastructure and                   57,220,000       5,780,000      63,000,000 56.7
         habitat
         Final projects, bidding documents, and works              4,700,000                 -     4,700,000   4.2
         inspection
         Habitat and infrastructure works                         52,520,000       5,780,000      58,300,000 52.5
         Component III. Social management and                     35,671,500       3,978,500      39,650,000 35.7
         community development
         Management of resettlements, housing                     21,096,000       2,344,000      23,440,000 21.1
         solutions, and regularization of property
         ownership
         Household connections                                    10,260,000       1,140,000      11,400,000 10.3
         Community strengthening and productive                    4,315,500         494,500       4,810,000   4.3
         development
         Project management and monitoring                         5,250,000         250,000       5,500,000   4.9
         Total                                                   100,000,000      11,150,000     111,150,000 100


2.6       Eligibility criteria. The neighborhoods to be financed by this operation will
          primarily be those where the vulnerable low socioeconomic population lives. To be
          eligible, these neighborhoods must meet the following requirements: (i) be
          identified and surveyed in the RPPVAP;28 (ii) be located in one of the 24 districts of
          GBA; (iii) have a minimum of 50 housing units; (iv) not be located in ecological
          reserves, environmental preservation areas, or archeological heritage sites. In
          addition, they cannot be exposed to the risk of natural disasters or be in areas with
          irreversible levels of soil, water, or air pollution or other environmental liabilities;
          and (v) they can be regularized mostly in the same place where they are currently

28   Or be subsequently identified in an official directive that falls within OPISU’s sphere of competence.
                                                 - 14 -



       situated. The projects’ eligibility will be determined by the executing agency based
       on a report that must include an analysis of the different requirements and include,
       when necessary, consultations with the specific areas of government competent in
       each subject matter. The Bank’s statement of no objection will be required.
       Program-financed works must be executed in eligible neighborhoods, be part of a
       comprehensive plan with a positive socioeconomic evaluation, and meet the
       environmental and social requirements in the Environmental and Social
       Management Framework. The development of the criteria and eligibility declaration
       method will be specified in the program Operating Regulations.
2.7    Disbursement schedule. Taking into consideration the desire to request the
       recognition of expenditures from activities that have already begun, the execution
       period for this project is four years from the date the loan contract is signed. The
       disbursement schedule is as follows:

                                    Table 3. Disbursement schedule (US$)
             Financing         Year 1 (*)       Year 2         Year 3           Year 4       Total
       IDB                     $23,910,000     $27,776,000    $14,911,000      $33,406,000      100.00
       Local                    $4,950,000      $1,365,000     $1,287,000       $3,546,000       11.15
       Total                   $28,860,000     $29,141,000    $16,198,000      $36,952,000      111.15
       % IDB                       23.91%          27.78%         14.91%           33.41%        100%
       % Local                     44.39%          12.24%         11.54%           31.80%        100%
       (*) Includes retroactive expenses and/or recognition of expenditures.


B.     Environmental and social risks
2.8    The first operation under the CCLIP has been classified as a category “B”
       operation, in accordance with the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards
       Compliance Policy. The applicable policies are: the Environment and Safeguards
       Compliance Policy (OP-703); Disaster Risk Management Policy (OP-704);
       Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP-710); Gender Equality in Development
       (OP-761); and Access to Information Policy (OP-102).
2.9    The program is expected to have mostly positive impacts. However, given the
       population’s level of informality and vulnerability, there may be some negative
       impacts that need to be mitigated. An environmental and social impact assessment
       of the sample of projects in the neighborhoods of Costa Esperanza, Costa del
       Lago, and 8 de Mayo in the Municipio of General San Martín was prepared, which
       included: (i) paving and sidewalks; (ii) Parque Escuela Costa Esperanza: a
       30-hectare park and community facilities (a daycare nursery, a health center, a
       multisport center, a youth center, and a police station); (iii) revitalization and
       improvement of the Zanjón Güemes Linear Park; (iv) neighborhood infrastructure
       for the management of urban solid waste (temporary waste disposal facilities);
       (v) housing improvement: pilot project on in-house water connections; and
       (vi) Plaza Mercedes Sosa.
2.10   The sample shows that the program’s main social impact relates to resettlement
       caused by the paving and sidewalks project, which focuses on one area and
       affects a small number of families (nine, in principle). To mitigate this impact, a
       resettlement plan has been formulated that includes mitigation measures to
                                          - 15 -



       ensure that affected households can remain in the same or a similar location
       after the project. The affected families were consulted about this plan and the
       proposed mitigation measures. Any resettlements stemming from projects that
       are announced after the program is declared eligible must respect the terms of a
       category “B” project and comply with the environmental and social provisions
       included in the loan contract and the program Operating Regulations.
2.11   The expected adverse environmental impacts relate to construction activities:
       movement and operation of vehicles, machinery, influx of labor, generation of
       waste, excavation and movement of soil, and handling of materials. The
       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment includes a detailed analysis of
       potential impacts and risks, with specific information on their proper management
       found in the Environmental and Social Management Plan.
2.12   The consultation process included two public consultations with the community
       on the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, and the resettlement plan
       consultation with the population that would be directly affected. The main issues
       discussed were the scope of the project, coordination between current sewerage
       works and future pavement projects, specific flooding problems due to land
       grade, maintenance and garbage collection. People were informed that the
       consultation processes would continue as the work progresses. The program’s
       future projects will follow the guidelines established in the Environmental and
       Social Management Framework and the Involuntary Resettlement Framework.
       These documents were published in September 2018 and updated in May 2019.
2.13   OPISU will also carry out activities to promote social and productive integration,
       which will be designed by the social services office and management team
       associated with the social-productive area and executed by its local team. This
       will help coordinate actions in the area with the municipio and establish
       connections with neighbors and organizations.
2.14   An additional exercise was conducted that resulted in the identification of certain
       medium social risks related to the socioeconomic context of the neighborhoods:
       (i) inability to pay for public utilities once they are regularized, which will be
       mitigated through support provided by social teams to the most vulnerable
       beneficiaries, to help them receive reduced rates for low-income customers and
       agreements with the service providers on the rates set; (ii) the community’s
       rejection of the project (due to a lack of information, negative effect on their
       livelihood, or fear of relocation, etc.), which will be mitigated by local teams
       working exclusively and directly in the neighborhoods, creating dissemination
       mechanisms and links with community leaders and organizations to promote
       participatory co-design processes; and (iii) increased costs due to delays in
       planning or relocation processes, which will be mitigated by minimizing
       relocations and including the participation of local teams to create ways to reach
       agreements, disseminate information, and build connections with the community.
       These local social teams will be set up to support the preparation of the program
       and will remain in the neighborhoods during the construction and operation
       phases.
                                                 - 16 -



C.        Fiduciary risks
2.15      A medium fiduciary risk was identified that relates to the execution arrangements
          and a possible lack of coordination of activities between the different ministries,
          which could lead to inefficiencies in program management. The formal support of
          the executing agency (OPISU) to be provided by the MIySP’s Works
          Coordination and Execution Unit (UCEPO) and the Ministry of Economy’s
          Provincial Directorate of Multilateral Institutions and Bilateral Financing
          (DPOMyFB) in the Province of Buenos Aires will help mitigate exposure to this
          risk and keep it at a medium level (Annex III). Mitigation measures will include:
          (i) formalizing interagency support mechanisms through the execution of
          agreements, including agreements with prospective beneficiary municipios;29
          (ii) reviewing and improving fiduciary processes and control environment
          processes (including a chapter on accounting-financial matters), with any
          changes reflected in the Operating Regulations; (iii) verifying the addition of
          fiduciary staff specialized in multilateral banking projects and appointing a focal
          point for each subject area; (iv) offering fiduciary training to OPISU staff; and
          (v) updating and/or developing the pertinent manuals, ministerial resolutions, or
          annexes to the Operating Regulations to ensure proper functioning.
D.        Other project risks
2.16      At the risk workshop conducted during the preparation stage, other high and
          medium risks were identified: (i) the lack of safety conditions for personnel
          working in the targeted areas; and (ii) the quality of the project’s detailed designs,
          including the identification of environmental liabilities when the interventions are
          designed. To mitigate these risks, the program calls for: (i) working closely with
          security forces to ensure the safety of personnel working full time in the targeted
          neighborhoods; and (ii) strengthening the technical teams under Component I
          and administration activities. It is also possible that expectations regarding the
          outcomes of the socio-urban integration process will lead to the growth of
          informal dwellings in areas that are intended for other purposes or will make the
          planned interventions insufficient, which would impact the program’s objectives
          and costs. To mitigate this risk, the projects will follow the protocols established
          in the Involuntary Resettlement Framework and the specific plans for each
          neighborhood, seeking to educate the beneficiaries about the use and care of
          public and community spaces.
2.17      Sustainability of the interventions. The sustainability of the interventions carried
          out in the prioritized municipios after this operation has ended will benefit from:
          (i) the development and strengthening of the municipal teams’ assessment and
          comprehensive planning capacities for shantytowns and settlements in the PBA,
          which could be used in other informal neighborhoods with their own resources;
          (ii) the strengthening of the communities’ social, human, and productive capital for
          purposes of integration with the formal city, which is expected to translate into a
          greater sense of ownership and willingness to take care of the works constructed
          by the program, with appropriate use of services; and (iii) the execution of
          agreements with the municipios (paragraph 2.15) and the companies that provide

29   An annex to the program Operating Regulations will include a model agreement with the beneficiary
     municipios, to the Bank’s satisfaction.
                                           - 17 -



       water, sanitation and electricity services (paragraph 1.20), to ensure the
       subsequent operation and maintenance of the works.
2.18   Financial sustainability and debt capacity. As part of the program’s
       preparation activities, an analysis of the PBA’s historical, current, and projected
       financial position (2013-2030) was conducted (optional link 4). It produced the
       following conclusions: (i) the primary fiscal balance begins to reverse the
       deteriorating trend starting in 2017, with positive results achieved in 2018,
       although the bottom line remained in the red; (ii) the inflationary process led to a
       decrease in constant values of current expenses in the last two years (the sharp
       deterioration in 2018 offset the slight increase in 2017), which is reflected in the
       primary balance; (iii) starting in 2017, the PBA substantially increased its share in
       national resources; (iv) total resources increased from 11.8% of gross
       geographic product (GGP) in 2010 to 14.6% in 2017 and 15% in 2018; and
       (v) during this period, the debt (4% with multilateral lending institutions) grew as a
       percentage of total revenues and GGP, its average life was shortened, and 74%
       is subject to foreign laws or corresponds to multilateral lending institutions, which
       increases the need to keep reducing future expenditure to decrease exposure to
       potential macroeconomic shocks. In conclusion, the historical and projected
       financial analyses conducted show that the PBA has the debt capacity to meet its
       obligations in terms of paying the program’s principal and interest and providing
       the local contribution. It should be mentioned that the Government of Argentina,
       the operation’s guarantor, conducts an analysis of the PBA’s debt capacity
       before the guarantee agreement is executed.

                    III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN

A.     Summary of implementation arrangements
3.1    The borrower will be the PBA, through the Ministry of Economy. The executing
       agency will be the Provincial Agency for Social and Urban Integration (OPISU),
       which reports to the Cabinet Office (MJGM) and will be directly responsible for
       the execution of Components I and III. To execute Component II, OPISU will be
       supported by the Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Services (MIySP), which
       will act as subexecuting agency through the Neighborhood Infrastructure
       Coordination Unit (UCIBA). The Ministry of Economy, through the DPOMyFB
       under the authority of the Finance Subsecretariat (SSF), will be responsible for
       financial administration of the program. Their interaction will be spelled out in the
       program Operating Regulations.
3.2    The executing agency will coordinate the technical considerations and will also
       be responsible for coordinating program execution, the management, planning,
       and oversight of procurement processes, interaction with the Bank, payment
       requests, and budget allocations from the loan in its area of competence, as well
       as requests for the Bank’s no objection. The MIySP will support the executing
       agency through the different technical areas coordinated by UCIBA. The MIySP,
       working with the executing agency, will be responsible for executing the
       program’s construction projects, in accordance with the terms of the loan contract
       and Operating Regulations.
                                            - 18 -



3.3   To ensure the successful execution of the program, the special contractual
      condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan will be to provide
      evidence of the entry into effect of the program Operating Regulations and
      respective annexes, in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon
      with the Bank. Special contractual conditions for the execution of Component II
      will be to: (i) provide evidence of the entry into effect of an agreement between
      OPISU and the MIySP, to the Bank’s satisfaction, which specifies the execution
      agreements entered into; and (ii) for the execution of the works required to
      provide services, the entry into effect of agreements signed by OPISU and the
      provider(s) of such services (paragraph 1.20).
3.4   Financial management and procurement. Annex III contains the fiduciary
      arrangements for execution. The loan will be disbursed using the advance of funds
      method, with the frequency of disbursements determined based on proper financial
      programming and consistency with other planning and financial tools such as the
      annual work plan and procurement plan. The Bank may disburse other advances,
      preferably every six months, provided at least 65% of all previously advanced
      funds have been substantiated. This percentage is justified based on the
      experience with executing operations in the PBA, where the flow of funds involves
      several institutions, which considerably delays the process of receiving such funds.
      The procurement of works and goods and the contracting of consulting services
      with loan proceeds will be carried out in accordance with the policies for the
      procurement of works and goods (document GN-2349-9) and the policies for the
      selection and contracting of consultants (document GN-2350-9). To achieve the
      objectives of Component II and III at the community and social level, community
      procurement processes may be used (document GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.17),
      which will be specified in the Operating Regulations. Facilitation services, and
      technical and administrative support provided by nongovernmental organizations
      and public or private agencies specialized in housing project management or
      public utility projects may be contracted.
3.5   Retroactive financing and recognition of expenditures. The Bank will
      retroactively finance and charge to the loan up to US$11.7 million (11.7% of the
      proposed loan amount) and will recognize and charge to the local contribution up
      to US$2 million (20% of the estimated local contribution amount) any eligible
      project expenses incurred by the borrower under Component II, provided they
      meet requirements substantially similar to those specified in the loan contract.
      These expenses will have been incurred for the execution of infrastructure works
      such as paving, green areas, public spaces, in-house connections, and public
      facilities, among others, and must have been incurred as of the project profile
      approval date (1 April 2019). Any expenses incurred more than 18 months before
      the date of the program’s approval by the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors
      may not be included.
3.6   Audit. The executing agency, with the support of the Ministry of Economy, will
      submit the program’s audited financial statements on an annual basis, in
      accordance with the terms specified in the Bank’s policies. These audited financial
      statements will be submitted 120 days after the close of each fiscal year. The audit
      reports at the end of the program will be submitted within 120 days after the last
      disbursement. The audit will be conducted by the Audit Office of the PBA provided
      it retains its eligibility to audit Bank-financed operations, otherwise, the audit will be
                                          - 19 -



       conducted by an audit firm. The determination of the scope of the audit and other
       related matters will follow the Financial Management Guidelines for IDB-financed
       Projects (document OP-273-6) and the Instructions for Financial Reports and
       External Audit Management. The executing agency will be responsible for
       contracting the audit firm.
B.     Summary of arrangements for monitoring results
3.7    Monitoring arrangements. The monitoring and evaluation plan (required link 2)
       will monitor the execution of the program based on the targets and progress
       indicators defined in the results matrix. The program’s monitoring system will
       include the results matrix, the multiyear execution plan, the annual work plans,
       the progress monitoring reports, the annual reports, and the on-site supervision
       plan, supplemented by periodic updating of the risk mitigation matrix. These tools
       will be used to carry out the planning, updating, and monitoring of the program’s
       activities.
3.8    For financial and fiduciary monitoring, the program uses an External Loans
       Execution Unit (UEPEX) system, which records financial transactions and
       milestones. Procurement processes will be monitored based on the Procurement
       Plan Execution System that has already been implemented. The executing agency
       will upload the output and outcome indicators into its system.
3.9    The executing agency will submit semiannual progress status reports, which will
       include: (i) performance in achieving the objectives and outcomes specified in the
       annual work plans and progress monitoring report, including the analysis and
       monitoring of risks and their respective mitigation measures; (ii) procurement
       plan     execution    status;    (iii) compliance   with   contractual   clauses;
       (iv) implementation of environmental and social safeguards; (v) financial
       execution statement and respective components; and (vi) implementation status
       of the monitoring and evaluation plan.
3.10   Arrangements for evaluating the program’s outcomes. The evaluation
       method will consist of (i) a quasi-experimental difference-in-differences and
       matching methodology for the entire CCLIP; and (ii) a reflexive comparison
       methodology for those indicators for which an impact evaluation cannot be
       conducted.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annex I - AR-L1288
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 1




                                                                               Development Effectiveness Matrix

                                                                                       Summary
I. Corporate and Country Priorities
1. IDB Development Objectives                                                                                                                    Yes


                                                                                                   -Social Inclusion and Equality
                                                                                                   -Gender Equality and Diversity
   Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes                                                   -Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability
                                                                                                   -Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law




                                                                                                   -Households benefitting from housing solutions (#)*
                                                                                                   -Households with new or upgraded access to drinking water (#)*
                                                                                                   -Households with new or upgraded access to sanitation (#)*
                                                                                                   -Roads built or upgraded (km)*
                                                                                                   -Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and
   Country Development Results Indicators                                                          managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*
                                                                                                   -Households with wastewater treatment (#)*
                                                                                                   -Households with new or improved access to electricity supply (#)*
                                                                                                   -Subnational governments benefited by decentralization, fiscal management and
                                                                                                   institutional capacity projects (#)*




2. Country Development Objectives                                                                                                                Yes


   Country Strategy Results Matrix                                                                         GN-2870-1
                                                                                                                                Habitat improvement and access to basic services



   Country Program Results Matrix                                                                           GN-2948             The intervention is included in the 2019 Operational Program.



 Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country
 strategy or country program)


II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability                                                                                                    Evaluable
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution                                                                                                          9.5
     3.1 Program Diagnosis                                                                                                                       3.0
     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions                                                                                                     4.0
     3.3 Results Matrix Quality                                                                                                                  2.5
4. Ex ante Economic Analysis                                                                                                                     8.0
     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA                                                                              3.0
     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs                                                                                            3.0
     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions                                                                                                                  0.0
     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis                                                                                                                    2.0
     4.5 Consistency with results matrix                                                                                                         0.0
5. Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                     8.6
     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms                                                                                                                   1.1
     5.2 Evaluation Plan                                                                                                                         7.5
III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix
Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood                                                                                             Medium
                                Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood                                                   Yes
                                    Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks                                                    Yes
                       Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation                                                    Yes
Environmental & social risk classification                                                                                                       B
IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality
The project relies on the use of country systems

                                                                                                                                Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and
                                                                                                                                Reporting, External Control, Internal Audit.
                                                                    Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)               Yes
                                                                                                                                Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison,
                                                                                                                                Contracting Individual Consultant, National Public Bidding.



                                                                                                                                Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and
                                                                                   Non-Fiduciary               Yes
                                                                                                                                Evaluation National System.


The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries
and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:



Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector
                                                                                                               Yes
entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project



Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.


The general objective of the CCLIP and its first individual operation is to contribute to improve the living conditions of the population of the villages, slums and housing complexes of the
Province of Buenos Aires (PBA) through interventions of social and urban integration. The specific objectives of the first individual operation are: (i) to strengthen and support local and
provincial governments in the planning, management, and execution of integral intervention projects and regularization of informal neighborhoods; (ii) improve access and facilitate the use of
basic services, resilient urban infrastructure, public space, community equipment and state services for the inhabitants of the neighborhoods, integrating them into the municipal urban
structure; and (iii) strengthen social capital, promote opportunities for social, labor and productive community development and improve living conditions and tenure.

The project presents a complete diagnosis; with an accurate description of the housing deficit, environmental conditions and the processes of informal urbanization of the villages, settlements
and housing complexes of the PBA. The design of the project is supported by the evidence of projects carried out and evaluated in Argentina, as well as the experiences of other countries.
The results indicators included in the results matrix are SMART and have means of verification.

The economic analysis of the project was carried out through a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) and focused on expected benefits related to the valuation of real estate assets of the project sample
and its surroundings. The CBA used the hedonic prices rigorous methodology based on previous projects implemented in the PBA, and has an adequate sensitivity analysis. The analysis
concludes that the project is economically viable, with an IRR of 26.3%, using a discount rate of 12%.

The project includes a monitoring and evaluation plan that is in line with the Bank's standards. The effectiveness of the proposed intervention will be measured according to several
approaches: a difference-in-differences analysis, matching and an ex post economic analysis.
                                                                                                                                                                         Annex II
                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 5



                                                                                   RESULTS MATRIX

       Project objective:                The general objective of the CCLIP and its first operation is to improve living conditions in the shantytowns, informal neighborhoods, and
                                         housing complexes in the Province of Buenos Aires (PBA) through social and urban integration interventions.



                                                                                  EXPECTED IMPACT
                                                              Unit of                              Baseline           Final           Means of
                          Indicators                                              Baseline1                                                                    Comments2
                                                            measurement                             Year             target          verification
       IMPACT 1: IMPROVED QUALITY OF LIFE

                                                               % of the
       Households with at least one member that
                                                              beneficiary            n.a.*           2019            -10%          OPISU - DPE3
       reports currently having an acute disease
                                                              population
       Safety of residents living in informal areas           % increase             n.a.*           2019            n.a.*          OPISU - DPE
       Perception of safety of women living in informal
                                                              % increase             n.a.*           2019            n.a.*             Survey4
       areas




1   Note: The abbreviation “n.a.*” indicates that there are no current data for the baseline measurements; data will be collected during the assessment of each neighborhood.
2   Indicator details can be found in the monitoring and evaluation plan.
3
    OPISU-DPE surveys of all households in the neighborhood (census).
4   OPISU survey on perception to be conducted on a representative sample of the targeted neighborhoods.
    Annex II
    Page 2 of 5


                                                                              EXPECTED OUTCOMES

                                                                           Unit of                          Baseline        Final         Means of
                                 Indicators                                                    Baseline                                                         Comments
                                                                         measurement                          year         target1       verification5

       OUTCOME 1: Strengthen and support local and provincial governments in the planning, management and execution of comprehensive informal neighborhood
       intervention and regularization projects

                                                                           Number of
       Number of master plans prepared by OPISU in
                                                                         comprehensive           n.a*         2019           10             Report
       neighborhoods that are not included in this operation
                                                                             plans

       OUTCOME 2: Improve access to and facilitate the use of basic public utilities, resilient urban infrastructure, public spaces, community facilities, and government
       services for residents of the neighborhoods, thereby integrating them into the municipal urban fabric

       Dwellings in the beneficiary neighborhoods with continuous
                                                                          % of dwellings          11          2019           80         OPISU - DPE
       formal use of drinking water
       Dwellings in the beneficiary neighborhoods that safely
                                                                          % of dwellings           3          2019           60              Idem
       dispose of wastewater
       Dwellings in the beneficiary neighborhoods that report the
                                                                          % of dwellings          31          2019            5              Idem
       existence of dumps on their block
       Percentage of households that report being satisfied or very
                                                                        % of households           33          2019           43             Survey
       satisfied with existing public spaces in the neighborhood
       Percentage of households satisfied or very satisfied with
                                                                        % of households           66          2019           76             Survey
       their access to healthcare in the neighborhood
       Households that report the existence of flooding, strong
                                                                        % of households          n.a.*        2019         -10%         OPISU - DPE
       smells, and sewage spills on their block

       OUTCOME 3: Strengthen social capital and boost opportunities for social-community, labor, and productive development

       Percentage of households that report a good or very good
                                                                        % of households          93%          2019          97%             Survey
       relationship with their neighbors
       Percentage of community initiative projects (CIP)
       satisfactorily executed, out of the total financed by the              % CIP                0          2019           80             Report
       program
       Percentage of productive units strengthened under the
                                                                       % productive units          0          2019           30             Report
       Neighborhood Productive Development Plan
       Percentage of Public Safety Information System (SISC)             % requests per
                                                                                                   0          2019           80             Report
       requests that have been satisfactorily resolved                   neighborhood




5   OPISU report.
                                                                                                                                             Annex II
                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 5



                                                                     Unit of                      Baseline    Final      Means of
                          Indicators                                                   Baseline                                         Comments
                                                                   measurement                      year     target1    verification5

OUTCOME 4: Improve habitability and tenure conditions

Housing improvements from private household investments
                                                                     % homes             38           2019     40          Survey
in the last year

OUTCOME 5: Electricity and water savings and energy saved by using efficient construction materials

                                                                 kilowatt hours used
Electricity savings in buildings                                                        n.a.*         2020   -20%
                                                                      (monthly)
                                                                   m3/hour used                                        EDGE standards
Water consumption savings in buildings                                                  n.a.*         2020   -20%
                                                                    (monthly)
Energy savings incorporated in construction materials                  MJ/m2            n.a.*         2020   -20%

OUTCOME 6: Gender

Percentage of lots currently being regularized that are titled
                                                                         %                0           2019     55          Report
to women or have shared ownership
    Annex II
    Page 4 of 5


                                                                                      OUTPUTS

                                               Unit of                     Baseline                                          Final     Means of
                    Outputs                                     Baseline                Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4                                 Comments
                                             measurement                     year                                           target    verification6

      Component I. Comprehensive planning and institutional strengthening

      Socio-housing surveys                     Census             0        2019          2        0        2        0        4       OPISU - DPE
      Comprehensive urban
                                                 Study             0        2019          1        1        2        0        4          Report
      assessments
                                                                                                                                                        Comprehensively
      Master plans designed                       Plan             0        2019          1        1        2                 4          Report         includes climate
                                                                                                                                                             change
      Management guidelines for                Number of
                                                                   0        2019          0        0        1        1        2          Report
      replication in future interventions      guidelines

      Component II. Urban infrastructure and habitat

      Neighborhood infrastructure
                                                  Plan             0        2019          2        0        0        0        2          Report
      intervention plan designed
      Neighborhood infrastructure
                                                  Plan             0        2019          0        0        0        2        2          Report
      intervention plan implemented
                                                                                                                                     Final completion
      ➔ Milestone: Paved streets             Linear meters         0        2019        2,368    12,632     -        -      15,000
                                                                                                                                       certificates7
      ➔ Milestone: Lots with water and
        sewerage connections                 Number of lots        0        2019          0        0        0        0       n.a*         Idem
        installed under the program
      ➔ Milestone: New or revitalized
                                             Square meters         0        2019        5,127    38,337     -        -      43,464        Idem
        public spaces
      ➔ Milestone: New trees in public
                                             Trees planted         0        2019         320     1,680      0        0      2,000         Idem
        spaces
                                                                                                                                                        Detailed designs
      ➔ Milestone: New LED public             Lighting units                                                                                               and bidding
                                                                   0        2019         158      843       0        0      1,001         Idem
        lighting on sidewalks                    installed
                                                                                                                                                           documents
                                            Number of formal                                                                                             include climate
      ➔ Milestone: Disposal sites
                                              disposal and         0        2019          0        2        0        0        2          Report              change
        constructed
                                             collection sites
                                                                                                                                                          specifications
      ➔ Milestone: Community facility        Number of new                                                                           Final completion
                                                                   0        2019          1        4        0        0        5
        constructed and in operation           facilities                                                                               certificates
      ➔ Number of dwellings                                                                                                          Final completion
                                               Dwellings           0        2019         n.a*     n.a*     n.a*     n.a*     n.a*
        constructed                                                                                                                     certificates


6   OPISU report.
7   Final completion certificates approved and reported by OPISU.
                                                                                                                                                Annex II
                                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 5



                                      Unit of                     Baseline                                        Final     Means of
              Outputs                                  Baseline              Year 1   Year 2   Year 3   Year 4                               Comments
                                    measurement                     year                                         target    verification6

Component III. Social management and community development

Community participation plans
                                   Number of plans        0        2019        2        0        0        2        2          Report
designed
Community participation plans
                                   Number of plans        0        2019        0        0                 2        2          Report
implemented
Social-community development
                                   Number of plans        0        2019        1        1        0        0        2          Report
plans designed
Social-community development
                                   Number of plans        0        2019        0        0        0        2        2          Report
plans implemented
➔ Milestone: Increase in the number
  of vacant spaces in daycares      Number of vacant
                                                          0        2019        0        0        0        0       n.a*        Report
  and/or community daycares for        spaces
  children ages 0-5 years
➔ Milestone: Social protection
                                       SISC per
  network management system                               0        2019        2        0        0        0        2          Report
                                     neighborhood
  set up and functioning
Productive development plans
                                   Number of plans        0        2019        1        1        0        0        2          Report
designed
Productive development plans
                                   Number of plans        0        2019        0        0        0        2        2          Report
implemented
➔ Milestone: Socio-productive
                                      Workshops           0        2019        4       10       20       30       64          Report
  workshops organized
➔ Milestone: Number of              Number of units
                                                          0        2019       10       30       20       40       100         Report
  economic units strengthened         financed
Number of community initiative        Number of
                                                          0        2019       10       10       10       10       40          Report
projects financed                      projects
Dwellings with in-house drinking      Number of                                                                           Final completion
                                                          0        2019       400     1,200    1,200    1,200    4,000
water connections installed           dwellings                                                                              certificates
Dwellings with in-house sewage        Number of
                                                          0        2019       200      800     1,000    1,000    3,000         Idem
connections installed                 dwellings
Dwellings that receive aid for        Number of
                                                          0        2019        0       50       150      200      400         Report
construction improvements             dwellings
Households that receive a
                                      Number of
resettlement offer (excluding                             0        2019        9       11        0        0       20          Report
                                      households
construction of new dwelling)
Lots currently being regularized    Number of lots        0        2019        0       800     1,000    1,000    2,800        Report
                                                                                Annex III
                                                                              Page 1 of 8




                    FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS



Country:                Argentina
Project number:         AR-L1288
Name:                   Social and Urban Integration Program in Greater Buenos
                        Aires
Executing agency:       Provincial Agency for Social and Urban Integration (OPISU),
                        under the authority of the Cabinet Office (MJGM)
Fiduciary team:         Roberto Laguado and Analía La Rosa (FMP/CAR)



                             I.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

     The executing agency for the program will be the Provincial Agency for Social and
     Urban Integration (OPISU), which reports to the Cabinet Office (MJGM). To
     execute Component II, OPISU will be supported by the Ministry of Infrastructure
     and Public Services (MIySP), which will act as subexecuting agency through the
     Neighborhood Integration Coordination Unit (UCIBA). The Ministry of Economy,
     through the Provincial Directorate of Multilateral Agencies and Bilateral Financing
     (DPOMyFB) under the authority of the Finance Subsecretariat (SSF), will be
     responsible for financial administration of the program. Their interaction will be
     spelled out in the program Operating Regulations.
     The Bank analyzed the executing agency’s institutional capacity to plan, execute,
     and implement the program, using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System
     (ICAS) methodology, which concluded that the agency had a “medium” level of
     fiduciary risk.

               II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT

     OPISU was created by means of Law 14,449/2018 (Art. 48), as an autonomous
     public agency under the MJGM. Its structure and powers are set out in
     Decree 168/2018, which also provides for budget transfers from the MJGM to
     OPISU to ensure the agency’s financial autonomy.
     OPISU will be responsible for planning urban and social management policies, as
     well as for the formulation, implementation, and execution of programs and plans
     for the social and urban integration of shantytowns, informal neighborhoods, and
     housing complexes. As part of program execution, it will be responsible for the
     management, planning, and oversight of procurement processes, interactions with
     the Bank, payment requests, allocation of the loan resources, and requests for the
     Bank’s no objection.
Annex III
Page 2 of 8


                                    III. FIDUCIARY RISKS

3.1     The assessment of the executing agency’s institutional capacity was based on the
        ICAS methodology, which identified a medium risk. This assessment and its
        conclusions consider challenges related to execution arrangements based on the
        coordination of activities between the different ministries and the recent creation
        of OPISU (the program’s executing agency), which at the time of the assessment,
        was still in the process of being set up and structured. The MIySP’s support,
        formalized through the Neighborhood Infrastructure Coordination Unit (UCIBA)
        and the Works Coordination and Execution Unit (UCEPO) and the support of the
        Ministry of Economy through the DPOMyFB for financial management activities
        make it possible to capitalize on the experience of these units for the benefit of
        OPISU and the ability to achieve the program’s objectives based on fiduciary
        standards acceptable to the Bank. Their interactions will be spelled out in the
        program Operating Regulations.
3.2     The recommended measures to mitigate these risks are: (i) formalizing
        interagency support mechanisms through the execution of agreements to ensure
        achievement of the program’s objectives; (ii) reviewing, improving, and reflecting
        in the Operating Regulations all fiduciary and control environment processes
        (including a chapter on accounting-financial            matters which will describe
        programming and budget, treasury, accounting and information systems,
        disbursements and cash flow, internal control and internal audit, and external
        control processes), along with specific responsibilities based on the execution
        arrangements; (iii) verifying the addition of fiduciary staff specialized in multilateral
        banking projects and appointment of a focal point for each subject area;
        (iv) offering fiduciary training to OPISU staff; and (v) updating and/or developing
        the pertinent manuals, ministerial resolutions, or annexes to the program
        Operating Regulations to ensure proper functioning.

              IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF CONTRACTS

        The Bank may disburse advances provided the executing agency has
        substantiated at least 65% of all previously advanced funds pending
        substantiation. This percentage is justified based on the experience with executing
        operations in the PBA, where the flow of funds involves several institutions, which
        considerably delays the process of receiving such funds.
        For purposes of the provisions of Article 4.10 of the loan’s General Conditions, the
        parties agree that the applicable exchange rate will be the rate indicated in
        subparagraph (b) (i) of that Article.
        The exchange rate in effect on the first business day of the month of payment will
        be used to determine the equivalency of expenses incurred in local currency and
        charged to the local contribution or the reimbursement of expenses charged to the
        loan.
        For purposes of the provisions of Article 7.03 of the loan’s General Conditions, the
        external financial audit reports and other reports needed to supervise the
        program’s financial management are the program’s audited financial statements,
        which will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the close of each fiscal
                                                                                       Annex III
                                                                                     Page 3 of 8


         year during the original disbursement period or any extensions thereof, duly
         certified by Bank-eligible external audit firms. For purposes of the provisions of
         Article 7.03 (a) of the General Conditions, the fiscal year runs from 1 January to
         31 December of each year.
         For the execution of Component III, the possibility of offering existing functional
         units in the neighborhood and adjacent areas as an option to the households to be
         resettled has been considered. To this end, the inclusion of a transfer mechanism
         to provide compensation (subsidies) to purchase the units will be evaluated. If the
         units are included, the arrangements for providing, recognizing, and auditing these
         subsidies and their subsequent recognition as eligible expenses will be approved
         by the Bank in the Operating Regulations.

         V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION

         Procurement execution
         The Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works (document GN-2349-9) of
         April 2011 and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants
         (document GN-2350-9) of April 2011 will be applied.
           (i)   Procurement of works, goods and nonconsulting services. Contracts
                 for works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international
                 competitive bidding (ICB) will be executed using the standard bidding
                 documents issued by the Bank. Bidding processes subject to national
                 competitive bidding (NCB) will be executed using national competitive
                 bidding documents agreed upon with the Bank.
          (ii)   Procurement with community participation. To execute housing
                 construction activities under Components II and III, procedures may be
                 used that include community participation in procurement processes,
                 based on a basic survey of needs, followed by the selection of small local
                 construction firms with a geographic presence in the neighborhoods. These
                 procedures will include: the calculation and detailed budget of interventions
                 for each dwelling, delivery of materials, the management of labor with
                 community participation, and certification of the functionality of the
                 infrastructure installed and constructed, which will promote a transfer of
                 knowledge. The small construction companies will be selected based on
                 the quoted unit prices/rates (lowest cost) and availability. Details will be
                 included in the Operating Regulations.
         (iii)   Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting
                 services arising under the program will be executed using the standard
                 request for proposals issued by the Bank.
         (iv)    Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants will be selected
                 based on their qualifications to perform the work, based on competitive
                 processes comparing the qualifications of at least three candidates.
         The program’s sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical
         specifications.

1   Document GN-2349-9 paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods.
    Annex III
    Page 4 of 8


              Of the country subsystems approved by the Bank, the information system will be
              used.

                       Table 4.1 Threshold Amounts for ICB and International Shortlists

                  Works                                    Goods                             Consulting Services
                                                                                                          Shortlist
                                                                                          International
   ICB             NCB          Shopping        ICB            NCB      Shopping                           100%
                                                                                            publicity
                                                                                                          National
                < 25,000,000                              <1,500,000
>25,000,000                      <350,000    >1,500,000                    <100,000        >200,000       <1,000,000
                  >350,000                                 >100,000


              Main procurement items

                               Table 4.2 Type of Competitive Bidding and Amounts
                                                                  Type of
                                                                                Estimated         Estimated
                                  Activity                      Competitive
                                                                                  Date           Amount (US$)
                                                                 Bidding
              NCB Priority Paving CDL, Landscaping PECE            NCB             To be          US$2,589,000
              Stage 1 and PECE Policy State                                      confirmed
              NCB Roads and Walkways, CE, CDL and 8M                 NCB              -          US$17,180,000
              Shopping - Temporary Disposal Facilities (2)       Shopping             -             US$53,000
              LPN Landscaping PECE Stage 2                         NCB                -           US$3,444,000
              Shopping - Zanjón Güemes Linear Park (includes     Shopping             -           US$2,241,000
              road crossings)
              Shopping - Plaza Mercedes Sosa                     Shopping             -            US$448,000
              Shopping – Daycare center PECE                     Shopping             -           US$2,033,000
              Shopping – Health center PECE                      Shopping             -           US$1,797,000
              Shopping – Youth center PECE                       Shopping             -           US$2,486,000
              Shopping – Multisports center PECE                 Shopping             -           US$1,436,000
              NCB Works Component 2 Urban Infrastructure          Multiple            -          US$30,000,000
              and Housing                                          NCB
              In-house utility connections, enhancement and        NCB                -          US$11,000,000
              improvement of habitat
              Consulting service for inspecting construction    National SP           -             US$758,408
              works CC8
              Coordination team consultants                          CLND             -               US$32,500


              Procurement supervision
              Procurement processes will be reviewed based on the procurement plan and will
              generally be conducted on an ex ante basis, with the exception of processes
              involving the shopping method, selection of consulting firms based on qualifications,
              and individual consultants. Ex post review visits will take place every 12 months. At
              least 10% of reviewed contracts will be physically inspected during the program.
              The thresholds for ex post review are based on OPISU’s fiduciary capacity
              assessed during the operation’s design stage and may be modified by the Bank
              as the agency’s capacity changes.
                                                                              Annex III
                                                                            Page 5 of 8


                  Table 4.3 Ex post Review Thresholds (US$)
                                                                 Individual
    Works                Goods         Consulting Services
                                                                Consultants
 <15,000,000            <900,000             <600,000             <50,000



Special provisions
Mechanisms for preventing prohibited practices. See the provisions set out in
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 regarding prohibited practices (multilateral
institutions’ lists of ineligible companies and individuals).
In connection with Component III and the activities involving the connection,
enhancement and improvement of housing, procurement mechanisms based on
community participation may be used (document GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.17) and
facilitation services and technical and administrative support provided by
nongovernmental organizations or public or private agencies specialized in the
management of housing projects may be contracted.
Records and files
Documentation on procurement processes will be kept in the offices of OPISU as
the entity fully responsible for the program’s procurement processes. Records and
files for ex post reviews will be kept properly organized, categorized, and updated.
Recognition of expenditures
The Bank will retroactively finance and charge to the loan up to US$11.7 million
(11.7% of the proposed loan amount) and will recognize and charge to the local
contribution up to US$2 million (20% of the estimated local contribution amount)
any eligible project expenses incurred by the borrower for the activities included in
Component II, provided they meet requirements substantially similar to those
specified in the loan contract. These expenses will have been incurred for the
execution of infrastructure works such as paving, green areas, public spaces, in-
house connections, and public facilities, among others, and must have been
incurred on or after the project profile approval date (1 April 2019). Any expenses
incurred more than 18 months before the date of the program’s approval by the
Bank’s Board of Executive Directors may not be included.

                       VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

The    Financial   Management     Guidelines    for    IDB-financed Projects
(document OP-273-6) and the Financial Management Operational Guidelines for
IDB-financed Projects (document OP-274-2) will be applied.
Programming and budget
The executing agency’s budget includes programmatic categories and other
classifications organized by item of expenditure (main budget items). Depending
on their financial nature, the headings may be recurring expenses, capital
expenses, and financial applications. Internal sources of financing may be the
provincial treasury account, use of credit, and the agency’s own resources.
Annex III
Page 6 of 8


         Budgetary allocations should be anticipated to ensure the execution of the program
         within the established time period.
         Treasury
         All payments will be made through the General Provincial Treasury Office (TGP)
         from the central administration offices or from the decentralized agencies.
         The DPOMyFB is responsible for the monthly auditing of the balances of the
         account in dollars for receiving the loan proceeds and reconciling them.
         These bank accounts are sub-accounts within the Single Treasury Account (CUT)
         administered by the General Provincial Treasury Office, in which the funds in
         pesos are authorized for payments of eligible expenditures to contracting
         agencies.
         Disbursements are made based on a detailed financial plan in accordance with
         IDB guidelines.
         Accounting, information systems, and reporting
         The borrower, through the Ministry of Economy, will use the External Loans
         Execution Unit system (UEPEX)2 as the financial administration system, to identify
         program funds and sources of financing. In accordance with the chart of accounts
         approved by the Bank, the UEPEX records investments in the program by expense
         matrix category. Cash accounting will be used, following the International Financial
         Reporting Standards, as applicable, in accordance with the established national
         criteria. The required financial reports will be: (i) financial plans covering up to
         180 days following a request for the advance of funds; (ii) the program’s audited
         annual financial statements; and (iii) other reports requested by the fiduciary
         specialists.
         The DPOMyFB, through its Project Accounting and Project Disbursements Office,
         is responsible for the following activities: (i) enter accounting records on program
         execution in the UEPEX; (ii) prepare disbursement requests, monitor their
         approval and the respective deposit of funds into the Province’s accounts; (iii) on
         a monthly basis, audit the balances of the special accounts in dollars and reconcile
         the program bank accounts; (iv) each month, analyze the accounting balances and
         issue statements on the balances and reconciled balances in pesos and dollars;
         (v) prepare the financial reports requested by the agencies and the Provincial
         Office; and (vi) prepare the loan’s financial statements and present them to the
         external auditor for audit reporting purposes.
         Disbursements and cash flow
         The Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6)
         and the Financial Management Operational Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects
         (document OP-274-2) will apply.
         Loan resources requested from the Bank in the form of advances will be deposited
         in an account in dollars and converted to Argentine pesos based on operational
         requirements and deposited in an account in pesos set up exclusively for the
         project. Project expenses and investments will be paid out of these accounts
         according to the plan. The executing agency will maintain strict and effective

2   https://dgsiaf.mecon.gov.ar/uepex/.
                                                                              Annex III
                                                                            Page 7 of 8


control over the use of the advanced funds, using mechanisms that will allow it to
verify and reconcile the available balances in its records with the corresponding
balances in the Bank’s records (LMS1 Report).
The e-disbursements modality will be used. This is the Bank’s online system that
allows the executing agency to prepare and send disbursement requests
electronically to the Bank, which lowers transaction costs and allows the Bank to
review and process requests remotely.
Internal control and internal auditing
The Provincial Accounting Office (CGP) performs internal control duties
associated with the legal and financial aspects of loan execution. For execution
and payment processes, the CGP intervenes prior to making payments from the
General Provincial Treasury Office. For procurement processes, it intervenes to
verify legal considerations prior to any procurement processes.
External control: external financial auditing and program reports
The Audit Office (HTC) of the PBA was declared eligible by the Bank to audit
IDB-financed operations. As long as the HTC retains its eligibility, it will conduct
the external audit of the program, with no need for a competitive bidding process.
If the external audit is not conducted by the HTC of the PBA, an independent audit
firm acceptable to the Bank will be contracted.
Financial supervision plan
The financial supervision plan will be designed based on the risk and fiduciary
capacity assessments carried out in accordance with the on-site and desk reviews
planned for the project. It includes the scope of the operational, financial,
accounting activities, compliance and legality issues, and is also based on the
reports issued by the external auditors. An annual financial inspection visit is
planned, but the frequency may be modified based on the project’s risk evaluation.
The ex post review method will be used for disbursements.
Execution mechanism
The DPOMyFB will handle the loan’s financial and external audit matters. Its most
important duties related to the loans are: (i) track and process requests for
advance of funds in order to make payments; (ii) track and process expense
reports; (iii) enter accounting records; (iv) prepare disbursement projections;
(v) track and reconcile bank account balances; (vi) analyze account balances and
issue reports on reconciled balances; and (vii) fulfill audit requirements.
Disbursements will be made in the form of advances of funds based on a financial
plan covering a maximum of 180 days. These disbursements will be substantiated
when at least 65% of the funds have been spent. To request funds, the disbursement
request form, the execution status report, and the financial plan for the following
180 days will be submitted. The financial management specialist may request
additional information, such as: (i) itemized list of commitments; and (ii) reports on
the estimated physical and financial progress of the project. Substantiation of
advanced funds will be submitted to the Bank with the following information:
(i) disbursement request form; (ii) project status report; (iii) reconciliation of Bank
resources; (iv) payment details; and (v) any other reports that help demonstrate the
project’s progress. The substantiation reports need not include supporting
Annex III
Page 8 of 8


        documentation for expenses incurred and payments made, which does not imply
        approval by the Bank of expenditures made. The original documentation supporting
        the expenses will be available for review by the Bank upon request.
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                             PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/19



  Argentina. Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) for the Social and Urban
               Integration Program in the Province of Buenos Aires (AR-O0012)



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

       1.      To authorize the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall
designate, to enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Province
of Buenos Aires, as borrower, and with the Argentine Republic, as guarantor, to establish the
Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) for the Social and Urban Integration
Program in the Province of Buenos Aires (AR-O0012) for an amount of up to US$400,000,000
chargeable to the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital.

        2.      To determine that the resources allocated to the above-mentioned Conditional
Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP), for the Social and Urban Integration Program in the
Province of Buenos Aires (AR-O0012), shall be used to finance individual loan operations in
accordance with: (a) the objectives and regulations of the Conditional Credit Line for Investment
Projects approved by Resolution DE-58/03, as amended by Resolutions DE-10/07, DE-164/07,
and DE-86/16; (b) the provisions set forth in documents GN-2246-9 and GN-2564-3; and (c) the
terms and conditions included in the Loan Proposal for the corresponding individual operation.



                               (Adopted on __ __________ 2019)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1044359933-17862
AR-O0012
               DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK




                             PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/19



   Argentina. Loan ____/OC-AR to the Province of Buenos Aires. First Individual Operation
  under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) for the Social and Urban
  Integration Program in the Province of Buenos Aires (AR-O0012) for the Social and Urban
                   Integration Program in Greater Buenos Aires (AR-L1288)



       The Board of Executive Directors

RESOLVES:

        That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as
may be necessary with the Province of Buenos Aires, as borrower, and with the Argentine
Republic, as guarantor, for the purpose of granting the former a financing aimed at cooperating
in the execution of the Social and Urban Integration Program in Greater Buenos Aires, which
constitutes the first individual operation under the Conditional Credit Line for Investment
Projects (CCLIP) for the Social and Urban Integration Program in the Province of Buenos Aires
approved on __________ 2019 by Resolution DE-___/19. Such financing will be in the amount
of up to US$100,000,000, from the resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject
to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project
Summary of the Loan Proposal.



                               (Adopted on __ ___________ 2019)



LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1044359933-17859
AR-L1288
